January 11, 2022
Photo by: U.S. Air Force
The ASAT Prisoner’s Dilemma
The Case for U.S. Leadership and a Unilateral Moratorium on Kinetic-Energy Antisatellite Testing
BY Douglas Loverro, Brian Chow, Brandon Kelley, Brian Weeden, and Robert Cardillo
OVER 70 YEARS AGO, two RAND researchers structured States, China, India, and Russia find themselves locked
the fundamental tenets in game theory of what later in their own ASAT Prisoner’s Dilemma.
became known as “The Prisoner’s Dilemma” – a
Over the past 15 years, four countries – China in 2007,
description of a situation in which two perfectly rational
the United States in 2008, India in 2019, and now Russia
actors, ignorant of the decisions of the other, will wisely
this past year – have conducted such tests, using
pursue their own self-interest, but ultimately suffer a
ground-based kinetic-energy (KE) missiles to
worse fate than if they had cooperated. The Prisoner’s
deliberately destroy their own satellites. These tests
Dilemma applies to many real-life problems such as
have created many thousands of pieces of debris in low
agreements on climate change, individual firms’
earth orbit (LEO) in the process. While the resultant
investments in advertising, and the decision on one’s
harm to the LEO space environment varied depending
use of steroids in sports. In all these cases, the
on the altitudes of these engagements, no nation can be
conditions of the Prisoner’s Dilemma are established by
certain how far debris from such an impact will spread,
the fact that any single actor is either incapable of
nor what unlucky third-party will cross into its path. As
knowing what the other will do or has a high mistrust in
space becomes increasingly congested, the risk grows
any actions they may promise. They are therefore
exponentially.
motivated to follow their own self-interest despite the
overall negative impact to all. And so today, the United
AEROSPACE.CSIS.ORG | 1

“Today, the U.S., China, India, and Russia test in November which not only begat another round of
international recriminations but risked the lives of
find themselves locked in their own
Russian cosmonauts on the International Space Station.
ASAT Prisoner’s Dilemma”
Given the varied reactions, a cynic might be forgiven for
Simultaneously, these same nations have all argued for concluding that the differing responses had less to do
internationally agreed to treaties, mandatory or with space sustainability and more to international
voluntary guidelines, or simply a code of conduct that geopolitics – and certainly that played a role. Equally at
would arrest such debris-creating activities and reduce play was the calculable difference in the risk created.
the threat to space sustainability. Yet, locked in Prisoner However, beneath it all lay the undeniable tenets of the
Dilemma cells of their own rational construction, they Prisoner’s Dilemma: none of the four nations were
have been unable to reach consensus. The time has prepared to restrain their right to test despite
come for the United States to lead, and to engineer an undeniable harm to their own interests, since they
escape. either could not know, or did not trust the others’
intents.
Roots of the Dilemma
Rational Self-Interest?
KE tests against objects in space are not new; they
began shortly after the first satellite was launched into These trends underscore the pressing need for action.
space but faded away during the latter part of the 20th As noted in an open letter to the United National
century. That momentum was reversed early this General Assembly (UNGA) signed by hundreds of
century when China infamously shot down its Fengyun- prominent space experts and stakeholders in
1C weather satellite on January 11th, 2007, generating , debris-producing KE-ASAT tests must
thousands of pieces of space debris. Since that time, be stopped because even good-faith efforts to minimize
taken aback by the immensity of the debris generated debris are empirically insufficient and precariously
and the severe international backlash that ensued, unsafe. The letter, penned less than two months before
China has conducted only non-debris-generating ASAT the November Russian test, noted that, despite their
tests. Unfortunately, other nations have not been so efforts to reduce risk:
restrained.
“…debris from [the Indian] test did cross the orbit
One year later, in apparent response to the Chinese test, of the International Space Station and would
the United States destroyed its own failed USA-193 have crossed the orbits of both the planned
satellite. While the level of dangerous debris created satellite mega-constellations and China’s new
was significantly smaller, and the international outcry Tiangong space station, creating multiple
muted, the die had been cast, and the effects of the operational hazards… [and that future large
dilemma were on full display. Despite proposals and constellations would] make debris-generating
calls for restraint or limits on space weapons, no space- ASAT tests significantly more perilous than
faring nation was ready to negotiate away its right to before.”
follow suit. An Indian test in 2019, and the failure of
Ironically, the nations with the largest level of space
other nations to react strongly despite the moderate
investments (China, Russia, and the United States), with
level of dangerous debris created, further reinforced the
potentially the most to gain in any future space
notion that these destructive tests were becoming more
economy and therefore most at risk of debris-caused
acceptable. All of which led to the most recent Russian
2 | The ASAT’s Prisoner’s Dilemma

mishap, are in large part the ones conducting the tests, group which the U.S. supported. The U.N. approved
in clear contravention to their own interests. Left group will meet in 2022 and 2023 and report back to the
unchecked, destructive testing of KE-ASATs will lead to a UNGA in Fall 2023. What better way for the U.S. to shape
space environment full of collision hazards and of the results of such a group than to lead the way with its
therefore far lower commercial, civil, and national own, unilateral ban?
security value. The likelihood and impact of collisions
On December 1st, at the inaugural meeting of the Biden
will increase dramatically as constellations – each with
administration’s National Space Council, Vice President
hundreds, thousands, or even tens of thousands of
Kamala Harris highlighted the risks posed by Russia’s
satellites – continue to proliferate. With each collision,
debris-generating ASAT test, and Deputy Secretary of
the next becomes more likely, to the clear detriment of
Defense Kathleen Hicks declared that the Department of
all parties.
Defense “would like to see all nations agree to refrain
The competing interest – the self-interest component of from antisatellite weapons testing that creates debris,”
the “dilemma” which motivates continued testing – is a position echoed by National Security Advisor Jake
that space warfare is unavoidable and that KE-ASAT Sullivan and Deputy Secretary of State Wendy Sherman.
systems are a weapon of choice; or perhaps that Surely these are welcomed statements, but the fact
successful testing is necessary to sufficiently intimidate remains that nothing prevents the U.S. from acting
or coerce potential adversaries. Even were those to be unilaterally to establish its own ban, irrespective of
true, these rationales cannot explain the countries’ others’ agreement. A U.S. moratorium would not only
continued failure to negotiate cessation after having align U.S. actions with its words, but also provide a
conducted such tests. The key driver is mistrust model for the world to follow – one set by the single
between the actors. This counterproductive stalemate actor most active across decades of security-related
provides the key rationale for U.S. action. space activities.
Unraveling the Dilemma The careful formulation of such a moratorium is the key
to its domestic bi-partisan acceptability and rapid
The United States – as both a global superpower and a
international adoption. The moratorium should apply
nation with strong civil, commercial, and military stake
only to KE tests aimed at impacting orbital objects.
in the future of the space environment – must take a
This means that anti-ballistic missile tests would not be
leadership role in solving this problem. The United
prohibited, as the targets are not orbital. Orbital testing
States should immediately declare a unilateral
of KE-ASATs would be allowed, but collision tests would
moratorium on debris-producing kinetic-energy anti-
be barred in favor of deliberate near-miss “fly-bys” of
satellite (KE-ASAT) testing against orbital objects, and
their targets. Testing of non-KE-ASAT systems would
actively promote international agreement(s)
also be allowed. Alternative formulations describing
prohibiting such tests.
levels of debris created or the lifetime of such debris are
far less desirable, as they are open to interpretation and
Now is the perfect time. On the 15th anniversary of the
leave undue room for “creative” violators. Such wording
first modern-day ASAT test, there is growing momentum
also entails months or years of technical debate,
in favor of such a ban as indicated by the majority of
compared with the straightforward language of the
responses to U.N. resolution A/75/36 and the
proposed moratorium.
subsequent formation last month of an Open-Ended
Working Group aimed at establishing space norms – a
| 3

While some would argue this still leaves room for many counterspace program, provide a workable model for
other ASAT activities – and they are correct – the goal how to best formulate such a restriction, and lend
here is to eliminate the most detrimental outcome of forward momentum with allies, and in international
such testing, not to constrain any nation’s right to fora, at a critical juncture.
defend itself. The United States should strongly
The United States – and everyone else – must be clear-
encourage other countries, including but not limited to
eyed about the fact that this unilateral ban and any
those who have previously conducted such tests (i.e.,
follow-on agreement are narrowly-tailored solutions to
India, China, and Russia), to adopt matching voluntary
only one single problem: the production of debris in
moratoria, while also seeking a subsequent binding
orbit through KE testing of ASATs. This narrowness is a
multilateral agreement. China essentially instituted
central feature, not a flaw. This ban would not limit
such a self-imposed ban after its 2007 test and,
ASAT development. It would not limit war-time use of
according to U.S. intelligence reports, their ASAT
debris-producing ASATs (although that would
program has not appeared to suffer from it.
optimistically be an eventual result). It would not limit
Experience of unilateral action suggests it could be testing of non-KE-ASATs. And it would not even prevent
highly effective. In 1991, following decades of failed testing of direct-ascent KE-ASATs, provided such tests
negotiations, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev declared do not produce any orbital debris (using deliberate
a unilateral nuclear test moratorium and called for the “near-misses,” or by engagement with purely sub-
United States to reciprocate; a year later the U.S. orbital targets).
Congress passed its own unilateral 9-month ban, later
“…this unilateral ban and any follow-on
extended by President Clinton. These actions broke the
longstanding stalemate at the U.N. leading to a fully agreement are narrowly-tailored
ratified and signed treaty by 1996, for which the United
solutions to only one single problem: the
States was the first nation to sign – though the Senate’s
production of debris in orbit through KE
refusal to ratify it prevented entry into force. Since then,
testing of ASATs. This narrowness is a
the U.S. and other signatories have avoided testing
regardless of the treaty’s absolute legal standing. central feature, not a flaw.”
Some believe that the United States should await
Therefore, this ban may be better understood as an
international action before proceeding with our own
environment sustainability measure than as an “arms
ban. However, this ignores the history (and causes) of
control” measure per se – but, for exactly that reason, is
long-term negotiating failure, the fact that there is much
in the clear self-interest of all parties. Because it does
to be gained by acting now, and the lack of upside to
not prevent development, testing, or use of KE-ASATs,
waiting. As General John Hyten noted in November,
there is nearly zero cost to adopters, even those who
prior to his retirement as Vice Chairman of the Joint
may favor new KE systems. Continued destructive
Chiefs of Staff (JCS), the glacial pace at which the U.S.
testing is potentially catastrophic for the space
has moved thus far will be insufficient to counter current
environment and continued peaceful use of space, while
threats to space security and safety. A declaration of our
being unnecessary – and arguably of no use at all – to
own limit will help to restore U.S. credibility and moral
the goal of achieving adequate space deterrence and
leadership, convey willingness to make concrete
defense.
progress on space security issues, make clear that
orbital KE tests are not necessary for a strong
4 | The ASAT’s Prisoner’s Dilemma

Liberating the Prisoners
The remarkable impact of a self-imposed, unilateral ban is that it fundamentally unwinds the calculus that begat the
current dilemma. By recognizing that interests in ASAT development are not harmed by this narrow ban, the United
States can pursue its interests in space sustainability and security regardless of the actions of other nations, as well as
increase the likelihood of other countries adopting such a ban. Other nations will be able to have clear knowledge of
U.S. intent, thus removing the unknowing or untrusting component of the dilemma so that they too may act. A self-
imposed ban also needs no verification protocol – an oft-cited pretext for refusing agreement – and, most
importantly, the ability of many world actors to easily monitor debris creation eliminates the verification challenges
attending many other proposals.
The stakes could not be higher – nor the opportunity clearer. Absent prohibition, we should expect the recent trend
toward testing to continue and for international negotiations to once again bog down. Each new nation seeking to
join ‘the club’ may feel the need to conduct such a test, and every new KE-ASAT development by an existing power
might also be a candidate for orbital KE tests. The consequences would be catastrophic. Fortunately, there are good
reasons to believe that this is preventable. The United States has a golden opportunity now to lead the world in
addressing this issue and raze the prison cells we so foolishly erected. There is no time to waste.
| 5

About CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research organization dedicated to
advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding former U.S. Senator Sam Nunn (D-GA).
Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of values—nonpartisanship,
independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity and professionalism, and talent development.
CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research, analysis, and recommendations. We
organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media appearances that aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and
salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policymakers and the thinking of key influencers.
We work toward a vision of a saferand more prosperous world.
CSIS is ranked the number one think tank in the United States as well as the defense and national security center of excellence for
2016-2018 by the University of Pennsylvania’s annual think tank report.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be understood to be solely those of
the author(s).
Authors
DOUGLAS LOVERRO is the President of Loverro Consulting, former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space
Policy, and former NASA Associate Administrator for Human Exploration and Operations. Loverro is a CSIS non-
resident Senior Associate.
BRIAN G. CHOW (Ph.D. physics, MBA with Distinction, Ph.D. finance) is an independent policy analyst with over 160
publications. He can be reached on Twitter at @briangchow or by email at brianchow.sp@gmail.com.
BRANDON W. KELLEY is the Director of Debate at Georgetown University and a graduate student in the Security
Studies Program. He can be reached at bwk9@georgetown.edu.
BRIAN WEEDEN is the Director of Program Planning for the Secure World Foundation, a former Air Force space and
missile officer, and has more than 20 years’ experience in space operations and policy.
ROBERT CARDILLO is the President of the Cardillo Group, Chairman of the Board of Planet federal, and former
Director of the National Geospatial Intelligence Agency.
6 | The ASAT’s Prisoner’s Dilemma