Figure 1. Key statistics
Climate change
ND-GAIN Country Index NIGER
Mean annual surface temperatures 23–28°C The ND-GAIN Country Index captures a country’s vulnerability to climate CHAD
Lake Chad Basin region change and other global challenges, and its readiness to improve
resilience. It is a score out of 100; the higher the score, the less
vulnerable and more ready the country.
Predicted increase of mean annual surface temperatures (2081-2100)
1.8°C (low), 2.7°C (intermediate), 4.4°C (very high) 50.00
45.00 NNIIGGEERRIIAA Lake Chad
40.00 Cameroon
35.00 Nigeria Niger
30.00 CCAAMMEERROOOONN
25.00 Chad
20.00
1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2022
Sources: Lieberknecht, L., Rucevska, I., Skripnova, S. and G.N. Slotsvik, ‘Environmental Dimensions of Conflict in the Lake Chad Region’, eds. de Coning, C. and T.O. Iversen (GRID-
Arendal, XCEPT, UK International Development and NUPI, 2026); Climate & Development Knowledge Network and African Climate and Development Initiative, ‘The IPCC’s Sixth
Assessment Report – Impacts, Adaptation Options and Investment Areas for a Climate-Resilient Central Africa’ (2022); Nuhu, M., ‘Call to action: Stabilizing the Lake Chad Basin
region through regional approach-local ownership’, UN Development Programme (UNDP), 21 Jan. 2023; International Organization for Migration (IOM), ‘Lake Chad Basin Crisis
Monthly Dashboard’, 30 Apr. 2026; and United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), ‘Lake Chad Basin – Humanitarian Overview’, 29 .;
and Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative (ND-GAIN), ‘ND-GAIN Index country rankings 2023’, accessed 15 .
kcotsrettuhS
:otohP

Climate, Peace and Security Fact Sheet
Lake Chad*
The ongoing insecurity in the Lake Chad region—which intersects RECOMMENDED ACTIONS:
Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria—cannot be understood in
isolation from climate and environmental change. Climate change- ► The United Nations and its member states should
related stressors—such as increasingly variable precipitation and prioritize continued investment in climate-resilient and
drought—contribute to existing tension and conflict between different gender-sensitive livelihood initiatives particularly in
communities by exacerbating scarcity of natural resources, including displacement-affected communities. Conflict-sensitive
land, water and food. Such pressures amplify the tensions between natural resource management should be integrated
local community members, refugees and internally displaced people into stabilization planning through investment in local
(IDPs), and between livelihood groups such as arable farmers, fishers dispute mechanisms, natural resource management
and pastoralists. Through its destabilizing impacts on livelihoods, and value chain systems. Government agencies should
climate change can further increase vulnerability to recruitment by implement targeted youth-empowerment programmes
violent extremist organizations, such as Boko Haram and Islamic focused on vocational skills in partnership with donors.
State–West Africa Province (ISWAP) and other unidentified armed ► Funding mechanisms such as the LCBC Nexus Funding
groups and bandit networks, which operate throughout the region.
Facility, the UN Development Programme’s Regional
• The Lake Chad region is highly vulnerable to accelerating climate Stabilization Fund and the World Bank’s PROLAC
change, which increases risks of erratic weather events and less require sustained funding from international partners
predictable seasonal weather patterns. This, in turn, has negative to maintain and expand climate adaptation and
impacts on livelihoods that depend on natural resources and rains. environmental peacebuilding programming.
A large share of the population of the Lake Chad region relies on ► Bodies such as the LCBC, the Economic Community
livelihoods that are dependent on natural resources such as rain- of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic
fed agriculture, fisheries and pastures. Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
• Displacement in the Lake Chad region is driven by multiple, other relevant regional bodies should collaborate in
and often interconnected, conflict-related and climate-related developing and scaling up regional early-warning
hazards, including flooding and drought. Climate-related risks in systems for climate-related insecurity, displacement
turn increase the likelihood of tension between IDPs, refugees and mobility. A framework for inspiration may be the
and host communities, as well as livelihood groups such as arable forecasting and preventive stabilization initiatives of the
farmers, fishers and pastoralists. Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Climate Prediction and Applications Centre (ICPAC).
•
The natural resource economy in the Lake Chad region—both The UN and its member states should ensure support
legal and illegal—is closely tied into the economics of violence and for regional bodies in strengthening their expertise on
persistent local inter-community tensions. Extremist groups are climate, peace and security by appointing and retaining
materially sustained in part by their deep entrenchment in the specialized advisors.
region’s natural resource economy.
► Beyond humanitarian needs, the region’s national
•
The region is characterized by a security–adaptation imbalance, governments should adopt conflict-sensitive National
where stabilization efforts have outpaced climate-security risk Development Plans, National Adaptation Plans (NAPs)
reduction. Livelihood-support initiatives and climate change and Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) that
adaptation remain critical gaps in translating stabilization gains cohere with existing efforts such as the Great Green
into durable peace. Wall Initiative, the Common African Position on Climate
Change, Peace and Security (currently being assessed),
and the Bamako Declaration on Climate Security.
ND-GAIN Country Index
Population
Total population 45–50 million (2025)
Internally displaced population 3.25 million (2026)
Population in moderate or 7.4 million (2025)
severe food insecurity

2 Climate, Peace and Security Fact Sheet: Lake Chad
In response to the conflict in the Lake Chad region, Cameroon, Chad, despite environmental stress. For instance, women in north-east
Niger and Nigeria have developed the Regional Strategy for the Nigeria have formed local cooperatives for mutual support and
Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience of the Boko Haram-affected agricultural development.11
Areas of the Lake Chad Basin Region (RS-SRR) in partnership with the
African Union (AU), the Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC) and other Climate-related peace and security risks
international organizations. The RS-SRR is driven by subnational and
Climate change is rarely the main driver of conflict, but it can
multidimensional humanitarian, development and peace initiatives
undermine development gains, exacerbate the dynamics of ongoing
that aim to address the root causes of conflict. The significance of
violence, amplify existing tensions and disrupt fragile peace processes.
climate change as an amplifier of existing conflicts and instability is
Violent conflict and political instability can also weaken community
likely to increase, unless climate-sensitive adaptation and conflict-
resilience to the effects of climate change. This fact sheet uses four
mitigation strategies are implemented.
interrelated pathways to navigate the relationship between climate
change, peace and security: (a) livelihood impacts, (b) migration and
Climate exposure: Trends and projections
mobility, (c) armed actors and security, and (d) political and economic
The Lake Chad region lies in the Sahel, a climatic transition zone where grievances.
the southern edge of the Sahara transitions into tropical savannah.1
Livelihood impacts
Mean annual temperatures range from about 23°C to about 28°C in
the region. Average monthly temperatures reach their annual peak Livelihood disruption acts as a primary pathway linking climate change
in April, May or June, just before the rainiest part of the wet season. to peace and security risks.12 Erratic rainfall, desertification, drought
They reach their lowest in January, except in the southern part of the and flooding undermine arable farming, fishing, herding and petty
region, where lowest monthly temperatures occur in August, at the trading. Interviewees consistently associate these pressures with
peak of the wet season. Rainfall is highly seasonal and characterized rising tensions, disputes and criminal activity.13 Livelihood pressures
by interannual variability. This makes floods and drought periods an further heighten the vulnerability of a limited proportion of youth to
inherent part of normal rainfall patterns.2 crime or recruitment into armed groups.14 Households often operate
diversified livelihoods, engaging in small-scale farming as well as
The average temperature of the Lake Chad region has undergone a
fishing depending on the season.15 The households that lack secure
significant increase (of around 1°C) since the 1960s. Climate models
access to land, water, markets and income face persistent risk of
predict a severe temperature increase (of up to 4.4°C depending on
livelihood collapse, which also increases the likelihood of inter-
emissions scenario) by the end of this century.3 This has led to an
community conflict over land, water and food.
increase in interannual variability in rainfall, including more short-
term fluctuations between wet and dry years.4 Trends are indicating Arable farming is affected by climate change both directly and
increasing climate variability, with less seasonal and interannual indirectly. It is a vital livelihood for communities that is predominantly
predictability. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change carried out at small scale as part of subsistence livelihoods.16
(IPCC) scenarios for the Lake Chad region predict worsening climatic Cultivation mainly uses traditional farming practices that are highly
instability, variability and extreme weather, including increased dependent on water availability from rainfall and the fluctuating water
severity of flooding events.5 levels of the lake.17 Fluctuations in water availability thus pose major
threats to agriculture.18
Socioecological vulnerabilities
The fisheries of Lake Chad are an important source of livelihood
Lake Chad is a vital and life-sustaining ecosystem and water reservoir
for the surrounding communities.19 Combined population growth
for 45–50 million people in a region affected by a combination of
and shrinking of the lake between the 1960s and the 2000s had a
climate change, high population growth, poverty, food insecurity
devastating impact on fisheries. Not only did the shrinking lake provide
and security risks.6 Interviews with local communities indicate that
less suitable habitat for fish, but physical access to fisheries became
rising temperatures, erratic rainfall, desertification and flooding
more restricted. Around 5 million households surrounding the lake
are significant climate stressors across the region.7 Arable farming,
continue to rely on fishing as a key source of income and nutrition, but
fishing and herding are three closely integrated activities in the lake
fisheries are not productive enough to sustain needs.20 In areas where
area, closely intertwined with a complex land- and waterscape that
insurgents gain control, arable farmers, fishermen and pastoralists
is being deeply affected by accelerating climate change.8 The latest
who refuse to pay fees are often forced out of communities. Recent
humanitarian statistics indicate that 7.4 million people in the region are
research indicates that fishery stocks are recovering due to insecurity-
acutely food insecure and in need of food aid.9
related lack of access to fisheries.21
Gender relations play a role in mediating the outcomes of climate The area around the lake also provides pasture for grazing livestock
change for peace and security. Women bear a disproportionate and supports more specific industries, such as the production of
responsibility for adapting to climate change, spending more time algae and natron.22 Interviewees highlighted declining agricultural
sourcing water, food and fuel under increasingly difficult conditions.10 productivity and related livelihood stress as the main pathways linking
Women’s coping strategies—such as food sharing, informal childcare climate change to insecurity.23 The irregular rainfall and changes
arrangements and mutual support—help prevent social breakdown in seasonal patterns affect agricultural productivity, increasing
1 Sahara and Sahel Observatory (OSS), Sahel and West Africa: Atlas of Land Cover Maps 13 Fieldwork interview reports from Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria, 2025.
(OSS: Tunis, Jan. 2019). 14 de Coning et al. (note 10).
2 Lieberknecht, L. et al., Environmental Dimensions of Conflict in the Lake Chad Region 15 Béné et al. (note 8); and Eriegha et al., ‘Shrinking Lake Chad: Initialization of culture-
(GRID-Arendal, XCEPT, UK International Development and NUPI: Mar. 2026). based fisheries for improved livelihood in Nigeria’, International Journal of Fisheries
3 Climate and Development Knowledge Network (CDKN) and African Climate and and Aquatic Studies, vol. 7, no. 3 (May–).
Development Initiative (ACDI), ‘The IPCC’s sixth assessment report: Impacts, 16 Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO), Lake Chad Basin Crisis: Response
adaptation options and investment areas for a climate-resilient Central Africa’, 2022. Strategy (2017–2019) (FAO: Rome, 2017).
4 Gangneron, F. et al., ‘Persistence and success of the Sahel desertification narrative’, 17 Alhassan et al., ‘Decline in agricultural activity around Lake Chad: Any prospect for
Regional Environmental Change, vol. 22 (2022). restoration? A review’, Arid Zone Journal of Engineering, Technology and Environment,
5 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Climate Change 2023: Synthesis vol. 17, no. 2 ().
Report (IPCC: Geneva, 2023). 18 Amali, A. A., Sani Bala, M. and Adeyemi, F. A., ‘Dying Lake Chad: Adaptive strategies
6 Nuhu, M., ‘Call to action: Stabilizing the Lake Chad Basin region through regional to climate change and water scarcity of the Lake Chad Basin’, 2nd World Irrigation
approach-local ownership’, UN Development Programme (UNDP), 21 Jan. 2023. Forum, 2016.
7 Fieldwork interview reports from Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria, 2025. 19 Béné et al. (note 8); and Lemoalle, J. and Magrin, G., Le développement du lac Tchad:
8 Béné, C. et al., ‘Inland fisheries, poverty, and rural livelihoods in the Lake Chad Basin’, Situation actuelle et futurs possibles [Development of Lake Chad: Current situation
Journal of Asian and African Studies, vol. 38, no. 1 (Feb. 2003). and possible futures] (IRD Éditions: Marseille, 2017).
9 Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), ‘Lake Chad Basin: 20 Okeke-Ogbuafor, N. et al., ‘Proposed solutions to the problems of the Lake Chad
Humanitarian overview’, Apr. 2026. fisheries: Resilience lessons for Africa?’ Fishes, vol. 8, no. 2 (Feb. 2023).
10 de Coning, C. et al., Responding to Climate Change-related Insecurity in the Lake Chad 21 de Coning et al. (note 10).
Region (XCEPT, UK International Development and NUPI: Mar. 2026). 22 Lieberknecht et al. (note 2).
11 Fieldwork interview reports from Nigeria, 2025. 23 Field interview summaries from Cameroon, Chad and Niger, Dec. 2025.
12 de Coning et al. (note 10). 24 de Coning et al. (note 10); and Lieberknecht et al. (note 2).

 3
vulnerability for communities that depend on flood
Figure 2. Climate change exposure and conflict
irrigation and rain-fed livelihoods.24 Furthermore,
desertification and sand dune encroachment are Climate hazard and exposure
burying farmland, blocking irrigation channels and 2019–25 KANEM
Less More
access routes, and forcing livelihood adaptation. Mao
NIGER
Regional and international partners that aim to build LAC
peace, stability and resilience in the region should DIFFA
Bol
prioritize interventions to support (natural resource- Diffa CHAD
based) livelihoods that are being disrupted by climate Lake Massakory
change.25 BORNO Chad
HADJER-LAMIS
Migration and mobility
YOBE
NIGERIA
Displacement in the Lake Chad region is driven by N’DJAMENA
multiple conflict-related and environmental factors Conflict
Maiduguri
and is characterized by significant transboundary fatalities CHARI-BAGUIRMI
2025 Damaturu
movements. As of the four countries—Chad,
200 Massenya
Cameroon, Niger and Nigeria—hosted 6.5 million
affected individuals, encompassing IDPs, returnees and
refugees.26 100
CAMEROON MAYO-KEBBI
The main reason for displacement is insurgent violence, 50 Maroua EST
with a much smaller proportion of people displaced for Bongor
environmental reasons such as floods. Borno state in
101 ADAMAWA FAR NORTH
Nigeria is the most affected, with much displacement
being conflict-driven, while Yobe state has the highest Notes: Fatalities include deaths directly caused by conflict or by political violence. They can include state and non-state armed combatants as well as
civilians. Climate hazards correspond to the accumulation of droughts, heatwaves, heavy precipitation, wildfires, floods and tropical cyclones over 7 years.
percentage of displacement driven by climate.27 The Sources: ACLED, ‘Data export tool’, 2025; Climate hazard: Climate–Conflict Vulnerability Index (CCVI), 'Climate Hazard Exposure', climate-conflict.org, 2025.
cycle of displacement places immense strain on local
community resources, including arable land, water
Due to the regional nature of climate-related security risks, regional
systems, food supplies and infrastructure.28
bodies—such as the LCBC, ECOWAS, ECCAS, the Liptako-Gourma
Displaced people are typically accommodated in large camps, in or Authority, the Niger Basin Authority, the Permanent Interstate
around existing settlements or seek refuge in unaffected areas by Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel and the Climate
clearing natural habitats. Climate-related environmental pressure Commission for the Sahel Region—should collaborate in developing
increases the risk of tension between IDPs and host communities.29 and scaling up regional early-warning systems for climate-related
Deforestation is, for instance, a common consequence of insecurity, displacement and mobility patterns.
displacement. Research in N’Guigmi and Diffa in Niger indicates that
Armed actors and security
forests and the bush in certain areas have been significantly affected
by deforestation, partly due to repeated displacement, accelerating The conflicts in the Lake Chad region have become tightly interlinked
soil erosion and eroding ecosystems.30 In the affected areas of the with exploitation of the natural resource economy by insurgents.
North East zone of Nigeria and the Far North region of Cameroon, the Extremists are sustained in part by food, taxation and trade derived
felling of trees is a major problem for host communities, IDPs and local from natural resources, and by financing extracted through extortion
government, which are trying to enforce policies designed to reverse of arable farmers, fishers and pastoralists. Extremist groups have thus
deforestation.31 been able to leverage livelihoods as a vital bargaining chip.35 Control
over fisheries, for instance, drives infighting between Boko Haram and
Population growth and growth in livestock numbers, in combination
ISWAP. ISWAP has been estimated to earn more than US$191 million
with increasingly unpredictable patterns of rainfall, have created
annually—mostly from taxes levied on fishers and livestock owners
conditions that lead to increased conflict between pastoralists
who use the islands of Lake Chad.36
and arable farmers.32 Furthermore, the southward movement of
pastoralists has concentrated natural resource exploitation in drought- Extremist groups also infiltrate other parts of the natural resource
and flood-affected zones, fuelling conflicts, the arming of herders economy, including artisanal mining, wood and charcoal production,
and the emergence of self-defence groups. In Logone-and-Chari and trafficking of wildlife and wildlife products.37 Insurgent groups
department in northern Cameroon, the dense concentration of arable mandate local communities to cut down trees to use wood as cooking
farmers, fishers and herders in the floodplains sparked violent clashes fuel and as a cash crop, hunt wild animals for food or to sell for cash,
in 2021 between the Kotoko and Musgum communities. This displaced and use open areas within the woodland for grazing cattle.38 Gold
100 000 individuals, who sought refuge in Chad or relocated within mining also financially sustains insurgents and bandit networks in
Cameroon.33 Climate change amplifies similar conflicts by increasing the region.39 Exploiting weak state presence, networks of traders and
unpredictability of rainfall patterns and exacerbating temporary water smugglers move illicit commodities (e.g. arms and gold) from informal
scarcity, with resulting pressures on remaining areas of pasture and mining operations across national borders. Both Boko Haram and
crop land.34 ISWAP have also evolved in their tactics of ‘jihadi banditry’, such as
25 de Coning et al. (note 10). 34 Lieberknecht et al. (note 2); and Olowoyeye, O. S. and Kanwar, R. S., ‘Water and food
26 International Organization for Migration (IOM), ‘Lake Chad Basin crisis monthly sustainability in the riparian countries of Lake Chad in Africa’, Sustainability, vol. 15,
dashboard’, 30 Apr. 2026. no. 13 ().
27 Lieberknecht et al. (note 2). 35 International Crisis Group (ICG), What Role for the Multinational Joint Task Force in
28 Iversen, T. O. et al., Managing Climate, Peace and Security Risks in the Borderlands of Fighting Boko Haram?, Africa Report no. 291 (ICG: Brussels, ).
the Lake Chad Region (CPS-Lake Chad) (XCEPT, UK International Development and 36 Malik, S., ‘When rebels rule: ISWAP’s formula for winning support in Nigeria’s
NUPI: 2026). northeast’, New Humanitarian, 24 .
29 de Coning et al. (note 10). 37 African Security Analysis (ASA), ‘Boko Haram’s illicit trade in gold and other
30 Field interview summaries from Niger, Dec. 2025. resources’, 23 .
31 de Coning et al. (note 10). 38 Lieberknecht et al. (note 2).
32 Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), ‘Peaceful 39 African Security Analysis (note 37); and UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
transhumance and development of pastoral economy in the Lake Chad region’, Jan. Gold Trafficking in the Sahel: Transnational Organised Crime Threat Assessment—
2025. Sahel (UNODC: New York, 2024).
33 UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Cameroon and Chad Emergency: 40 Oginni, O. S., How to Stop ‘Jihadi Banditry’ from Becoming the New Normal in the Lake
Supplementary Material (UNHCR: New York, 2022). Chad Basin (Bonn International Centre for Conflict Studies: Bonn, 2024).

4 Climate, Peace and Security Fact Sheet: Lake Chad
hit-and-run operations, theft of valuable goods and Figure 3. Food insecurity, water stress and displacement
livestock, and kidnapping for ransom.40
Numbers of IDPs,
Extremist groups are materially sustained in part by by region or state
their deep entrenchment in the region’s natural resource 2025 CHAD KANEM Mao
economy. This highlights the need for sustained funding 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 NIGER
LAC
from international partners to maintain and expand 500 000
climate-sensitive stabilization and environmental 100 000 DIFFA Bol
peacebuilding interventions. Diffa
Lake Massakory
Political and economic grievances YOBE NIGERIA Chad
HADJER-LAMIS
The origins of the conflicts in the Lake Chad region
are partially rooted in perceived social discontent with
unfair distribution of and access to resources, in a N’DJAMENA
Water stress
context of scarcity. The history of European colonialist

extraction disrupted traditional economies and Areas affected Maiduguri CHARI-BAGUIRMI
institutions around natural resource management.41 Acute food Massenya
These historical contingencies have contributed to insecurity status BORNO
continued destabilization and injustice in the region. 2025
No data FAR NORTH
The situation is exacerbated by uneven state presence Minimal (IPC phase 1) CAMEROON MAYO-KEBBI
and governance deficits from the four national Stressed (IPC phase 2) EST
Crisis (IPC phase 3) Maroua
governments. This is further complicated by a long- Emergency (IPC phase 4) Bongor
standing history of structural development disparities IDP = Internally displaced person. ADAMAWA
affecting communities surrounding the lake.42 Notes: The different phases of acute food insecurity are used to reflect the severity of food insecurity in a given area. Water stress
measures the ratio of total water demand to available renewable surface and groundwater supplies. It refers to extremely high,
high and medium levels of water stress. The 2023 data represented on this map is the latest available for water stress.
The Lake Chad region is thus characterized by a history Sources: International Organization for Migration (IOM) Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM), 'West and Central Africa – Lake Chad Basin Crisis Dashboard 79', ;
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC), main dashboard map, 2025; World Resources Institute (WRI), Aqueduct 4.0.
of marginalization that constrains stabilization and
climate change adaptation. Research has identified
Traditional leaders intervene in disputes, negotiate access to land,
a security–adaptation imbalance in the region; stabilization efforts
and manage tensions between arable farmers, fishers, herders and
have outpaced climate-security risk reduction.43 In addition, capacity
displaced populations.44
constraints at subnational levels of governance raise concerns about
the durability of stabilization gains. For instance, in response to climate National governments in the region should therefore adopt and
change, communities rely on traditional leadership, collective labour, implement conflict-sensitive and peace-positive National Development
food sharing and self-organized responses to flooding, rather than Plans, National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) and Nationally Determined
institutional support. Despite frequent tension and disputes, violent Contributions (NDCs) that prioritize conflict-sensitive investment in
conflict is largely prevented through local mediation and indigenous climate adaption in conflict-affected areas.
alternative dispute-resolution practices that hold cultural legitimacy.
41 Stewart, N. F., Indigenous Climate Justice in the Lake Chad Basin (Springer Nature: Cham, 2025).
42 Iversen et al. (note 28).
43 de Coning et al. (note 10).
44 de Coning et al. (note 10).
Climate, Peace and Security Fact Sheets are a joint product by the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs (NUPI) and the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), with
funding from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Norway and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark. The information in this fact sheet does not necessarily reflect the views of these
partners.
The Climate, Peace and Security Fact Sheets aim to generate reliable, relevant, timely and actionable information and analysis on climate-related peace and security risks in selected
countries and regions on the United Nations Security Council agenda.
Series editors: Dr Cedric de Coning (NUPI) and Dr Florian Krampe (SIPRI)
Contributors: Dr Thor Olav Iversen (NUPI), Katongo Seyuba (SIPRI), Dr Andrew E. Yaw Tchie (NUPI) and Ingvild Brox Brotkorb (NUPI)
Visuals: Jules Duhamel