Verifying the Prohibition on the Placement of Nuclear Weapons in Outer Space: Legal, Technical, and Policy Pathways
GCSP OFFICES, GENEVA | MAY 26-27, 2026
Verifying the Prohibition on the Placement
of Nuclear Weapons in Outer Space
Legal, Technical, and Policy Pathways
tipped intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM).
Introduction
This discussion then focused on the policy and
legal distinctions between the two. While both have
The growing dependence of military, civilian,
significant strategic implications, the illegality of the
and commercial systems on space infrastructure,
first under the OST needs to be highlighted. Unlike
combined with renewed concerns about the possible
an ICBM, an orbital nuclear weapon would remain
deployment of nuclear weapons in orbit, has revived
persistently deployed, reducing warning times,
interest in strengthening the Outer Space Treaty
ambiguating intent and attribution, creating “use-or-
(OST). While Article IV of the OST clearly prohibits
lose” pressures, and potentially offering first-mover
the placement, installation, and stationing of
advantages before or during a crisis. Participants
weapons of mass destruction in orbit, it contains
emphasized that these characteristics make nuclear
no verification mechanism. This gap is becoming
weapons in space uniquely destabilizing and
increasingly concerning because a nuclear anti-
potentially capable of triggering an escalatory new
satellite (ASAT) weapon would have extremely
arms race in outer space.
negative effects on the space environment, degrading
entire orbital regimes for potentially long periods
Technically, a high altitude nuclear detonation would
of time, indiscriminately damaging satellites, and
have multiple effects on the space environment,
creating dangerous escalation pressures on Earth.
some immediate, others delayed and longer-lasting,
Recognizing these challenges, the Council on
depending on its location and yield. The initial blast
Strategic Risks (CSR), the Geneva Centre for Security
releases ionizing radiation (mostly as x-rays, as
Policy (GCSP), and the Secure World Foundation
well as gamma radiation and neutrons) that affects
(SWF) convened a Track 1.5 dialogue in Geneva in
spacecraft within line of sight. At the same time,
 to examine legal, technical, and policy
radioactive residuals from the weapon emit electrons.
pathways for verifying compliance with the OST.
In space, these charged electrons quickly become
trapped in the Earth’s magnetic field, amplifying
existing radiation belts, where they remain for weeks
Differentiating from nuclear
to years. Repeated exposure to ionizing radiation
weapons on ballistic missiles
can permanently disrupt, degrade, or damage
electronics onboard satellites passing through these
During the initial discussions of this issue, some
high radiation areas. Thus, both prompt and delayed
colleagues pointed out the need to distinguish a
effects of a nuclear detonation in space pose a severe
nuclear weapon stationed in space from a nuclear-
risk to satellites in orbit.
 1

Verifying the Prohibition on the Placement of Nuclear Weapons in Outer Space: Legal, Technical, and Policy Pathways
important questions remain unresolved, including
Differentiating nuclear weapons in
whether the mere presence of a nuclear weapon
orbit from nuclear energy systems
in orbit constitutes an unlawful “threat of force”
and how states should interpret concepts such as
Another distinction raised during participants’ initial
“weaponization” in practice.
discussion of verification is the ability to distinguish
nuclear weapons in orbit from legitimate nuclear
The core challenge is that the OST functions as,
power systems, such as radioisotope thermoelectric
in the words of one of the participants, “an arms
generators (RTGs), fission reactors, or developmental
control treaty without a verification regime.”
nuclear propulsion technologies. Several participants
Participants therefore focused on practical methods
confirmed that a variety of existing and emerging
of strengthening compliance without reopening the
verification capabilities could distinguish between
treaty itself, which was widely viewed as politically
nuclear power sources and nuclear weapons in orbit,
unrealistic. Three broad approaches emerged. The
provided sufficient consideration is given to resolution,
first would entail negotiating a formal verification
shielding, and standoff distance. It was suggested that
protocol, although few considered this feasible in the
companies working on such nuclear power sources be
current geopolitical environment. The second would
transparent about their activities to demonstrate they
involve developing implementation mechanisms and
are not developing nuclear weapons for space. These
common interpretations under the existing treaty
companies may be another source of support for a
framework. The third—and possibly most promising—
verification capacity that could distinguish peaceful
would focus on building customary international
nuclear power from nuclear weapons in orbit.
law to allow for verification through state practice
(“practice of the parties”), transparency measures,
declarations, and operational norms that reinforce
Agreement on the importance of
the prohibition over time.
Article IV of the OST
From a legal perspective, all participants agreed that
Article IV of the OST remains the cornerstone of the Verification models
international regime governing nuclear weapons in
Several verification pathways were discussed.
space. Additional legal constraints arise from the
National technical means (NTM), analogous to those
Limited Test Ban Treaty (also known as the Partial
used in traditional arms control agreements, could
Test Ban Treaty), the UN Charter, broader principles
provide independent monitoring capabilities. But
of international law incorporated through Article
NTM could face credibility challenges because only
III of the OST, the Convention on the Prohibition of
a handful of countries currently possess advanced
Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental
space situational awareness (SSA) systems. Also,
Modification Techniques (Environmental Modification
while SSA helps identify objects in orbit, it does not
Convention), and the Comprehensive Nuclear Test
allow verification of payloads. At the other extreme,
Ban Treaty. It was widely understood that stationing a
an international verification organization could
nuclear weapon in orbit would violate Article IV of the
conduct inspections and adjudicate compliance
OST and that any use of such a weapon would certainly
disputes, though political acceptance of such an
implicate multiple legal obligations, particularly in
organization remains doubtful. A hybrid approach
relation to the prohibition of the use or threat of force
for sharing SSA data received the greatest support:
enshrined in Article 2(4) of the UN Charter. However,
 2

Verifying the Prohibition on the Placement of Nuclear Weapons in Outer Space: Legal, Technical, and Policy Pathways
combining national capabilities, commercial data, networks are making these approaches more accessible
and international coordination through organizations than in previous decades.
such as the United Nations Office for Outer Space
Affairs (UNOOSA) or a future international SSA Additionally, some participants questioned the
information coordination mechanism. value of a US government-led verification effort that
adversaries would claim was rigged. Thus, sharing
The participants also discussed specific technologies. verification technology, or at least observational
Several colleagues noted that some technical data, with neutral actors could help them
verification options rely on tradeoffs between standoff independently verify and reach conclusions about
distance and time, where the closer the inspector the satellite’s payload.
satellite can get, the shorter the amount of time is
needed to complete the verification. Discussions
also revealed that the presented technical options
The value of verification as
containing tradeoffs between standoff distance and
deterrence, not just enforcement
time would best fit cooperative verification scenarios.
For example, X-ray radiography requires X-rays to be
Many participants suggested that the greatest value of
sent between two satellites and the satellite they are
verification may not be enforcement but deterrence.
inspecting; all three must remain co-linear for that to
The ability to detect, localize, characterize, and
be effective, and thus such verification would be most
attribute a prohibited weapon could discourage
appropriate for a cooperative scenario. Uncooperative
states from attempting deployment in the first place.
satellite inspections, on the other hand, would entail
Historical examples such as the Vela satellites (12
inherent escalation risks; although some participants
satellites placed at an altitude of over 100,000 km from
noted that public announcement, transparency,
Earth in order to monitor compliance with the LTBT)
and multilateral approaches might mitigate these
demonstrate how attribution capabilities can reinforce
risks. Several experts noted that using a gamma
treaty compliance. Verification becomes most effective
spectrometer would allow one inspector satellite to use
when paired with clear accountability policies that
passive detection to see a payload and thus could be
specify what happens after a violation is detected,
done in an uncooperative scenario.
including inspections, consultations, public disclosure,
and potential responses. The simple expectation of
From a technical perspective, several participants
discovery may itself serve as a powerful deterrent.
concluded that verification is challenging but
increasingly feasible. Options include pre-launch
verification, such as launch-site inspections and
Understanding and reducing
challenge inspections, as well as on-orbit verification
incentives for violating the OST
using proximity operations, neutron detection, gamma
spectroscopy, radiographic techniques, and pattern-
Some participants emphasized the need to
of-life analysis. However, no single method is likely to
understand the state’s motivations for a nuclear ASAT
suffice. Instead, a multi-modal approach combining
program, as this could help deter its deployment.
SSA data, radiation signatures, inspections, and
The key question is not simply whether a state could
commercial sensor networks would provide the highest
deploy such a capability, but why it would choose
confidence. Advances in commercial space capabilities,
to do so. Possible incentives include the increasing
AI-enabled data fusion, and globally distributed sensor
proliferation of very large satellite constellations
 3

Verifying the Prohibition on the Placement of Nuclear Weapons in Outer Space: Legal, Technical, and Policy Pathways
that may not be entirely civilian in nature, and requirements, expanded information sharing, greater
that could be quickly degraded or destroyed with transparency regarding satellite operations, and
this technology, responding to space-based missile the development of norms governing proximity
defenses, strengthening deterrence, or pursuing operations and on-orbit inspections. Such measures
warfighting advantages. would complement technical verification efforts
while helping to build trust among states. Some
Over the last decade, we have seen a shift towards participants acknowledged that such measures have
distributed space systems and away from monolithic, already been recommended (even by consensus) at
exquisite ones. We have also seen increased military the international level, but that what is currently
reliance on commercial space services. These missing is any implementation. Others stressed that
changes to the world’s space architecture introduce smaller and emerging spacefaring nations must be
new incentives and calculations, particularly amid included in these discussions, as they often depend
evolving strategic competition among major powers. heavily on the protections afforded by the OST
Understanding underlying incentives is critical because despite lacking significant counterspace capabilities
verification or attribution alone will not eliminate the of their own. Credibility, transparency, and capacity-
drivers that could encourage deployment. building were discussed as essential components of
any successful verification architecture.
The discussion also highlighted the importance
of reducing incentives to violate the treaty. Some
participants noted that if space systems were more Conclusion: bolstering
resilient to nuclear effects, the military utility of a the OST is essential
space-based nuclear weapon would decline. Radiation
hardening, distributed satellite architectures, rapid The overall conclusion of the dialogue was
reconstitution capabilities, placing constellations at that preserving and strengthening the OST’s
higher orbits, and more resilient commercial systems prohibition on nuclear weapons in space is both
could all reduce the attractiveness of such weapons. necessary and achievable, but likely not through
(While some participants argued that the costs treaty renegotiation. A more practical path lies in
for pre-launch satellite hardening against at least developing a layered system of deterrence through:
long-term radiation exposure effects have dropped, education about the threat, SSA, advances in
others felt that they were prohibitive for competing technical options to verify whether satellites are
commercial operators.) This line of discussion carrying nuclear warheads, commercial participation,
focused on deterrence by denial of benefits to the and evolving state practice that gradually strengthens
attacker in addition to deterrence through the fear of compliance and transparency. Over time, these
attribution and accountability. measures could combine to create a credible
verification and accountability architecture that
reinforces Article IV, reduces incentives to deploy
nuclear weapons in orbit, and helps preserve outer
Confidence-building and
space as a stable and secure domain for all nations.
transparency as low-hanging fruit
Confidence-building and transparency measures
were widely viewed as the most achievable near-term
steps. These could include enhanced registration
 4

Verifying the Prohibition on the Placement of Nuclear Weapons in Outer Space: Legal, Technical, and Policy Pathways
This dialogue is the result of grants from the Andrew
Carnegie Foundation and Longview Philanthropy; we
thank them for their generous support.
Contributors:
Mallory Stewart
Council on Strategic Risks
Almudena Azcárate Ortega
Secure World Foundation
Simon Cleobury
Geneva Centre for Security Policy
Jenifer Mackby
Geneva Centre for Security Policy
Isobel Porteous
Council on Strategic Risks
Jess Rogers
Council on Strategic Risks
Victoria Samson
Secure World Foundation
 5