January 13, 2023
Photo by: ISTOK / BLACKJACK3D
U.S. Space-Based Nuclear
Command and Control: A Guide
BY Marie Villarreal Dean
The United States has long depended on a vast array of and protect this vital infrastructure. This information
complex sensing and communications infrastructure to should serve as a resource for scholars, practitioners,
receive warning in the event of a nuclear attack and to and decisionmakers to better understand this complex
execute nuclear orders. This command and control system and the unique challenges it faces in today’s
network is highly reliant on space-based assets to space environment.
operate and provide dependable information to
The U.S. Nuclear Command and Control Network
decision makers in the event of a nuclear crisis. This
paper aims to provide a comprehensive outline of the
The U.S. nuclear command, control, and
contribution of satellites in the U.S. nuclear command
communications (NC3) network is a complex system
and control network, analyze space assets in the nuclear
modernization process, explore vulnerabilities and the Marie Villarreal Dean was a research intern for the
risks they face as the space environment becomes more Aerospace Security Project at the Center for Strategic
contested, and propose policy solutions to strengthen and International Studies in Washington, D.C.
AEROSPACE.CSIS.ORG | 1

composed of many critical parts designed to support the direction of forces.2 These functions are carried out
United States’ nuclear deterrent. The Department of through a system of interconnected elements that
Defense defines NC3 as the facilities, equipment, include warning satellites and radars, communication
communications, procedures, and personnel that satellites, aircraft and ground stations, fixed and mobile
enable the President to exercise nuclear authority. 1 The command posts, and control centers for nuclear
graphic below shows a simplified rendering of the systems. The current system is often referred to as
components of this network, including the nuclear having two layers: a “thick-line,” which consists of both
platforms themselves, sensors, communications standard operational and crisis architectures, and a
infrastructure, and the decision-makers. “thin-line,” which provides survivable, secure, and
enduring connectivity to the president, secretary of
defense, and combatant commanders. NC3 serves as
the link between the nuclear forces and presidential
authority.3
The nuclear command and control network requires a
high degree of survivability to continue performing even
in a worst-case nuclear war scenario. It has been
designed to be survivable to various extreme conditions
and has incorporated hardening, mobility, redundancy,
and concealment measures.4
Figure 1: Space-Based Nuclear Command & Control. Space-Based Assets in NC3
Source: “Nuclear Matters Handbook 2020 [Revised],” Chapter 2,
The space-based component of NC3 is integral to the

hapter2.html. defense of the United States because it is “the preferred
means to transmit a presidential order to use nuclear
The Nuclear Posture Review (NPR) is the guiding weapons and would provide the first warning of an
document for U.S. nuclear policy for each incoming nuclear attack.”5 Satellites provide secure
administration. The latest NPR was published in 2022 communications; intelligence, surveillance, and
and outlines the five critical functions of the nuclear reconnaissance (ISR); missile launch early warning; and
command and control system: detection, warning and positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT) functions as
attack characterization; adaptive nuclear planning; well as the synchronization of NC3 systems and
decision-making conferencing; receiving and executing networks. These systems consist of a satellite or
Presidential orders; and enabling the management and constellation of many satellites, ground stations,
1Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Nuclear Matters. 3 Claeys, Suzanne. “NC3: Challenges Facing the Future
“Nuclear Matters Handbook 2020 [Revised],” 2020. System,” 2020. 
 facing-future-system.
/chapter2.html.
4 Critchlow, Robert. “Nuclear Command and Control: Current
2 U.S. Department of Defense. “2022 Nuclear Posture Review,” Programs and Issues.” CRS Report, 3 ,
. 

1/1/2022-NATIONAL-DEFENSE-STRATEGY-NPR-MDR.PDF. 5 Acton, James, and Thomas McDonald. “Nuclear Command-
and-Control Satellites Should Be Off Limits.” Defense One,
2021. 
command-and-control-satellites-should-be-limits/187472/.
| 2

sensors, and uplink/downlinks for transmitting and covers everything from the base of the Arctic Circle to
receiving data, and terminals for the end-users.6 northern Antarctica. AEHF communications are also
Additionally, earth observation, electronic intelligence, shared with select allies and partners. AEHF provides
and meteorological forecasting are also space-based assured communications for the President, senior
functions that contribute to NC3. According to Lt. Gen. national security leaders, and military tactical and
Jack Weinstein, Air Force deputy chief of staff for strategic forces throughout a nuclear war.9 AEHF is one
strategic deterrence and nuclear integration, “we need of a few publicly acknowledged avenues through which
an unblinking eye to find out what is going on. That executive authorization orders can be transmitted. The
unblinking eye is provided by space…[the NC3 network] AEHF constellation provides support across land, air and
is entirely dependent on space.”7 naval warfare; special operations; strategic nuclear
operations; strategic defense; theater missile defense;
Communications
and space operations and intelligence.10 The six aging
MILSTAR satellites, the first of which launched in 1994,
The primary NC3 satellite communications (SATCOM)
infrastructure is the geosynchronous Advanced have since been supplemented by the newer AEHF
constellation. 11 The final AEHF payload was launched in
Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) constellation of six
satellites, which is the follow-on to the 1990s MILSTAR as the first Space Force mission, with the
total program cost for six satellites at $15 billion.12
program. AEHF is supported by additional protected
SATCOM units in polar orbit, which currently consists of
two Enhanced Polar System (EPS) hosted payloads and
supporting systems providing coverage above 65
degrees latitude.8 AEHF is a multi-service
communications constellation that is designed to be
protected against certain forms of counterspace attack.
AEHF provides jam-resistant communications for the
NC3 network, as well as other land, sea, and air assets.
Notably, AEHF serves latitudes located within 65
degrees north and 65 degrees south latitude, which
6 Lt Gen Deptula, David, William LaPlante, and Robert Haddick. Display/Article/2485377/end-of-an-era-the-aehf-program-
“Modernizing U.S. Nuclear Command, Control, and comes-to-a-close/.
Communications.” Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies,
10 Capt. Elizabeth Forbes, Space Force. “End of an Era: The
February 14, 2019. 
AEHF Program Comes to a Close.” Los Angeles Air Force Base,
content/uploads/2021/02/a2dd91_ed45cfd71de2457eba3bcc
e4d0657196.pdf#page=26.
2021. 
Display/Article/2485377/end-of-an-era-the-aehf-program-
7 Erwin, Sandra. “Another Way to Define Nuclear Triad: Three comes-to-a-close/.
Legs, plus ‘Space Capability.’” SpaceNews, May 1, 2018.
11 Air Force. “MILSTAR Satellite Communications System.”

2015. 
three-legs-plus-space-capability/.
Sheets/Display/Article/104563/milstar-satellite-
8 Northrop Grumman. “Enhanced Polar System.” Northrop communications-system/; Analysis from the Satellite
Grumman. Accessed October 12, 2022. Dashboard 

12 Erwin, Sandra. “Is the Cost of Military Space Programs Going
system.
Up or Down? Depends on How You Count.” SpaceNews, March
9 Capt. Elizabeth Forbes, Space Force. “End of an Era: The 19, 2018. 
AEHF Program Comes to a Close.” Los Angeles Air Force Base, space-programs-going-up-or-down-depends-on-how-you-
2021. count/.
| 3

Missile Warning NUDET
Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS) is the primary While early warning and secure communications
early warning satellite constellation. Made up of six satellites are well-known for their role in national
satellites with nuclear-hardened components, SBIRS security, other satellites fulfilling more mundane tasks
consists of two hosted sensor payloads in a Highly receive less attention but are still important to national
Elliptical Orbit (HEO) and four security operations. These satellite
dedicated payloads in systems and their respective ground
Geosynchronous Orbit (GEO).13 stations are integral parts of the larger NC3
SBIRS uses infrared sensors that system.
detect thermal signatures to
Hosted sensors on the Global Positioning
surveil the Earth, providing vast
System (GPS), Defense Support Program
amounts of data used for
(DSP), and other classified GEO
Figure 2: Depiction of SBIRS Missile Warning
missile defense, battlespace
Satellite constellations also contribute to NC3.18
awareness, missile warning, and
These satellites host the space segment of
Source: Space Force, Lockheed Martin
tactical intelligence,, sending
 the United States Nuclear Detonation
raw unprocessed data through 926454/newest-missile-warning-satellite-
(NUDET) Detection System (USNDS),19
five separate downlinks to the accepted-for-operations/
which according to the Air Force, “provides
ground. The follow-on to the Defense Support Program
a near real-time worldwide, highly survivable capability
(DSP) constellation, SBIRS is designed to meet system
to detect, locate, and report any nuclear detonations in
survivability and endurance requirements, and
the earth's atmosphere or in near space.”20 These
hardened against a nuclear electro-magnetic blast in
sensors have been operating since the first GPS launch
space.1415 As of August 4, 2022, all six satellites have been
in 1978, and provide nuclear force management,
successfully launched into GEO orbit.16 The original Air
technical intelligence, and treaty monitoring to the
Force budget calculations expected SBIRS to cost $5
National Command Authority, U.S. Strategic Command,
billion for six satellites– the current numbers place
U.S. Space Command, and the Air Force Technical
SBIRS at $19.2 billion dollars for six satellites.17
Applications Center, with funding supplied by the Air
13 Lockheed Martin. “SBIRS,” February 13, 2022. space-programs-going-up-or-down-depends-on-how-you-
 count/.
14 USAF. Defense Support Program Satellites. 2015. 18 USAF. “NUDET Detection System.” 2023 Space Procurement
 Justification Book, 2021, p.135.
Sheets/Display/Article/104611/defense-support-program- 
satellites/. OCUREMENT/FY20_PB_3021_Space.pdf?ver=2019-03-18-
152805-323#page=137.
15 USAF. “Space Based Infrared System.” Air Force, 2019.
 19 USAF. “NUDET Detection System.” 2020 Space Procurement
Sheets/Display/Article/104549/space-based-infrared-system/. Justification Book, 2019, p.137.

16 Erwin, Sandra. “ULA Launches the Last SBIRS U.S. Space
OCUREMENT/FY20_PB_3021_Space.pdf?ver=2019-03-18-
Force Missile Warning Satellite.” SpaceNews, August 4, 2022.
152805-323#page=137.

space-force-missile-warning-satellite/.
20 USAF. “NUDET Detection System.” 2020 Space Procurement
17 Erwin, Sandra. “Is the Cost of Military Space Programs Going Justification Book, 2019, p.137.
up or down? Depends on How You Count.” SpaceNews, March 
19, 2018. OCUREMENT/FY20_PB_3021_Space.pdf?ver=2019-03-18-
152805-323#page=137.
| 4

Force and the NNSA.21 The Space Force requested $7 am doing it with submarines built in the '80s and '90s,
million for continued NUDET system procurement in its and air-launched cruise missile built in the '80s,
FY2023 budget.22 intercontinental ballistic missiles built in the '70s, a
bomber built in the '60s, part of our nuclear command
NC3 Modernization
and control that predates the internet, and a nuclear
The ongoing nuclear modernization process began with weapons complex that dates back to the Manhattan
the upgrading of the next-generation B2 bomber in the era.25
early 2000s23 and continued more broadly as outlined in
the 2012 Nuclear Posture Review under President Having been designed to counter the Soviet missile
Obama.24 The current modernization push was threat, the NC3 architecture was last significantly
supported by political compromise and was concurrent updated in the 1980s. In the years since, the US has
with the ratification of the New START treaty in 2010. It faced new nuclear threats without advancing the NC3
has been driven by several factors, including an increase system to meet them. Advanced technologies also have
of foreign competition with Russia and China as both complicated NC3 requirements by creating new threats
states modernize their own strategic arsenals, as well as to the systems themselves.26 The modernization process
the need to replace an aging arsenal and support also extends to space-based assets and a space domain
infrastructure and upgrade nuclear infrastructure with that sees increasing congestion and contestation. The
today’s digital technology. Admiral Richard, former national security space enterprise has shifted to adjust
commander of U.S. Strategic Command, recently architecture and acquisitions practices to an
testified that: increasingly contested environment. In a memo
The strategic security environment is now a three-party chartering the establishment of the Space Development
nuclear near-peer reality. Today's nuclear force is the Agency (SDA), former acting Defense Secretary Patrick
minimum required to achieve our national Shanahan wrote that:
strategy. Right now I am executing my strategic
A national security space architecture that provides the
deterrence mission under historic stress, crisis levels of
persistent, resilient, global, low-latency surveillance
deterrence, crisis deterrence dynamics that we have
needed to deter, or if deterrence fails, defeat adversary
only seen a couple of times in our nation's history, and I
21 Inspector General, Department of Defense. “Evaluation of whitehouse.gov, November 17, 2010.
the Space-Based Segment of the U.S. Nuclear Detonation 
Detection System,” . office/2010/11/17/fact-sheet-enduring-commitment-us-
 nuclear-deterrent.
1/1/DODIG-2018-160.PDF.
25 “Testimony on United States Strategic Command and
22U.S. Department of Defense. “Department of Defense Fiscal United States Space Command in Review of the Defense
Year 2023 Budget Estimates, Space Force Procurement,” April Authorization Request for Fiscal Year 2023, Senate Armed
2022, p.133. Services Committee,” March 8, 2022.
 
OCUREMENT_/FY23%20Space%20Force%20Procurement.pdf C-Hearing-Transcript/.
?ver=vMyfar1xW31ifPHFc-mz6A%3d%3d#page=133.
26 Lt Gen Deptula, David, William LaPlante, and Robert
23 Klotz, Frank, and Alexandra Evans. “Modernizing the U.S. Haddick. “Modernizing U.S. Nuclear Command, Control, and
Nuclear Triad: The Rationale for a New Intercontinental Communications.” Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies,
Ballistic Missile.” RAND, , Figure 1, p.4. February 14, 2019.
 
PEA1400/PEA1434-1/RAND_PEA1434-1.pdf. nuclear-command-control-and-communications/.
24 White House: Office of the Press Secretary. “Fact Sheet: An
Enduring Commitment to the U.S. Nuclear Deterrent.”
| 5

action is a prerequisite to maintain our long-term Gen OPIR) constellation. The first block of this
competitive advantage. We cannot achieve these goals, constellation will consist of three satellites in GEO
and we cannot match the pace our adversaries are covering mid-latitudes and two satellites in polar highly
setting, if we remain bound by legacy methods and
elliptical orbits for upper latitude coverage.29 Lockheed
culture.27
Martin was awarded the non-competitive, sole-source
Modernization includes upgrading and replacing contract worth $2.9 billion to develop the three Next
satellites to reduce obsolescence and removing aging Gen OPIR geosynchronous satellites in 2018 with a
systems, equipping new payloads with more advanced follow-on contract of $4.9 billion. The first GEO satellite
sensors, expanding capacity, and designing systems for is planned for initial launch in 2025, while the first polar
survivability and resiliency. Specific systems in need of
satellite, built by Northrop Grumman, will likely launch
modernization include various missile launch early
in 2028.30 Delivery of the full constellation is expected by
warning and communications satellites, including SBIRS
2028. Another initiative, the Future Operationally
and AEHF. Along with developing new constellations to
Resilient Ground Evolution (FORGE), will modernize the
keep pace with missile technologies, additional
ground station segment of this system and process data
modernization is likely to include upgrades in sensors,
from both SBIRS and Next Gen OPIR.31 The 2023 Fiscal
ground stations, terminals, and resiliency, survivability
Year budget research and development request for this
and hardening of the entire network.
system was $3.5 billion for the total ground, GEO, and
The latest projections from the Congressional Budget
polar components, 32 with total projected program costs
Office estimate that approximately 15% of the
estimated at $14.4 billion.33
requested budget for nuclear modernization from 2021-
2030 is dedicated to command, control, In 2017, General John Hyten, former vice chairman of
communications, and early warning systems.28
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, called the aging SBIRS satellites
“big juicy targets,” referring to their lack of defenses
NextGen OPIR
against anti-satellite weapons, and criticized the
SBIRS will be supplemented and eventually replaced by timeline for the development of the next-generation
the Next Generation Overhead Persistent Infrared (Next replacement. This invigorated the Air Force to speed up
27 Krzyzaniak, John. “‘Big, Fat, Juicy Targets’— the Problem Generation%20Overhead%20Persistent%20Infrared%20Progr
with Existing Early-Warning Satellites. And a Solution.” am%20Selects%20Mission%20Payload%20Suppliers%20v4.p
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, September 30, 2019. df?ver=7qUXGXb35DOGSCh2uAQEGw%3D%3D.

31U.S. Government Accountability Office, and John
problem-with-existing-early-warning-satellites/.
Ludwigson. “Space Acquisitions: Changing Environment
28Congressional Budget Office. “Projected Costs of U.S. Presents Continuing Challenges and Opportunities for DOD,”
Nuclear Forces, 2021 to 2030.” May 24, 2021. . 

32 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller).
29U.S. Government Accountability Office, and John “Department of Defense Budget, Fiscal Year 2023, RDT&E
Ludwigson. “Space Acquisitions: Changing Environment Programs,” .
Presents Continuing Challenges and Opportunities for DOD,” 
. udget/FY2023/FY2023_r1.pdf#page=50.
30 Space Systems Command. “Next-Generation Overhead 33 U. S. Government Accountability Office. “Missile Warning
Persistent Infrared Program Selects Mission Payload Satellites: Comprehensive Cost and Schedule Information
Suppliers.” . Would Enhance Congressional Oversight.” .
 
%20RELEASES/Next-
| 6

the development of the system and integrate more missile warning capability against emerging missile and
advanced features, from better sensors to resiliency counter-space threats.”36
measures.34 Next Gen OPIR is planned to be more
Space Development Agency
resilient against threats, which were a concern for the
SBIRS constellation. According to a Lockheed Martin The Space Development Agency is also developing a
global infrared hypersonic and ballistic missile tracking
representative, “a space program of this size — which
layer in LEO and MEO as a key component of its National
includes developing two entirely new missile warning
Defense Space Architecture that will be integrated with
payloads — has never moved this fast.”35
the broader NC3 network.37 The first eight satellites will
The development of the Next Gen OPIR constellation is launch in Tranche 0,38 and the next wave will be
being divided between two contractors to reinforce composed of 28 additional satellites in LEO launching in
redundancy for sensitive national security payloads. For 2025.39 The end goal is an entire constellation in LEO and
example, if one of the contractors were to experience a MEO interfacing with each other seamlessly and capable
delay or other issue, the entirety of the planned of boost-phase missile detection and tracking.40 SDA
constellation wouldn't be compromised and could recently announced that it has awarded L3Harris and
continue on schedule. Resilience is being addressed at Northrop Grumman a total of $1.3 billion in contracts to
every step of the development process, from payload develop prototype satellites capable of tracking
requirements to architecture design, with Space Force hypersonic missiles in flight.41 The main motivation
Colonel Brian Denaro describing Next Gen OPIR as the behind this larger space missile warning architecture is
cornerstone of U.S. integrated missile warning, tracking, to have satellites in lower orbits that can provide
and battlespace awareness, saying that, “Next Gen OPIR enhanced tracking capability for hypersonic missiles
is designed to provide a resilient space-based global and gliders, while also having the added benefit of
increasing redundancy.
34 Erwin, Sandra. “The End of SBIRS: Air Force Says It’s Time to 38 Space Development Agency. “SDA Awards Contracts for the
Move on.” SpaceNews, February 19, 2018. First Generation of the Tracking Layer – Space Development
 Agency.” 
time-to-move-on/. first-generation-of-the-tracking-layer/.
35 SpaceNews. “Lockheed Martin Gets $4.9 Billion Contract to 39 U.S. Department of Defense. “Space Development Agency
Build Three Missile-Warning Satellites for U.S. Space Force,” Makes Awards for 28 Satellites to Build Tranche 1 Tracking
January 5, 2021. Layer.” .
gets-4-9-billion-contract-to-build-three-missile-warning- 
satellites/. 6294/space-development-agency-makes-awards-for-28-
satellites-to-build-tranche-1-trac/.
36 Space Systems Command. “United States Space Force Next
Gen OPIR GEO Program Completes Block 0 GEO Space Vehicle 40 Miller, Amanda. “Emerging Emphasis on Missile Tracking
C.” August 24, 2021. Reflected in Space Force’s 2023 Budget Request.” Air Force
 Magazine, April 26, 2022.
Display/Article/2744261/united-states-space-force-next-gen- 
opir-geo-program-completes-block-0-geo-space. missile-tracking-reflected-in-space-forces-2023-budget-
request/.
37 Hitchens, Theresa. “Space Development Agency Missile
Tracking Data Will Inform NC3.” Breaking Defense, November 41 Williams, Lauren. “Hypersonic Missile-Tracking Satellites
11, 2022. Greenlit For Development.” Defense One, 2022.
 
pace-development-agency-missile-tracking-data-will-inform- systems/2022/07/hypersonic-missile-tracking-satellites-
nc3/. greenlit-development/374618/.
| 7

Beyond AEHF Typically, while most of the technical specifications of
these satellite systems are highly classified, there is a
The modernization plan for AEHF involves
variety of publicly available information available on the
supplementing and then replacing it with the new
Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF)
Evolved Strategic Satellite (ESS) constellation, a Space
constellation. Developed as the successor to the
Force program.42 It will provide expanded global
MILSTAR communications constellation, the program
strategic and secure communications capabilities to
began in 1999, was developed in 2001, reached its initial
support NC3 functions.43 Lockheed Martin, Boeing, and
operational capability in 2018, and is now operated and
Northrop Grumman are developing competing designs
maintained by the Space Force. The first of the six
for the ESS program over the next few years. Contracts
satellites launched in 2010, with the final unit launched
for the full ESS system are expected to be awarded in
in 2020. Its operational schedule faced some setbacks,
2025.4445 AEHF was originally intended to be replaced by
including technical issues with AEHF-1 resulting in it
the Transformational Satellite Communications System
being stranded on-orbit and later recovered, and further
(TSAT) program, but due to cost overruns and delays the
delays on AEHF-4.49 AEHF provides extremely high-
program was canceled in 2010 and instead two more
frequency (EHF) uplink and crosslink capabilities and
AEHF satellites were launched as an interim measure.46
super high-frequency (SHF) communications. Its
The Enhanced Polar System Recapitalization effort, capacity is ten times that of MILSTAR, featuring an
increased coverage area. Its anti-jam payload includes
designed as a stopgap between the Enhanced Polar
onboard signal processing, radio frequency equipment,
System and the upcoming polar component of the ESS,
crossbanded EHF/SHF communication antennas, with a
is currently in development and scheduled to launch in
mass of 6,168 kg at launch. Its hardened and survivable
2022. The $429 million contract for the polar segment
mission control and terminal segments are made up of
was awarded to Northrop Grumman.47
fixed and mobile ground, air, and sea terminals, which
facilitate data transfer rates from 75 bps to 8 Mbps.50 The
AEHF Case Study48
original Air Force cost estimate for the entire AEHF
42 Congressional Research Service, and John R Hoehn. 46 Gates, Robert. “Budget Press Briefing as Prepared for
“Nuclear Command, Control, and Communications (NC3) Delivery by Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates,” .
Modernization,” . 
 /Reports/2009/April%202009/Day07/Gates_budget_040609.p
df.
43 U.S. Government Accountability Office, and John
Ludwigson. “Space Acquisitions: Changing Environment 47 Strout, Nathan. “Space Force’s Stopgap Polar
Presents Continuing Challenges and Opportunities for DOD,” Communications System Passes Another Milestone.”
. C4ISRNet, July 9, 2020. 
tech/space/2020/07/09/space-forces-stopgap-polar-
44 Capt. Elizabeth Forbes, and Space Force. “End of an Era: communications-system-passes-another-milestone/.
The AEHF Program Comes to a Close.” Los Angeles Air Force
Base, 2021. 48 Air Force. “Advanced Extra High Frequency (AEHF),” March
 13, 2007.
Display/Article/2485377/end-of-an-era-the-aehf-program- 
comes-to-a-close/. angeles.af.mil/SMC/MC/aehf.htm.
45 “Lockheed Martin Wins $258M US Space Force Contract for 49 Ray, Justin. “Two U.S. Military Satellite Launches Delayed
ESS Program Prototype,” November 11, 2020. into Next Year – Spaceflight Now,” 2017.
 
military/2020/11/11/lockheed-martin-wins-258m-us-space- satellite-launches-delayed-into-next-year/.
force-contract-for-ess-program-prototype/.
50 Airforce Technology. “Advanced Extremely High Frequency
(AEHF) Satellite System.” . 
| 8

system was $6 billion, while the total cost came out to pause,” according to Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin.
be $15 billion.51 Instead of relying upon sheer military strength to deter
adversaries, integrated deterrence envisions pulling on
every available lever of influence to achieve the desired
Challenges and Policy Recommendations foreign policy and military effect. 53
As the modernization process continues, there are Cybersecurity
several challenges to maintaining and developing a
Because of the digital nature of space systems, cyber
strong space-based NC3 capability as the U.S. faces
interference and attacks remain a top concern for the
increasing threats in the space domain. Questions
national security space enterprise, and indeed “many of
around cybersecurity, force design and proliferation,
the most daunting challenges for NC3 resilience lie at
escalation and deterrence, and defenses are driving
the intersection of cyberspace and outer space
current policy discussions.
domains, where cyber-attacks are directed at space-
The 2022 National Defense Strategy features the based NC3 assets.”54 Vulnerabilities along supply chains
concept of “integrated deterrence” – which, per the and through contractors could also present openings for
deputy undersecretary of defense for policy Sasha bad actors or other failures to disrupt the complex
Baker, is “a framework for working across warfighting network. According to Erin Miller, Executive Director of
domains, theaters and the spectrum of conflict, in the Space Information Sharing and Analysis Center
collaboration with all instruments of national power, as (ISAC), “due to the different regulations and
well as with U.S. allies and our partners.”52 Space-based requirements used by firms and within the government,
assets will be a key part of the United States’ ability to it is difficult to ensure that components from all levels of
continue integrating forces and networks, across both the supply chain have the same quality of cyber
conventional and strategic missions. “Integrated protection.”55 A 2019 DOT&E Cyber Assessment report
deterrence is about using the right mix of technology, highlighted such concerns and the results of the
operational concepts, and capabilities—all woven evaluation of NC3 capability were “briefed to the highest
together in a networked way that is so credible, and levels of DOD leadership and have resulted in a
flexible, and formidable that it will give any adversary significant increase in focus in this vital area.”56
technology.com/projects/advanced-extremely-high- 54 Dunnmon, et al. “Nuclear Command and Control in the
frequency-aehf/. Twenty-First Century: Maintaining Surety in Outer Space and
Cyberspace.” Project on Nuclear Issues. Center for Strategic
51 Erwin, Sandra. “Is the Cost of Military Space Programs Going
and International Studies (CSIS), 2017.
Up or Down? Depends on How You Count.” SpaceNews, March

19, 2018. 
space-programs-going-up-or-down-depends-on-how-you- 55 Gillete, Amber. “From Supply Chains to Spacecraft: Taking
count/. an Integrated Approach to Cybersecurity in Space | Wilson
Center.” Accessed January 8, 2023.
52 Lopez, C. Todd. “Integrated Deterrence at Center of

Upcoming National Defense Strategy.” U.S. Department of
spacecraft-taking-integrated-approach-cybersecurity-space.
Defense, . 
Stories/Article/Article/2954945/integrated-deterrence-at- 56 Office of Test and Evaluation (DOT&E). “Cyber Assessment,”
center-of-upcoming-national-defense-strategy/
2019.

53 Osborn, Kris. “What Does the Pentagon’s ‘Integrated
her/2019cyber-assessments.pdf?ver=2020-01-30-115600-
Deterrence’ Strategy Mean?” The National Interest. The
800#page=4.
Center for the National Interest, November 16, 2021.

pentagons-integrated-deterrence-strategy-mean-196372.
| 9

In terms of acquisition, a 2021 SpaceNews op-ed the 2022 Russian hack against commercial satellite
explained why cybersecurity and supply chain operator Viasat in Ukraine shows, satellite ground
management must go hand in hand: “Given current stations are generally a weak link in this system and can
resource constraints, the leanness of the new U.S. be relatively easy targets in a conflict.59 A key
Space Force, and the push for agility and rapid recommendation of the 2020 Cyberspace Solarium
acquisition, commercial reliance is likely to increase. Commission report stated that:
The proliferation of vendors providing data, software,
Even more concerning is the potential cyber threat to
hardware, and services in this environment presents
the U.S. nuclear deterrent and the survivability and
an array of opportunities to adversaries with
resilience of NC3 systems and NLCC programs facing the
cascading effects, which punctuates the importance
full spectrum of cyber threats. These threats are
of immediately elevating cyber hygiene and supply
particularly alarming because they can undermine the
chain risk management (SCRM).”57
stability of nuclear deterrence and create the conditions
The Space Force is also at the forefront of recognizing for inadvertent nuclear war. The greatest risk is that
these risks and increasing focus on preparing to counter precisely because cyber interactions take place below
them, with the formation of the Space Delta 6 the threshold of armed conflict, the combination of
cybersecurity squadron, as well as the new Space cyber risks and NC3 systems can, in effect, lower that
Force Infrastructure Asset Pre-Assessment Program threshold. With this in mind, Congress should direct DoD
(IA-PRE) that aims to “advance the security posture of to routinely assess every segment of the NC3 and NLCC
current and future commercial satellite enterprise for adherence to cybersecurity best practices,
communications procurements for the DoD.” vulnerabilities, and evidence of compromise.60
To mitigate these challenges, government and industry Proliferation
should continue to focus on designing for resiliency with
Furthermore, shifting space architecture design away
a focus on cybersecurity at every step of the process,
from few numbers of expensive satellites that take a
and guard against supply chain interdiction from
long time to build, launch, and position, towards larger
research and development to launch. Because cyber
constellations of smaller, cheaper satellites could help
anti-satellite operations are among the counterspace
increase resiliency and protect against common mode
threats that worry experts the most, building in robust
failures that occur when one satellite is interfered with,
cybersecurity measures for satellite payloads and
leading to the weakening of the entire constellation.
ground stations during the modernization process and
This new infrastructure could also include a streamlined
similar efforts should be a priority.58 Contractors and
launch program to rapidly replace damaged satellites
commercial companies should ensure cybersecurity
and investing in air or ground redundancy systems.
hardening at every step of the process to help mitigate
Because constellations take so long to build, launch,
system weaknesses and vulnerabilities. Furthermore, as
57 Pillow, Liz. “Op-Ed | SOS Space: Why Cybersecurity and 59 Erwin, Sandra. “U.S. Space Force to Step up Protection of
Supply Chain Risk Management Must Go Hand in Hand.” Satellite Ground Systems in the Wake of Russia’s Cyber
SpaceNews, November 16, 2021. Attacks.” SpaceNews, May 19, 2022.
ed-sos-space-why-cybersecurity-and-supply-chain-risk- 
management-must-go-hand-in-hand/. protection-of-satellite-ground-systems-in-the-wake-of-
russias-cyber-attacks/.
58 Erwin, Sandra. “Cyber Warfare Gets Real for Satellite
60 Cyberspace Solarium Commission, Senator Angus King, and
Operators.” SpaceNews, March 20, 2022.
Representative Mike Gallagher. “Final Report,” ,

p.119. 
operators/.
content/uploads/2022/05/CSC-Final-Report.pdf.
| 10

and get into position, many systems won’t be operating these systems were targeted. An adversary's targeting of
at full capacity for years, so building in additional air, U.S. conventional space capabilities in an attempt to
ground communications or missile warning support is gain an advantage in a conventional conflict could have
an important consideration. The Space Development destabilizing effects on U.S. confidence in its nuclear
Agency is at the forefront of this effort, with proliferation forces if the strategic space-based NC3 capabilities were
and a spiral mode of architecture development as its affected as incidental damage.63 The variety of possible
two pillars approach to the National Defense Space offensive actions in space also could impact the degree
Architecture, allowing for higher resilience, more to which certain modes of attack on certain assets
flexibility, and the ability to “quickly pivot in response or would create escalation concerns. The jamming of dual-
even preemptively to advances in the threat.”61 use satellite communications during a conventional
Additionally, top officials have stressed the need for a conflict might elicit a different response than the
proliferated force design, including former Space jamming of a missile detection satellite or the detection
Force Chief of Space Operations General Raymond: of a co-orbital vehicle shadowing one of these systems.
“We have got to shift our space architecture, if you Both the mode of attack and the target, as well as the
will, from a handful of exquisite capabilities that are context of a possible conflict could impact the degree to
very hard to defend to a more robust, more resilient which certain attacks would raise strategic concerns.64
architecture.”62 However, some scholars have argued that the
entanglement of strategic and tactical functions in NC3
Entanglement, Escalation, & Deterrence
satellites serves as a deterrent against aggressive action,
Disruption of space assets could have serious impacts instead of as a potential tripwire.65 Adversaries may not
want to risk targeting these assets for tactical purposes
on U.S. nuclear posture and general force readiness by
impacting missile warning and secure communications because of the prospect of unintended escalation.
Therefore, disentanglement might work counter to
capabilities and the disruption of critical space
deterrence efforts. A strategy of entanglement might be
infrastructure. These effects could be amplified in a
more desirable as a result, and if so, it is also possible
conflict scenario where U.S. forces are under attack. If
an adversary were looking to undermine U.S. nuclear that the potential for this type of unintended escalation
in space might decrease.
security, these qualities would make the space-based
NC3 segment an attractive target.
Additionally, because these space systems are a part of
Military satellites can be entangled systems, meaning the nuclear command and control network, some
experts have proposed that countries most dependent
that some fulfill both strategic and tactical missions.
While the benefits of entanglement include cost on their satellites negotiate “keep-out” zones around
reductions and operational benefits, a concern is the
possibility of unintended escalation that could exist if
61 Space Development Agency. “Introduction,” , p. 5. the Risks of an Inadvertent Nuclear War.” International
 Security 43, no. 1 (): 56–99.
About-Us-2020-to-2021_march-2022-1.pdf#page=5. 
64 Egeli, Sitki. “Space-to-Space Warfare and Proximity
62 Erwin, Sandra. “Raymond: Space Force in 2022 to Focus on Operations: The Impact on Nuclear Command, Control, and
the Design of a Resilient Architecture.” SpaceNews, January Communications and Strategic Stability.” Journal for Peace
18, 2022. and Nuclear Disarmament 4, no. 1 (January 2, 2021): 116–40.
2022-to-focus-on-the-design-of-a-resilient-architecture/. 
65 Stewart, Brian. “Deterrence Through Entanglement.”
63 Acton, James M. “Escalation through Entanglement: How
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2022.
the Vulnerability of Command-and-Control Systems Raises

| 11

each other’s high-altitude satellites.66 This type of more ambiguous language of the Obama-era, simply
international norm or treaty creation is promising to stating that “the United States would only consider the
mitigate threats, although the willingness of major use of nuclear weapons in extreme circumstances to
nuclear powers like the U.S., Russia, and China to join defend the vital interests of the United States or its Allies
such an agreement is questionable. A potential and partners.”69 There has been a longstanding
challenge is that countries signing on to this agreement understanding that targeting these systems could be
would have to be willing to disclose which of their highly escalatory and destabilizing, so maintaining
satellites perform such operations and their locations in robust NC3 capabilities and protecting them from
orbit, against concerns that this information sharing interference is crucial.
would increase the vulnerability of those assets.
Space Defenses
According to expert Ankit Panda, “space-based NC3
NC3 satellites can also benefit from both passive and
assets deserve special consideration after the 2018
active protective measures. Passive measures include
NPR’s widening of the conditions for nuclear use.”67 In
disaggregated, distributed, and proliferated
the 2018 NPR, the U.S. “would only consider the
constellations, creating larger groups of smaller
employment of nuclear weapons in extreme
satellites that perform critical functions. A
circumstances to defend the vital interests of the United
disaggregation strategy could help mitigate the problem
States, its allies, and partners. Extreme circumstances
of entanglement in dual-use infrastructure – for
could include significant non-nuclear strategic attacks.
example, “the Evolved Strategic SATCOM (ESS) system
Significant non-nuclear strategic attacks include, but
will support strategic users for missions such as nuclear
are not limited to, attacks on the U.S., allied, or partner
command and control, whereas the Protected Tactical
civilian population or infrastructure, and attacks on U.S.
Service (PTS) system will support tactical SATCOM users
or allied nuclear forces, their command and control, or
that need a high level of jam resistance. This could
warning and attack assessment capabilities.”68 By
reduce the potential for unintentional escalation by
including “non-nuclear strategic attacks” on NC3 in the
forcing an adversary to be explicit about the capabilities
list of the circumstances under which the U.S might
it is targeting in an attack.”70 However, a strategy of
consider nuclear use, this sent the message that
disaggregation may not be feasible or the best option
interfering with NC3 may cross a line. It also raised
for some space systems, depending on technical or
questions as to what types of aggressive activity would
budgetary limitations or strategic concerns. And of
qualify as a “non-nuclear strategic attack” – a term
course, “an adversary may not be able to distinguish
which the Trump Administration never fully defined. In
between satellites that are intended for different
the 2022 NPR, the Biden Administration reverted to the
missions, and even if such differences are disclosed, an
66 Acton, James, and Thomas McDonald. “Nuclear Command- 
and-Control Satellites Should Be Off Limits.” Defense One, 1/1/2018-NUCLEAR-POSTURE-REVIEW-FINAL-REPORT.PDF.
.
69 U.S. Department of Defense. “2022 Nuclear Posture

Review,” , p.9.
command-and-control-satellites-should-be-limits/187472/.

67 Panda, Ankit. “Space-Based Nuclear Command and Control 1/1/2022-NATIONAL-DEFENSE-STRATEGY-NPR-MDR.PDF.
and the ‘Non-Nuclear Strategic Attack.’” The Diplomat, . 70 Harrison, Todd. “Defense Against The Dark Arts In Space:
nuclear-command-and-control-and-the-non-nuclear- Protecting Space Systems from Counterspace Weapons.”
strategic-attack/. CSIS, 2021. 
dark-arts-space-protecting-space-systems-counterspace-
68 Department of Defense. “2018 Nuclear Posture Review,” weapons
.
| 12

adversary may not trust this distinction and attack both creating a safe and sustainable space environment. The
anyway.”71 first meeting of the UN Open-Ended Working Group On
Reducing Space Threats in discussed these
Other passive measures include redundant, mobile, and
norms, and future meetings show promise of beginning
hardened ground stations, wherein satellite operations
discussions around space security.73 The US-led
are not dependent on a single, fixed, and vulnerable
moratorium on destructive kinetic ASAT testing was
ground station to receive and transmit key data but can
recently adopted into a UN resolution by a 154-8 vote.
be supported by other ground stations or air receivers.
Nine states have committed to the unilateral
Defenses like advanced space situational awareness,
moratorium, while China and Russia voted against the
electromagnetic shielding, rapid deployment, and
resolution and India abstained. The U.S., Russia, China,
reconstitution of satellite payloads, and using encrypted
and India are the only states to have tested an ASAT
and air-gapped systems are among the additional ways
weapon. This resolution could signal a degree of
that NC3 space systems can protect themselves from
momentum on policy options that could work to reduce
accidents or interference. Active satellite defense
risks in space.74 One future possibility could see nations
measures can take the form of jamming and spoofing,
with strong national security interests in space begin
lasers, targeting counterspace systems with
talks to negotiate the terms of a treaty banning
cyberattacks, or firing projectiles or physically seizing
purposeful interference with or targeting of critical
threatening objects. While some of these defensive
satellites, to include those involved in each other's
options add to the cost or weight of a satellite payload,
strategic forces.75 However, any such diplomatic efforts
a mixture of these has the potential to provide
must work towards solution that all countries can agree
important nuclear command and control satellites with
to and navigate sensitive national security concerns
a robust defense.72
inherent to space assets, which has so far proved
International options to reduce the impacts of a challenging.
congested and contested orbital environment also exist.
Summary
Creating a strong global space traffic management
system would contribute to the ability of all countries to The space leg of the U.S. nuclear command and control
obtain strong space situational awareness, and reduce network is a highly complex system, with the nature of
the risks posed by accidental collisions. Recent the orbital environment presenting unique challenges to
initiatives have also promoted the creation of its security. The open-source nature of this project
international norms around responsible behavior in naturally imposes limits on what it can answer on highly
space, with the end goal of guiding conduct and sensitive national security infrastructure, but it will
71 Harrison, Todd. “Defense Against The Dark Arts In Space: n-talks-on-space-norms-surprisingly-collegial-but-fireworks-
Protecting Space Systems from Counterspace Weapons.” to-come-sources/.
CSIS, 2021. 
74 Foye, Heather, and Gabriela Rosa Hernández. “UN First
dark-arts-space-protecting-space-systems-counterspace-
Committee Calls for ASAT Test Ban.” Arms Control
weapons
Association. .
72 Harrison, Todd. “Defense Against The Dark Arts In Space: 
Protecting Space Systems from Counterspace Weapons.” committee-calls-asat-test-ban.
CSIS, 2021. 
75 Hitchens, Theresa. “At Home and Internationally,
dark-arts-space-protecting-space-systems-counterspace-
‘governance’ Is the Space Watchword: 2023 Preview.”
weapons.
Breaking Defense, December 28, 2022.
73 Hitchens, Theresa. “UN Talks on Space Norms Surprisingly 
Collegial, but Fireworks to Come: Sources.” Breaking Defense, -home-and-internationally-governance-is-the-space-
May 31, 2022. watchword-2023-preview/.

| 13

hopefully provide a resource for researchers, analysts,
and policymakers on this important topic. The next
phase of research on this topic should include questions
on the role of the National Reconnaissance Office and
other intelligence community architecture in the NC3
system, how the military is altering capability and
survivability requirements in the next 10-20 years given
the rapidly changing space threat environment, how
tradeoffs between the increased need for survivability
and resulting increases in payload complexity and costs
are being decided, and the potential impacts on
international security as other nuclear powers invest in
their own advanced space nuclear command and
control assets. In conclusion, developing strong
successors to NC3 space programs and adapting new
systems are critical to staying abreast of the rapidly
changing and increasingly dangerous space
environment.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank the Brooke Owens
Fellowship, Kari Bingen, Kaitlyn Johnson, Makena
Young, Patricia Cooper, James Acton, Benjamin Bahney,
Carlos Niederstrasser, Brian Stewart, and Michael Dickey
for their support and expert insights.
| 14

About CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research organization dedicated to
advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding former U.S. Senator Sam Nunn (D-GA).
Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of values—nonpartisanship,
independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity and professionalism, and talent development.
CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research, analysis, and recommendations. We
organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media appearances that aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and
salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policymakers and the thinking of key influencers.
We work toward a vision of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS is ranked the number one think tank in the United States as well as the defense and national security center of excellence for
2016-2018 by the University of Pennsylvania’s annual think tank report.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be understood to be solely those of
the author(s).
| 15