Introduction
Georgetown University’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET) submitted the
following recommendations on the Development of an Artificial Intelligence (AI) Action Plan, as
directed by a Presidential Executive Order on January 23, 2025. These recommendations were
drawn from CSET’s wide body of research in the areas of assessment and evaluations, biosecurity,
cybersecurity and AI, military AI applications, technology monitoring, U.S.-China competition
analysis, and AI workforce research. The recommendations for the Trump administration broadly
fall into three categories: 1) steps the United States can take to advance and secure its leadership
in developing cutting-edge AI capabilities, 2) initiatives for competition in AI with China, and 3)
actions the U.S. government can take to realize the benefits of AI while mitigating its risks.
We begin by laying out several recommendations for advancing American AI leadership through
investments in research, innovation, and talent. First, we recommend increasing funding for public
sector research into AI applications in the social and life sciences and sharing findings widely to
promote new discoveries. Second, we recommend lowering the barriers to entry for emerging AI
companies to stimulate innovation and healthy market competition. Promoting competitive
markets and open AI models will enable new, diverse approaches to frontier research, offering
alternative pathways to realizing the benefits of powerful models. Finally, we recommend that the
United States further develop AI talent to strengthen our research ecosystem and create new
business opportunities. Increasing funding for workforce training programs and creating an AI
scholarship-for-service program will equip private sector workers and public servants with the
necessary skills to develop and use AI tools most effectively. Maintaining AI leadership requires
a sustained commitment to the research and expertise that have proven a fundamental advantage
to the United States.
We next offer recommendations for navigating AI competition between the United States and
China. We first recommend the administration take a two-pronged approach to strengthening U.S.
technological competitiveness. Preventing illicit technology transfers, coupled with enhancing the
effectiveness of U.S. export controls on key AI components, will ultimately weaken the Chinese
AI ecosystem. This will require close cooperation with allies and partners to devise joint strategies
and garner broad support for export control objectives: cooperation will translate into greater
effectiveness. We also recommend that the administration prioritize alleviating information
asymmetries between the U.S. government and frontier AI companies to avoid technological
surprise and for intelligence sharing with allies. Investments in open source intelligence collection,
both related to domestically-created capabilities and developments in China’s AI ecosystem, will
be critical to informing proactive U.S. AI policy. Finally, we recommend the administration

implement an AI incident reporting regime to aggregate data on AI failure modes and emerging
risks, which can better inform safety science research priorities and risk mitigation strategies.
Finally, we recommend actions the U.S. government can take to realize AI’s benefits while
minimizing risks. Providing public assurances for redressing harms from AI systems and shielding
whistleblowers from company retaliation can help the public more confidently engage with AI.
We recommend that the administration create standard pathways to contest adverse AI-enabled
decisions and establish whistleblower protections for employees at frontier AI firms, which may
ultimately improve system performance by disincentivizing dangerous practices. The
administration should also proactively guard against AI risks by creating threat profiles for how
AI systems could be used to cause harm in areas such as biotechnology, along with tailored model
safeguards to address these risks. AI evaluations and standards have a critical role to play in
elucidating system capabilities and driving forward AI progress through collaboration with the
private sector. The administration should empower federal bodies to advance AI evaluation science
and standards and demonstrate how adoption of evaluations can facilitate AI’s use for mission
success.

RFI Response: The Development of an Artificial Intelligence (AI) Action Plan
Federal Register Document Citation: 90 FR 9088
Agency Name: National Science Foundation, Networking and Information Technology Research
and Development National Coordination Office
Organization: Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET), Georgetown University
Primary POCs: Mia Hoffmann (mh2171@georgetown.edu), Jack Karsten
(jk2497@georgetown.edu), Mina Narayanan (mjn82@georgetown.edu)
The Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET) at Georgetown University offers the
following comments in response to the National Science Foundation Networking and Information
Technology Research and Development National Coordination Office’s request for comments on
the Development of an Artificial Intelligence Action Plan. A policy research organization
within Georgetown University’s Walsh School of Foreign Service, CSET provides decision-
makers with data-driven analysis on the security implications of emerging technologies, focusing
on artificial intelligence, advanced computing, and biotechnology. We appreciate the opportunity
to offer these comments.
Overview .........................................................................................................................................2
Promoting AI Research and Development ..................................................................................2
Stimulating Markets, Competition, and Innovation ...................................................................3
Foster dynamic and competitive markets ............................................................................................... 3
Promote open AI models ........................................................................................................................ 4
Incentivize multiple approaches to frontier research .............................................................................. 5
Developing and Securing Access to Talent ..................................................................................5
Strengthen the growing AI workforce .................................................................................................... 5
Promote a broader scope of AI education .............................................................................................. 6
Competing with China ...................................................................................................................7
Stop illicit technology transfer to the PRC ............................................................................................. 7
Assess and monitor export controls for effectiveness ............................................................................ 7
Cooperate with allies and partners to ensure controls remain effective ................................................. 8
Improving the AI Information Environment ..............................................................................8
Leverage open source intelligence to avoid technological surprise ....................................................... 8
Share intelligence across the government and private sector ................................................................. 9
Encourage reporting of AI incidents to facilitate technology adoption ................................................ 10
Mitigating Risks from AI ............................................................................................................11
Protect the public from harm caused by AI .......................................................................................... 11
Protect against AI-enabled biological risks .......................................................................................... 11
Advancing AI Evaluation Science and Standards ....................................................................12
Advance AI evaluation science to understand model capabilities........................................................ 12
Develop, adopt, and synchronize standards ......................................................................................... 13

This document is approved for public dissemination. The document contains no business-
proprietary or confidential information. Document contents may be reused by the government in
developing the AI Action Plan and associated documents without attribution.
Overview
Georgetown University’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET) presents the
following recommendations on the Development of an Artificial Intelligence (AI) Action Plan, as
directed by a Presidential Executive Order on January 23, 2025. These recommendations are drawn
from CSET’s wide body of research, and fall largely into three categories: 1) steps the United
States can take to advance and secure its leadership in developing cutting-edge AI capabilities, 2)
initiatives for competition in AI with China, and 3) actions the U.S. government can take to realize
the benefits of AI while mitigating its risks.
Promoting AI Research and Development
Driving AI research and development (R&D) should be a priority in the new AI Action Plan. The
federal government fills a critical R&D gap and is uniquely situated to motivate research
prioritization and production in specific areas. Given the private sector’s dominance in driving AI
R&D, the government can play a key role addressing important research gaps where there are no
immediate profit motives, like understanding the social, political, and economic implications of
AI. To promote U.S. AI R&D leadership, the government should incentivize and award projects
that take interdisciplinary approaches, encourage research findings to be disseminated openly and
widely, and support public sector research in coordination with private sector innovation. Since
AI is a general-purpose technology, basic R&D supports downstream model development for
commercial use, application, and, eventually, profits. We must build a thriving, interdisciplinary,
and cross-sector AI research ecosystem to enhance America’s AI dominance.
● Couple commercial AI development and innovation with robust, sustained funding for
R&D driven by the public sector. This includes research done at universities, national labs,
federally funded research and development centers, and nonprofits, sometimes in
collaboration with the private sector, across a range of technical and non-technical fields.
Among other things, such research examines how AI interacts with and impacts human
behavior, processes, and structures; aims to improve our metrics for understanding and
mapping the conversion of research to commercial innovation and real-world use; and creates
well-documented and widely usable open data sets.
● Promote AI-enhanced scientific progress: The intersection of AI and Biotechnology
(AIxBio) holds a great deal of promise—not only for biomedical and industrial innovations,
but also as a competitive global battleground for the economic advantages and technological
influence that AIxBio technologies will grant to the countries that lead in their development.

A future AI Action Plan must include robust initiatives to advance AI-driven biotechnology
in order for the United States to enjoy these benefits. Such an action plan should include:
○ Support for AIxBio funding, capacity, infrastructure, and workforce. While some of
the largest, compute-intensive biological AI models are developed by industry, many of
the more specialized, domain-specific AIxBio models come from academic research
groups. Providing additional resources to AIxBio researchers will enhance the speed and
range of achievable developments and facilitate their transition to real-world applications.
○ Infrastructure for biological data. At present, there are significant limitations for the
types of biological data that could power future AIxBio applications, including the lack
of large, standardized, labeled, and annotated training sets for AI systems. The United
States should prioritize the development of more robust databases, and explore incentives
to encourage researchers to collect biological data in an AI-usable format.
Stimulating Markets, Competition, and Innovation
Foster dynamic and competitive markets
Sustaining long-term U.S. leadership in AI will require a dynamic and diversified domestic market
for AI systems. Such an ecosystem—one in which many different developers are empowered to
pursue a wide variety of AI techniques and tools, and build their successes into viable businesses—
will promote innovation and ensure the United States remains at the forefront of AI. Today,
however, the U.S. AI industry is dominated by a small group of incumbent firms that have the
power and incentive to thwart rival American AI developers and potentially suppress disruptive
AI innovation. To promote the long-term health of the U.S. AI industry, policymakers should
lower barriers to entry for new AI developers and ensure that incumbent firms do not wield their
power to stifle competition in the AI market. To that end, we offer three recommendations:
● Promote a more open and competitive cloud computing market. Compute resources are a
crucial input for building and deploying AI systems. Many U.S. AI developers access these
resources through cloud services providers (CSPs) like Amazon Web Services, Microsoft
Azure, and Google Cloud Platform. Policymakers should crack down on egress fees,
restrictive contracting provisions, and other tactics that CSPs use to “lock-in” customers, and
implement nondiscrimination and open access rules to prevent CSPs from advantaging large
AI developers over smaller AI firms.
● Maintain open distribution channels for AI products. In order to build successful
businesses, AI developers market and distribute their products to customers. Many of the
most prominent “distribution channels” for AI products—mobile devices, software suites,
online marketplaces and app stores, and cloud platforms—are owned by incumbent
technology companies that develop AI systems in-house or maintain financial ties with
prominent third-party developers. Policymakers should prohibit companies from engaging in

self-preferencing, bundling, and other tactics that allow them to exclude rival AI developers
from valuable product distribution channels. Such behavior can make it more difficult for
new AI developers to gain a foothold in the market, hindering competition and innovation
over the long-term.
● Closely monitor mergers and acquisitions (M&A) and corporate “partnerships” within
the AI industry. M&A transactions can have positive innovation effects, allowing
companies to gain economies of scale and acquire new technologies and talent, as well as
negative effects, potentially reducing innovation incentives for incumbents and allowing
them to prevent disruptive rivals from entering the market. In recent years, incumbent
technology companies have also started engaging in “partnerships” with outside AI
developers. These arrangements are not subject to the same regulatory scrutiny as traditional
M&A transactions, and while their details are often opaque, they likely have similar positive
and negative effects on innovation. The Federal Trade Commission and Antitrust Division of
the Department of Justice should continue to closely scrutinize M&A transactions and
corporate partnerships in the AI sector, and block corporate combinations when necessary for
maintaining a competitive and contestable market.
Promote open AI models
Recent advances in AI foundation models have stirred debate over the benefits and risks of freely
releasing model weights. We recommend that the Trump administration refrain from inhibiting the
release of open models by U.S. companies unless they exceed clear and measurable risk thresholds.
Open models feed into America’s strengths: they foster innovation and competition, facilitate
advances in AI security, and encourage entrepreneurial entry into the AI industry. In particular,
we recommend the following:
● Support the release of open-source AI models, datasets, and tools that can be used to fuel
U.S. AI development, innovation, and economic growth. Open-source models and tools
enable greater participation in the AI domain, allowing lower-resource organizations that
cannot develop base models themselves to access, experiment, and build upon them. They
stimulate economic growth by increasing competition and drawing in more entrepreneurs.
Open-source datasets allow for consistent benchmarking of AI progress, enabling a greater
understanding of competitive advantages or gaps, and incentivize developers to strive for
further successes.
● Provide resources for the evaluation and analysis of the effects of open models on
advancing AI research and pushing forward private-sector AI growth. Such analyses can
contextualize the benefits of open models, which can be compared to the potential risks of
open model release from the perspective of AI competition with China.

● Develop best-practices for the release of frontier open models to help preemptively
identify and minimize risks, but avoid regulations that unnecessarily hinder or disincentivize
the opening of models. Work with industry to establish clear and measurable thresholds for
intolerable risk that warrant keeping models closed, and avoid over-indexing on hypothetical
risks. Ensure these thresholds account for marginal risk, and balance said risks with the
benefits of openness.
● Prioritize, alongside AI capability advancements, the diffusion of American AI models
in the U.S. and global AI ecosystem. Adoption of U.S. open models abroad builds reliance
on U.S. technology, thereby endowing the U.S. government with soft power, serving as a
foundation for stronger relationships and alliances with partners, and encouraging further
paid use of related U.S. AI technologies like enterprise subscription services and cloud
platforms. Promotion of U.S. AI technology abroad can also combat the growing influence of
Chinese models especially in developing and emerging economies, and prevent China from
providing the foundation for large parts of the global digital infrastructure, with implications
for the diffusion of Chinese ideologies on the world.
Incentivize multiple approaches to frontier research
● Incentivize alternative approaches to research on advanced AI in the United States and
among our allies. The United States and western nations regard large generative AI models
as the main path to artificial general intelligence despite these models’ cost, infrastructure
demands, and known limitations. There are likely other ways to advance in AI without
investing significant resources into a paradigm that is already approaching the limits of scale.
By contrast, China also invests in alternative, brain-inspired projects such as human brain
modeling, non-therapeutic brain-computer interfaces, and embodied AI that learns through
value-driven interaction with the environment. Large-scale implementation of this last
approach is underway now in Chinese cities. If the U.S. is concerned about the emergence of
artificial general intelligence, it should make multiple bets on viable pathways,
acknowledging the brittleness of a single focus and supporting alternatives, a truism Chinese
policymakers recognize.
Developing and Securing Access to Talent
Strengthen the growing AI workforce
Apprenticeships offer a pathway to training, re-training, and upskilling for American workers of
all backgrounds across the entire country. This includes apprenticeships in AI-related occupations,
which have rapidly increased in number over the last decade. This increase has coincided with
greater federal funding and support from successive administrations. Future success will depend
on continuing support for these programs. We recommend that the Trump administration:

● Increase funding for the federal National Apprenticeship system, with an emphasis on
technical occupations and industry intermediaries. The government should also provide
funding for data collection and tracking of employment outcomes for Registered
Apprenticeship Programs to determine if they lead to well-compensated jobs for apprentices.
Community colleges have enormous potential for training the next wave of AI workers, but require
funding and support to succeed. Community colleges are located in every state and have a long
history of training workers of all ages in emerging industries. However, they face a number of
challenges, including uncertain, complicated, and insufficient funding streams. We recommend
that the Trump administration:
● Fully fund and reauthorize career and technical education programs like the
Strengthening Career and Technical Education for the 21st Century Act (Perkins V), the NSF
Advanced Technical Education program, and the Strengthening Community Colleges
Training Grants program. Many colleges rely on federal funding from these programs to
develop and continue to offer training in emerging technology fields like AI.
Promote a broader scope of AI education
Maintaining U.S. competitiveness in AI requires developing and sustaining the necessary
workforce. It is even more imperative that the U.S. government is able to attract, recruit, and retain
technical talent for the federal workforce. Among the numerous vehicles for getting top talent into
government, scholarship-for-service programs remain a direct talent pipeline into government
service. For example, the National Science Foundation’s (NSF) CyberCorps scholarship-for-
service program is largely considered a success due to its longevity and sustained congressional
funding.
● Support the creation of an AI scholarship-for-service program. In 2024, the NSF
released a report detailing the feasibility of and need for an AI scholarship-for-service
program following the CHIPS and Science Act. The NSF’s AI Research Institutes offer a
promising place to cultivate a potential AI scholarship-for-service program because of the
institutes’ specific focus on AI applications for a variety of fields and their existing
relationships with the federal government. There are 23 institutes across the country with the
NSF designation, nine have an active CyberCorps program, and 12 are designated as
National Centers of Academic Excellence in Cyber (NCAE).
AI literacy typically dominates education policy conversations. Educators, school systems, and
departments of education have mobilized to adapt and respond to the emergence of AI within the
education system. However, focusing solely on AI literacy efforts within the classroom excludes
many segments of the American citizenry. AI literacy can support citizens by making them aware
of AI and its limitations, de-mystifying fears or concerns, and helping individuals take ownership
of their creative and original work, thoughts, and ideas.

● Work with Congress to support AI literacy efforts for the American people. In 2024,
Senators Kelly and Rounds introduced a bill aimed at bolstering consumer awareness and
confidence in the use of AI products and services. A companion bill was later introduced by
Representative Blunt Rochester. Together, these bills go beyond the classroom and seek to
provide American citizens with the necessary education and information to make informed
decisions about their AI use and consumption.
Competing with China
Stop illicit technology transfer to the PRC
China’s comparative strength, now and historically, has been in commercializing scientific
advances made outside China. Although the Chinese diaspora and global data pipelines have
obscured China’s true capabilities, Chinese scientists still acknowledge their dependency on
foreign basic science. This is where China’s legal and illegal technology transfer programs
increasingly focus. While recognizing China’s new capacity for indigenous research, the country
continues to reap major advantages from what it acquires through theft, misappropriation, and
other one-sided practices. This is especially true in AI, where products are digital and easier to
acquire surreptitiously.
● Create an office or task force within ODNI to track technology transfers to China. U.S.
government efforts to address this problem through research security initiatives (the NSF-
backed SECURE project) and criminalizing participation in China’s talent programs move
the ball forward. Unfortunately, exposed venues and practices are replaced by novel
acquisition stratagems. CSET analysts have a suite of practical recommendations to mitigate
China’s excesses in this arena, but what is lacking is a focal point where monitoring and
deliberations can take place within the U.S. government.
Assess and monitor export controls for effectiveness
Export controls are an important economic statecraft tool designed to impose a delay and costs on
China and other competitors’ technological ambitions, particularly in semiconductor technology
and AI. Given the rapidly developing capabilities of AI hardware and both open- and closed-
weight AI models, it is critical to ensure that export control policies are adjusted accordingly.
● The Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) in the Department of Commerce should
institute scenario planning assessments before implementing new export controls and
rigorously monitor the effectiveness of current export control policies.
● Scenario planning assessments should be clearly articulated. They should include export
control policy objectives, analyses and testing of underlying assumptions, assessments of
economic impact on U.S. and allied firms, evaluations of potential Chinese countermeasures
and adaptations, and considerations of near- and long-term consequences.

● BIS should also conduct regular post-implementation assessments that track progress
toward stated control objectives, second-order effects, impact on China's semiconductor
manufacturing equipment industry, developments in China's semiconductor fabrication
capabilities, and advancements in China's AI sector.
Cooperate with allies and partners to ensure controls remain effective
BIS should continue closely working with allies on a joint export control strategy and improve
communication and information sharing about why the controls are needed to protect common
interests.
● Clearly articulate and justify the objectives of the export controls to allies in order for the
broader U.S. export control strategy to work.
● Avoid overuse of the Foreign Direct Product Rule (FDPR) to expand the reach of U.S.
export controls. Increasing use risks incentivizing foreign companies to design without U.S.
technology and components, undermining multilateral efforts and undercutting U.S. strategy
in the long-term.
Improving the AI Information Environment
Leverage open source intelligence to avoid technological surprise
In stark contrast to most of the major technological advances of recent decades, AI is being
developed, deployed, and used almost entirely outside of the federal government, and to a
significant extent in nations outside the United States altogether. Among other impacts, this puts
the U.S. government at an inherent informational disadvantage. U.S. policymakers can only exploit
AI's potential economic, strategic, and innovation benefits, avoid the risks it poses, and ensure
American AI leadership if they have reliable information about the current state of the technology
and where it is headed in the coming years. Unfortunately, there is currently no office or agency,
inside or outside government, that is able to provide this comprehensive view of the AI landscape.
We therefore recommend the following:
● Significantly expand open-source intelligence (OSINT) gathering and analysis on AI.
This work is particularly neglected in the intelligence community, which remains focused on
classified sources. It is critically underdeveloped and under-resourced elsewhere in the
federal government. Significant investments are needed in collection, interpretation, and
dissemination of AI OSINT, incorporating sources like research publications, supply chain
data, market research, patents, capital markets data, and workforce data.
● Make China's AI ecosystem a special focus for this AI OSINT program. The lack of a
serious program to track China’s AI progress undermines federal efforts across policy
domains such as export controls, trade policy, research security and industrial policy, and

raises the risk of technological surprise. China itself runs a 100,000-person open source-
based monitoring system directed at U.S. military and civilian R&D, fueling its own national
development in AI and other critical technologies. The federal government should
significantly ramp up efforts to monitor China's AI ecosystem, including the Chinese
government itself (at all relevant levels and organizations), related actors such as state-owned
enterprises, state research labs, and state-sponsored technology investment funds, and other
actors, such as universities and tech companies.
Share intelligence across the government and private sector
Critical information about frontier AI capabilities is siloed in AI companies. Transparency in
companies’ development practices is necessary for the U.S. government to respond to rapid AI
developments and anticipate emerging threats to national security. The U.S. government should
also enhance its horizon-scanning abilities by tapping into information from its allies about
significant AI developments. Conversely, the U.S. government collects intelligence that could help
companies harden their defenses against attacks by lone or state actors. We recommend that the
Trump administration exchange critical information about AI capabilities with allied countries and
AI companies and remove barriers to participating in such information sharing.
● Establish reporting programs to gather information on AI development processes from
AI companies. Reporting programs could ask companies to provide detailed documentation
on training procedures and environments, unexpected or concerning capabilities found in
new models, model specifications (also known as constitutions) that define the behaviors that
companies want AI models to have, and evaluations. Detailed documentation on AI
development practices would decrease the information gap between AI developers and the
government, enabling the government to quickly respond to sudden jumps in AI system
capabilities.
● Partner with companies to share threat intelligence. The U.S. government should partner
with AI companies to share suspicious patterns of user behavior and other types of threat
intelligence. In particular, the Intelligence Community and the Department of Homeland
Security should partner with AI companies to share cyber threat intelligence, and the
Department of Homeland Security should partner with AI companies to prepare for potential
emergencies caused by malicious use or loss of control over AI systems. In addition, the
Department of Commerce should receive, triage, and distribute reports on CBRN and cyber
capabilities of frontier AI models to support classified evaluations of novel AI-enabled
threats, building on a 2024 Memorandum of Understanding between the Departments of
Energy and Commerce.
● Contribute to and draw from the collective intelligence of U.S. allies regarding AI
capabilities. The impacts of AI systems transcend national borders, and observations about

AI developments in allied countries may also be relevant at home. The U.S. government
should draw on information about frontier AI capabilities from trusted allies like the United
Kingdom and its AI Security Institute and share information with them to maintain trust.
Encourage reporting of AI incidents to facilitate technology adoption
The growing deployment of AI systems by the public and private sector has inevitably led to a
growing number of failures and harmful incidents involving AI. If the U.S. government continues
not to track such AI incidents, it will miss a critical opportunity to boost AI innovation and
adoption. AI incident reporting and analysis accelerates learning about AI failures, which surfaces
where AI research is most needed and helps developers innovate and improve their models. By
preventing repeated failures and enhancing the reliability of AI systems, incident reporting not
only reduces the risk of harm to the American public, but also helps to build consumer and user
trust in the technology. This promotes widespread AI adoption and, consequently, the realization
of economic benefits of AI. We recommend the U.S. government:
● Implement a mandatory AI incident reporting regime for sensitive applications across
federal agencies. Federal agencies deploy AI systems for a wide range of safety- and rights-
impacting use cases, such as using AI to deliver government services or predict criminal
recidivism. AI failures, malfunctions, and other incidents in these contexts should be tracked
and investigated to determine their root cause, inform risk management practices, and reduce
the risk of recurrence. When AI systems are acquired from third parties, vendors should be
required to report AI incidents to the agency within 24 hours of detection.
● Direct agencies overseeing high-risk domains to implement hybrid incident reporting
schemes in their respective industries. High-risk domains include, but aren’t limited to,
healthcare, transportation, education, employment, finance, housing, insurance, utilities, and
critical infrastructure. Criteria for what constitutes an AI incident or malfunction should be
determined by each agency. Federal agencies should be authorized to investigate such
incidents in order to identify causes, commonalities, and emerging trends, and disseminate
lessons learned and updated AI risk management recommendations.
Mitigating Risks from AI
Protect the public from harm caused by AI
Risks from AI systems threaten to undermine U.S. AI policy objectives. If citizens do not have
assurances that they can seek remedy from AI harms or that AI systems work properly, then they
could be disinclined to adopt AI systems, to the detriment of policy objectives related to realizing
AI’s benefits.

● Create standard pathways to contest AI results. U.S. citizens who are materially impacted
by an AI-assisted decision will not trust AI systems if they do not have an efficient and
accessible way to contest erroneous decisions. Furthermore, reporting by affected persons is
an effective channel for identifying AI mistakes, which is a necessary precursor to remedying
these mistakes.
● Establish whistleblower protections for employees who report dangerous conduct by AI
companies. Whistleblower protections can shield employees from company retaliation and
help ensure that AI companies abide by their commitments and the law. The Trump
administration should establish a secure line for employees to report problematic company
practices, such as failure to report system capabilities that threaten national security.
Protect against AI-enabled biological risks
There are concerns that AI could exacerbate biological risks, for example by making it easier for
a non-expert to produce a biological weapon or by enabling the creation of more severe or targeted
pathogens and toxins. We recommend the following steps to guard against such outcomes:
● Build an integrated biosecurity ecosystem. While a malicious actor could use AI in their
plans to cause biological harm, the foundational information and resources necessary are
available without AI. A biosecurity strategy focused purely on controlling AI use will fail
without defending against both AI-enhanced and AI-agnostic biological agents. Rather,
mechanisms targeting AI use should be integrated into broader biosecurity strategies and
viewed as just one tool in a more comprehensive governance toolkit.
● Deploy appropriate model safeguards. Model safeguards can be deployed to address safety
concerns and target various nodes in the AI lifecycle. In a CSET report, we identified
potential model governance mechanisms: biosecurity training for developers, training data
filtration, access restrictions to certain datasets and computing infrastructure, pre-release
assessments, model access controls, usage monitoring, and harm reporting mechanisms.
● Require future policies to specify whether they apply to models solely trained on
biological or chemical data, particularly when using terms like “foundation model” or
“large language model.” Some terms relate to both general-purpose and chem-bio AI models
(models that can aid in the analysis, prediction, or generation of novel chemical or biological
sequences, structures, or functions), but are defined differently depending on the context,
creating confusion when they are referenced. This is a particular challenge for existing
regulatory and guidance documents, the majority of which are vague about whether they
include chem-bio AI models.
● Define capabilities of concern and support the creation of threat profiles for different
types of AI models. Assessing whether an AI model can output potentially risky biological

information and quantifying that risk on a spectrum is challenging because many pathogens
evolve over time and are dangerous in some conditions but harmless in others. Similarly,
distinct combinations of users and AI tools impact the potential for harm and the most
effective likely policy solutions for evaluation strategies and relevant mitigation measures. A
coalition of government agencies should develop frameworks that clearly define risky
capabilities, including chem-bio capabilities of concern, so evaluators know what risks to test
for. These frameworks could draw upon Appendix D of the National Institute of Standards
and Technology’s (NIST) draft Managing Misuse Risk for Dual-Use Foundation Models. In
addition, government agencies should build threat profiles that consider different
combinations of users, AI tools, and intended outcomes, and design targeted policy solutions
for these highly variable scenarios.
Advancing AI Evaluation Science and Standards
Advance AI evaluation science to understand model capabilities
Evaluations should inform decision-making about the safety and suitability of AI systems for
certain applications and whether AI systems should be used at all. The results of evaluations can
provide insight into AI system capabilities and the effectiveness of interventions like implementing
technical guardrails or upskilling AI users that shape the future development or adoption of AI.
Given the increasing importance of AI systems in many policy domains, it is crucial that AI
evaluations are rigorous and reliable and that decision-makers understand how to interpret their
results. We recommend that the AI Action Plan deploy evaluations as a foundational tool for
driving AI progress.
● Federal grantmaking bodies such as the National Science Foundation should support
basic research related to improving AI evaluation science overall and for “agentic”
systems specifically. Agentic AI systems are capable of independently pursuing complex
goals in complex environments and are expected to become increasingly capable in the near
future. Basic research into the evaluation of AI agent capabilities and technical mechanisms
to control and govern the behavior of AI agents is essential to improve their performance
over time.
● The U.S. AI Safety Institute (AISI) should work with other stakeholders to advance AI
evaluation science and de-duplicate efforts to evaluate frontier AI models. AISI has so
far worked effectively with industry, academia, and other partners to improve AI model
evaluations. The Trump administration should empower AISI to develop quantitative
benchmarks for AI, including benchmarks that test a model’s resistance to jailbreaks,
usefulness for making CBRN weapons, and capacity for deception. The recent announcement
of AISI’s collaboration with Scale AI demonstrates how the U.S. government can work with
third parties to develop frontier AI evaluations and make efficient use of testing

infrastructure. This type of partnership also gives the U.S. government access to highly
capable models that it otherwise would not have, allowing it to build new evaluations of
frontier AI models while limiting redundant efforts.
● Government procurement bodies should implement testing requirements for vendors of
AI systems. Examples of requirements could include listing the benchmarks used to measure
model performance, reporting the results of red-teaming exercises intended to discover
vulnerabilities or failures in specific contexts, or conducting pre-procurement user testing
with government employees. Government procurement bodies may also establish minimum
performance requirements for vendors’ AI systems based on reported evaluations. Having a
clear measure of the risk associated with deploying a given model would enable the U.S.
government to effectively harness AI systems and avoid AI failures.
● Facilitate knowledge and expertise exchange about AI evaluations and risks across the
federal government. Beyond AISI, other parts of the U.S. government are well-situated to
conduct evaluations of national security risks posed by AI systems. The National Security
Agency has expertise in offensive cyber threat risks and the Department of Energy is well-
equipped to test for nuclear and radiological risks. These agencies could build AI evaluation
infrastructure that complements other testing infrastructure provided through partnerships
such as the one between AISI and Scale AI. The AI Action Plan should encourage these
agencies to leverage the tools and knowledge they already have—which may not be readily
found outside of government—to ensure that AI systems work as intended.
Develop, adopt, and synchronize standards
Standards can promote smooth market function, interoperability, and consumer safety. However,
establishing standards for AI is challenging because of the technology’s rapid evolution and
explosion of potential use cases across sectors and applications. While many frontier AI companies
have published frameworks for managing risks posed by their models, these frameworks often lack
sufficient detail about risk mitigation efforts and are prone to being weakened or abandoned
altogether in the face of competitive pressure. In order to effectively mitigate the risks associated
with AI systems, the U.S. government should develop AI standards in coordination with other
stakeholders and model how standards adoption can facilitate the use of AI for mission success.
● Develop and adopt standards to mitigate risks from AI. In coordination with stakeholders
in academia, civil society, and industry, AISI should develop standards that cover topics
including model training, pre-release internal and external security testing, cybersecurity
practices, if-then commitments, AI risk assessments, and processes for testing and re-testing
systems as they change over time. Standards on when to conduct different types of
evaluations, what the best practices are for each, and how model evaluations are reported
should be developed to allow fair comparison between models. The U.S. government can

model how to effectively harness AI systems by adopting these standards, incorporating them
into procurement requirements, and sharing lessons learned from adoption.
● Synchronize baseline AI standards across federal agencies. Companies providing AI
tools, or those including AI tools as a part of software solutions, must currently navigate
multiple overlapping requirements or standards when selling products to different agencies of
the government. For example, NIST’s AI Risk Management Framework identifies
characteristics of trustworthy AI that differ from the Department of Defense guidance.
Within the Department of Defense (DOD), different military services have different
generative AI policies. If all federal agencies agree to abide by a unified set of minimum AI
standards for purposes of acquisition and deployment, this would greatly reduce the burden
on companies offering AI solutions, accelerate the adoption of standard tools and metrics,
and reduce inefficiencies caused by the need to repeatedly draft and respond to similar but
different requirements in government contracts. By unifying the U.S. government behind
common standards for industry contracts, the U.S. government could also drive the adoption
of international AI standards favorable to U.S. businesses.
● Reduce the duplication of effort across military services by empowering the Office of
the Secretary of Defense (OSD) to set AI security standards and expand authorization-
to-operate (ATO) reciprocity. OSD has not empowered a DOD-wide entity to set AI
policies for the services. This results in duplication of efforts across the military services,
with multiple memos guiding efforts across the DOD in different ways. For example, within
each service, different commands have different network ATO standards, which require
substantial rework by the government and AI vendors to satisfy before deployment.
Continuous ATOs and ATO reciprocity must be enforced across OSD and an entity should
be empowered to synchronize policies, rapidly certify reliable AI solutions, and act to stop
emerging security issues. Where the DOD establishes standards and policies, these should be
shared with other government agencies and state agencies to further synchronize standards
and accelerate responsible adoption.

Acknowledgments
This response is the product of contributions from all of CSET’s staff and builds substantially on
previous CSET publications and data insights. We are especially grateful to Mia Hoffmann, Jack
Karsten, and Mina Narayanan for their project leadership, and to Owen Daniels, Igor Mikolic-
Torreira, and Dewey Murdick for their comprehensive reviews. Special thanks also go to
Catherine Aiken, Zachary Arnold, Kendrea Beers, Jack Corrigan, Kathleen Curlee, Jacob
Feldgoise, Rebecca Gelles, William Hannas, Jessica Ji, Kyle Miller, Adrian Thinnyun, and
Vikram Venkatram for their valuable consolidation of team inputs.