Bright Prospects –
Big Challenges
Defence AI in the United Kingdom
Kenneth Payne Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
DAIO Study 22|04

About the Defense AI Observatory
The Defense AI Observatory (DAIO) at the Helmut Schmidt University in Hamburg
monitors and analyzes the use of artificial intelligence by armed forces. DAIO comprises
three interrelated work streams:
Culture, concept development, and organizational transformation in the context of
military innovation
Current and future conflict pictures, conflict dynamics, and operational experience,
especially related to the use of emerging technologies
Defense industrial dynamics with a particular focus on the impact of emerging
technologies on the nature and character of techno-industrial ecosystems
DAIO is an integral element of GhostPlay, a capability and technology development project
for concept-driven and AI-enhanced defense decision-making in support of fast-paced
defense operations. GhostPlay is funded by the Center for Digital and Technology Research
of the German Bundeswehr (dtec.bw).
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von

Bright Prospects –
Big Challenges
Defence AI in the United Kingdom
Kenneth Payne Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
DAIO Study 22|04

About the Author
Professor Kenneth Payne’s research is in political psychology and strategic studies. His latest
book, I, Warbot, considers the ways in which Artificial Intelligence will change strategy. It
was chosen as a book of the year by The Economist newspaper and by leading IR journal
International Affairs. Earlier books explored the evolution of strategy from apes and early
humans to Artificial Intelligence; strategy in the Vietnam War, and the relationship between
human evolution and modern, liberal warfare. Professor Payne has consulted for the gov-
ernments of the United Kingdom and United States. He’s appeared before Parliamentary
committees in the UK and Netherlands. He’s been a NATO research fellow and visiting
fellow at Oxford University. His Twitter account is @kennethpayne01.
Acknowledgments
The author is solely responsible for any errors in fact, analysis or omission.
Design
Almasy Information Design Thinking
Imprint
Kenneth Payne, Bright Prospects – Big Challenges. Defense AI in the United Kingdom,
DAIO Study 22/04 (Hamburg: Defense AI Observatory, 2022).
Defense AI Observatory | Chair of Political Theory | Helmut Schmidt University
Holstenhofweg 85 | 22043 Hamburg | T +49 40 6541 2776
 | contact@defenseai.eu | @Defense_AIO
ISSN (Online): 2749-5337
ISSN (Print): 2749-5345
4 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

Content
1 Summary ..................................................................................................................... 6
2 Thinking About Defence AI ....................................................................................... 8
2.1 The MOD Sets Course for More AI ...............................................................................9
2.2 The UK’s Definition of AI ............................................................................................10
2.3 AI Demands New Concepts – British Thinking Is Nascent ...........................................11
2.4 AI Ethics: The UK Debate ..........................................................................................12
3 Developing Defence AI. ........................................................................................... 14
3.1 UK Defence’s “AI Now …” .........................................................................................15
3.2 … And the Ecosystem Paving the Way to AI Next ......................................................18
4 Organizing Defence AI ............................................................................................ 20
5 Funding Defence AI ................................................................................................. 23
6 Fielding and Operating Defence AI ......................................................................... 26
6.1 The Army ..................................................................................................................27
6.2 The Royal Marines .....................................................................................................28
6.3 The Royal Navy .........................................................................................................28
6.4 The Royal Air Force ...................................................................................................29
6.5 The UK Intelligence Agencies ....................................................................................30
6.6 What to Expect in the Future? ....................................................................................31
7 Training for Defence AI ............................................................................................ 33
8 Conclusion: An AI Transformation Debate............................................................. 35
Literature ...................................................................................................................... 39
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 5

1 Summary
The UK is superbly placed to take advantage of developments in AI, including in
the area of national security. In recent years it has begun to chart a way ahead,
notably by developing an AI strategy for defence and national security. Much work
is underway within defence and more broadly in government, industry and aca-
demia. The military is experimenting with new autonomous platforms and with the
doctrine and concepts that might allow their effective employment. Aerial drone
swarms, pilotless “loyal wingmen,” uninhabited submersibles and tactical ground
robots – all are part of the British military’s ongoing work. New partnerships with
industry and academia have been developing. Autonomous systems are already
at work in data processing and intelligence analysis. And across defence and in
wider society, lively debates are underway about the ethical implications of using
AI in national security, including in decisions about the employment of lethal
force. Today, the pace of change is accelerating. New organisational structures are
coming into being; new dedicated career streams are mooted; military education
increasingly incorporates the study of AI; and, of course, new military systems,
including weapon systems, are coming online.
But there are a number of challenges ahead. There is considerable uncertainty
about the future development of AI. Equally there are concerns about its appli-
cation to defence – particularly from an ethical standpoint, but also in terms of
its performance. How robust will AI systems be to adversary counter-measures,
including via electronic and cyber warfare? How susceptible might AI systems be
to bias; how brittle might their performance be in novel situations of the sort they
might encounter in battle?
Such concerns aren’t unique to the British national security sector. But what makes
them particularly challenging are Britain’s longstanding aspiration to retain full
spectrum military and intelligence capabilities, to operate at global reach, and to
do so whilst undertaking a significant technological transformation. The British
defence budget is large and growing, but so too are its aspirations, and commit-
ments. It will be a formidable challenge to develop new technologies, including
AI (but also others, like new hypersonic missiles, satellites, 6th generation fighter
aircraft and a new generation of nuclear submarines) while still maintaining its
broadly constituted armed forces.
More broadly there are wider concerns about the economic and political envi-
ronment in which these changes will occur. The next few years will bring marked
economic challenges from high inflation and slow growth, a combination not seen
since the 1970s. Again, these are not unique difficulties, but in Britain they are
6 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

exacerbated by uncertainties following Brexit, and by the UK’s low productivity.
These headwinds impact the economy and society beyond immediate defence
budgeting. Eventually, however, those broader issues will feed into defence via
their impact on the UK’s research base, or its attractiveness to inward investment
and high-skilled migration.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 7

2 Thinking
About
Defence AI
88 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

2.1 The MOD Sets Course for More AI
The UK’s recent Integrated Defence and Security review stressed the significance
of AI for national security. The Review charged the government with establishing
“a leading (global) edge in critical areas such as Artificial Intelligence.”1 Respond-
ing to the Review’s top-level direction in a “Command Paper” the Ministry of
Defence described AI as transformative and so “essential to Defence modernisa-
tion.” The paper stressed the need to move quickly on AI and envisaged applica-
tions “from the battlespace to the back office.”2
A year later, in 2022, the Department published a detailed AI Strategy, produced
following engagement with industry and academia.3 The new strategy added
much more detail to the vision for defence AI outlined in the MoD’s 2019 Defence
Technology Framework, where it was bracketed alongside materials science,
electronics, robotics, power storage and other rapidly developing technologies.4
In the years since, AI expanded in importance such that the current head of the
Army referred to it in a 2021 speech as the “one ring to rule them all.”5 The new,
expansive strategy paper sets the MoD’s bold ambition to become, in terms of AI,
“the world’s most effective, efficient, trusted and influential Defence organization
of our size.”6 These are all somewhat subjective benchmarks – but perhaps rather
than taking them literally, or dismissing them as corporate boilerplate, they can
best be seen as indicative of genuine ambition and organizational drive to reform.
Among the many salient points raised in the Strategy were significant organi-
sational changes, intended to boost the scale and pace of AI adoption across
defence. AI would be jointly managed by a strategic-level Defence AI and Auton-
omy Unit (DAU) and a Defence AI Centre (DAIC). While the former sets the overall
direction and policy framework, the latter oversees research and development
and technical issues. In addition, the Strategy called for upskilling of military and
civil service personnel and the creation of new AI-focussed career pathways. There
was emphasis on the need to build a wider and deeper collaborative network
with other actors, signalling the departments enthusiasm to invest in AI technol-
ogies. And there was an important distinction between what the MoD calls “AI
Now” – technologies that are reaching maturity, and able to be instrumentalised
as practical systems for Defence; and “AI Next,” cutting-edge research that might
1 GlobalBritaininaCompetitiveAge,p.7.
2 DefenceinaCompetitiveAge,p.42.
3 DefenceArtificialIntelligenceStrategy.
4 DefenceTechnologyFramework,pp.18-20.
5 PatrickSanders,RoyalUnitedServicesInstitute(RUSI).
6 NationalAIStrategy,p.2.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 9

perhaps deliver utility in years ahead. On AI Now, the Ministry is eager to speed
the process of experimentation, validation and adoption of useful AI.
Lastly, of note is the Strategy’s emphasis on the continued role of human deci-
sion-makers, amidst rapid technological change. It stresses the need to develop
effective “human machine teams,” and to assess and mitigate the risks of AI
systems. There will, the authors note, always be human political control of the UK’s
nuclear weapons.
2.2 The UK’s Definition of AI
Much discussion of AI in UK national security, as elsewhere, focusses on kit, espe-
cially weapon systems that can operate autonomously and demonstrate intelligent
decision-making. That’s understandable; equipment is visibly striking, as with
swarming drones and crewless ships. More than that, attention often concentrates
on weapon systems – the final part of the so-called “kill chain” which delivers
lethal force. That’s reflected in the reams of analysis of the ethics of “killer robots.”
There is, of course, some technology like that in service with the UK, and much
more in the pipeline, some of which features below.
But AI in national security extends much further than this. AI is a general-pur-
pose technology or becoming one. Some analysts compare its likely influence to
electricity, or the internal combustion engine, but even these comparisons miss
something of the quality of the technology involved. AI is better seen as a de-
cision-making technology, or rather technologies. As such, it’s applicable across
a broad range of activities, many with national security implications. This makes
less visible from the outside, and so it can be challenging to analyse the extent
and quality of any AI transformation. That’s especially so where the information is
classified, as it often is, and when change is happening at pace. Any reflections on
defence AI in the UK, as elsewhere, are liable to miss important details.
In its new AI strategy, the MoD describes AI as something that can “supplement
or replace human intelligence.” It borrows its overarching definition from the
overall UK National AI Strategy, which in turn defined AI as “machines that per-
form tasks normally requiring human intelligence, especially when the machines
learn from data how to do those tasks.”7 It’s a broad definition, and this breadth
is a mixed blessing. On one hand, its flexible enough to accommodate a range of
underlying computer technologies, architectures and systems, performing a wide
7 NationalAIStrategy,p.4.
10 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

range of tasks. On the other hand, this flexibility and the wide range of possible
defence-related activities it encompasses could compromise the coherence and
focus of reform efforts.
Moreover, the UK definition might be critiqued as overly focused on human intelli-
gence as a yardstick. AI can perform tasks that are far beyond human intelligence
in some domains, as with lightning-fast exploitation of vulnerabilities in adversary
computer systems. AI allows qualitatively different decision-making to the human
variety: It’s not that AI replaces or supplements human decision-making but does
something entirely different.
2.3 AI Demands New Concepts – British Thinking
Is Nascent
While much attention is on physical platforms, the story of AI in defence is far
broader. UK doctrine distinguishes between physical and conceptual components
of “fighting power,” and the conceptual is likely to be every bit as important
as the physical, with new possibilities for combined arms warfare. Work here is
nascent, with little formal doctrine as yet. There is existing conceptual writing on
human-machine teaming, which stresses the continued importance on human
judgment in military activities; a theme that emerges frequently in military discus-
sions of defence AI.8 AI features in passing in other conceptual work too, as with
the RAF’s doctrine on “unmanned” aerial systems, dating from 2017, which states:
The UK does not possess armed autonomous aircraft systems and it has no
intention to develop them. The UK Government’s policy is clear that the
operation of UK weapons will always be under human control as an absolute
guarantee of human oversight, authority and accountability. Whilst weapon
systems may operate in automatic modes there is always a person involved in
setting appropriate parameters.9
That remains the most explicit doctrinal statement on autonomous lethal weapons,
but it is increasingly strained by technological advances over the last half decade,
notably swarming. The MoD has, we’ll see, developed further views on AI ethics,
but the essential problem of “meaningful” human control remains.
8 Human-MachineTeaming.
9 UnmannedAircraftSystems,p.14.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 11

More broadly than ethics, the next generation of doctrine will need to wrestle
with how best to employ AI – exploring the ways in which it might alter combined
arms warfare. To inform this conceptual thinking, there is considerable experimen-
tal work underway in the armed services. Some of this is explored below. More
broadly, the UK is home to a small number of specialists in industry, academia and
the wider armed forces, all engaged in thinking through the practical and concep-
tual dimensions of warfighting AI. Focal points include the UK’s Defence Academy
and the Royal United Services Institute. Doctrine and concepts typically originate
and evolve in the context of the UK’s close Alliance relationships, especially with
the US. There’s a long history of shared intellectual endeavour, and AI thinking
in both countries is developing along broadly similar lines. As yet, there’s limited
formal evidence of common approaches to AI, although in a number of areas
parallels are emerging.
2.4 AI Ethics: The UK Debate
Ethical debate in the UK over AI weapons has so far been limited largely to small
groups of concerned specialists and activists, rather than the wider public. There is
some evidence that this is changing. In 2021, the BBC’s high profile annual lecture
series, the Reith Lectures, featured a prominent British computer scientist, Stuart
Russell discussing some of the ethical challenges of AI, including in warfare.10
Algorithms were implicated in the controversial awarding of high school student
grades when exams were impossible during the covid pandemic. There were con-
cerns about personal health data collected by the National Health Service being
accessed by technology companies. And stories about the surveillance capabilities
of intelligence agencies periodically make the national press, as with the extensive
coverage of the Snowden leaks from the US NSA. At the moment though, there is
little evidence of widespread, deeply-held or sustained public engagement with AI
issues. It doesn’t yet, for example, feature explicitly in polling of public concerns.
Ethical debate happens inside Defence too, including in defence legal circles. The
Defence AI Strategy makes frequent mention of ethics and the need to develop
AI in line with the UK’s democratic values. It notes that adversaries are likely to
use AI in ways that the UK would consider unethical. And the Ministry published,
in conjunction with its Strategy, a separate policy paper on the “ambitious, safe,
responsible” use of AI. That paper insists:
10 Russell,“AIinWarfare.”
12 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

there must be context-appropriate human involvement in weapons which iden-
tify, select and attack targets. This could mean some form of real-time human
supervision, or control exercised through the setting of a system’s operational
parameters.11
Further, it outlines some key challenges, including AI bias and unpredictability, and
it sets out some ethical principles, not least of which is “human-centricity.” The
MoD has also convened an AI ethics advisory committee to offer informal input on
its approach, and to act as a forum for engaging wider views. It’s a serious effort to
grasp some tricky issues – though the MoD certainly wouldn’t claim to have solved
them. What, for example, is meant by “context appropriate?”
As AI becomes more pervasive, perhaps it will become part of a larger public
discourse in the UK. There’ll certainly be Parliamentary scrutiny, perhaps even a
dedicated select committee. There might be scope for AI commissioner, along
the lines of the UK’s Information Commissioner. The challenge for the UK will be
to maintain its current lead in AI, including in national security, while ensuring that
the changes AI spurs are sympathetic to the broader norms of wider society. The
MoD’s paper grasps that much, at least.
11 Ambitious,Safe,Responsible:OurapproachtothedeliveryofAI-enabledcapabilityinDefence,p.3.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 13

3 Developing
Defence AI
1144 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

3.1 UK Defence’s “AI Now …”
AI research is currently advancing more rapidly than its adoption by defence.
Earlier AI systems allowed rudimentary autonomy and were well suited to some
military applications – defensive weapons, for example, like the Royal Navy’s
shipboard Sea Viper anti-missile system. For the last decade, research progress
has been remarkable in machine learning, where computers improve optimisation
through repeated exposure to training data. It’s this generation of AI, especially its
“deep learning” subset, modelled loosely on biological brain cells, that is current-
ly driving UK defence applications – whether of autonomous aircraft, sophisticated
language translators, or intelligence analysts. All these applications are part of the
UK approach to AI.
AI now enables offensive weapon systems that can proactively identify and attack
targets, and some are already in service. The UK’s Brimstone air-launched missile
from MDBA is a good example of a weapon that can scour a search area as it flies,
looking for a pre-set target-type. Newer weapon systems will be able to “loiter”
over the battlefield before striking targets of opportunity selected from a pre-set
list of target types. The UK has begun to experiment with such weapons, includ-
ing the US manufactured Switchblade – but it has not yet acquired these in any
numbers. Nor does it possess an offensive weapon system that can integrate re-
connaissance and strike functions fully autonomously, like the Israeli Harpy. That’s
increasingly a matter of choice rather than necessity though – the UK’s Protector
drone, armed with Brimstones would theoretically be able to do so, flying autono-
mously and parsing target information using autonomous image analysis.
Still, the UK’s autonomous combat capabilities remain, for now, somewhat ru-
dimentary. Protector, for instance, isn’t designed to operate in highly contested
environments. AI platforms capable of performing aerial attack and air superiority
roles are still a little way off in the UK, as elsewhere. The UK is currently working
on its sixth-generation fighter programme, the Tempest. There will be plenty of
AI involved – in parsing incoming information, for example, or in autonomously
deploying defensive counter-measures to protect the aircraft. Perhaps there’ll
be something more fundamental still; no human on board. Unclassified concept
designs still conceive Tempest as a crewed fighter, with a cockpit. The MoD’s
Combat Air Strategy calls for an aircraft “manned or unmanned (sic),” suggesting
that Tempest may yet be crewless.12 In either case, the main platform may operate
as part of a system alongside uninhabited platforms – “loyal wingmen” of some
variety yet to be determined. The UK did not have an entry in DARPA’s recent AI
12 CombatAirStrategy:Anambitiousvisionforthefuture.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 15

dogfighting contest and has no publicly known equivalent process under-way to
competitively refine AI-fighter pilots.
Rather than air superiority or strike aircraft, AI systems are more immediately
promising in the intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) roles – whether
through uncrewed platforms and sensors operating in space, air, sea and on land;
or through machine intelligence analysis of the data they collect. Understandably,
much of the detail about the autonomous capabilities of such systems is classified.
Nonetheless it’s reasonable to suppose that similar technologies are being em-
ployed in the UK as in the United States, not least because some of the same sup-
pliers, platforms and systems are involved – General Atomics supplies the RAF’s
Protector UAV, a variant of its Reaper platform;13 Palantir, which is main contractor
of the US DoD’s “Project Maven” also offers its AI-powered analytics to the MoD.14
With technologies like these, autonomous flight, real time high-definition image
capture, and AI labelling and processing of such imagery is eminently feasible,
even if not yet operational.
Throughout British defence, a menagerie of robotic, uninhabited systems is
coming into being (Table 1). Some will be used for ISR, some for logistics activities,
and some for strike, or combat roles. Some will combine roles, like the strike-ca-
pable Protector. Increasingly systems will span the traditional domains of land, air
and sea, as with small uncrewed helicopters like Anduril’s Ghost, used in tactical
airspace for short-range ground reconnaissance, and perhaps attack. That raises
some interesting organisational dilemmas: are such drones the purview of the
Royal Air Force, or the Army? In field experiments, they’ve actually been used by
the Royal Marines.
13 Forbes,“UStoequipReaperDroneswithAI.”
14 
16 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

Table 1: UK Military Services Experiment with Different Types of Unmanned Systems
TheRoyalNavyhasbeenexperimentingwithcrewlessminesweepers(AtlasElek-
tronik’sSweepsystem),largesubmersibles(theMantaXLUUV),andcarrier-borne
UAVsabletoperformavarietyofroles,includingISR,airborneearlywarningand
resupply.Recentlyitacquiredadedicatedexperimentalsurfacevessel,theXV
PatrickBlackett,whichintimewillitselfbeautonomous.
TheRoyalAirForce(RAF)hascreatedanexperimentaldroneswarmingsquadron
andisworkingcloselywiththeDefenceScienceandTechnologyLaboratory(Dstl)
tobuildeverlargerswarms.Thelastpublicinformationdescribedaswarmof20
aircraft,comprisingfivedifferentdronetypes,operatingcollaboratively.Ituses
machinelearningtechniquesinitsexisting,inhabitedplatformstoo–notablythe
intelligencefusionmoduleofitsF-35fighter.
TheArmy,meanwhile,isalsoundertakingexperimentalworkonautonomous
systems–includingtacticallandandairplatforms.ExamplesincludeElbitSys-
tem’sswarmingmicro-dronesandloiteringmunitionsaloft,anduncrewedground
vehicles,liketheRheinmetallMissionMasterorHoribaMira’sViking.
Experimental kit is arriving so frequently that it’s impossible to keep up. Newer
models will undoubtedly be featuring in trials, even as you read this report. None-
theless, some general observations can be made:
All three armed services are following a similar model – acquiring small num-
bers of platforms from a range of traditional and non-traditional suppliers.
This includes suppliers from the UK and overseas; large, established providers;
suppliers of military hardware and – perhaps more importantly for AI – of the
code and systems underpinning it.
Alongside established defence corporations like BAE, MBDA and so on, are
newer, software-focused arrivals like Adarga15 and Rebellion,16 who offer AI
and data analytical services to the MoD.
There are giants, like Amazon, who furnish the UK MoD and intelligence agen-
cies with the cloud computing services that securely house the data on which
the AI works; mid-sized outfits, like Palantir who provide ways of parsing that
15 
16 
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 17

information; and comparatively tiny outfits, like Callen Lenz, whose small UAVs
have formed part of the RAF's experimental swarming work.
There is a lot of work going on, only some of it visible to outsiders. But there's
still a palpable sense of being in the foothills of more profound changes to come,
driven by the national AI strategy. And whilst established customer relationships
and organisational habits will continue to exert influence, there's a feeling of the
kaleidoscope having been shaken.
3.2 … And the Ecosystem Paving the Way to AI Next
The British AI capabilities being fielded now, even experimentally, are a long way
behind the cutting edge of AI research. Some lag is inevitable – it takes time to
develop and validate applications, and culture invariably intercedes to shape
adoption. But the strength of the UK ecosystem is that it innovates basic research,
rather than merely attempting to instrumentalise approaches developed else-
where. In this it has few peers beyond the US, or perhaps France or Israel. In the
foreword to the Integrated Review, the Prime Minister called for the UK to remain
“at least third in relevant performance measures for scientific research and innova-
tion.”17 The top two weren’t listed, but likely included China alongside the US – a
somewhat debatable proposition.
UK defence AI activity is embedded within a wider context, involving the defence
industry, academic research and wider, civil research and development. The UK
has long been a leading actor in the development of AI, reaching back decades
to the emergence of the discipline of computer science. The UK possesses world
leading AI researchers, and in DeepMind (owned by Alphabet/Google) it has
perhaps the outstanding AI innovation hub of the last decade. It also has, we’ll
see, a large in-house research base, an established defence industrial sector, and a
number of newly prominent AI companies offering services to the MoD.
The innovation that will emerge from this ecosystem is, of course, uncertain. But
it’s already apparent that some areas will be important. Among these, advances
in unsupervised machine learning and learning from limited data are already
underway. There will likely also be dramatic developments in computer architec-
ture – notably in quantum computing. The British MOD recently acquired its first
quantum computer – a technology that promises computer processing orders
of magnitude faster than conventional, binary supercomputers.18 As it matures,
17 GlobalBritaininaCompetitiveAge,p.7.
18 Mahon,“MODacquiresgovernment’sfirstquantumcomputer.”
18 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

quantum computing may lead to radical developments in AI, and also in decryp-
tion – posing a threat to network security. In its AI Strategy, the MoD suggests
that the next stage of AI might help with military tasks including automated cyber
defence and intelligence fusion. Further out, it identifies more challenging activi-
ties, like operational planning and “machine speed command and control.”19 That
will require further conceptual breakthroughs in AI, including perhaps the ability to
reason conceptually, or to better model adversary intentions.
Whilst the UK is well placed to innovate new approaches and technologies, it has
some notable weaknesses. Today, the UK has no global technology giant, along
the lines of Baidu, Google, or Microsoft – all of whom are currently leading funders
of AI research. Brexit has created an economic headwind, affecting the UK’s at-
tractiveness to inward investment and high-skill migration – especially from the EU
– whilst sapping demand for UK output, both in services and manufacturing. The
UK’s university sector remains world-class, but faces multiple challenges – whether
competition from American high-technology research companies for talent, or
access to EU research funding after Brexit. Another challenge is British produc-
tivity, which again lags peers, especially in the US and EU. The reasons are hotly
debated and likely multifaceted, but have unarguably proved resistant to change.
19 AIStrategy,pp.34-35.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 19

4 Organizing
Defence AI
2200 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

New ideas are one thing – the arrival of AI has also spurred plenty of organisation-
al change, and some degree of muddle. There’s a palpable sense of being at the
beginning of changes that may soon be more far reaching, especially as AI drives
conceptual changes.
One challenge is that AI itself is often “domain agnostic” – capable of operating
across all three traditional domains (land, maritime, air) as well as the two newer
ones (space, cyber). This suggests the value of central organisation at Departmen-
tal level, where we already saw the creation of a new Defence AI Centre to cham-
pion AI, alongside the existing Defence Autonomy Unit. Plenty of other actors
within UK Defence are involved in developing approaches to AI, and the following
is certainly not exhaustive.
One key player is Strategic Command, one of the UK’s four Front Line Commands,
alongside Army, Navy and Air Commands. Strategic Command is responsible for
a range of joint capabilities and enablers. It already coordinates a range of AI-re-
lated activities and organisations, notable among which is its jHub20 unit, which
promotes innovation by building relationships with technology suppliers, especial-
ly those with “dual use” civilian and military application. Also in Strategic Com-
mand is Defence Digital, charged with overseeing military IT. Defence Digital has
an interest in AI, for example via its work on digital twins and synthetic environ-
ments that simulate the real world.21 Developing secure approaches to processing
huge volumes of data is an important aspect of the MoD’s aspirations for AI, but
extends more broadly than AI to encompass all aspects of military information pro-
cessing. So, the organization is responsible for developing a digital “backbone” –
the physical capacity to share data, and its Foundry works to support organizations
in accessing and exploiting the data.
Elsewhere, organisational partnerships on AI are increasingly common. For ex-
ample, the MoD has established a defence BattleLab to facilitate technological
experimentation.22 The lab is a collaboration between the Navy, Army and two
other units, the Defence Innovation Unit and the Defence Science and Technol-
ogy Laboratory (Dstl), the government’s main in-house science and technology
research agency.
Dstl is perhaps the key government player in Defence AI research. Although much
of its output is not publicly accessible, it publishes open access guides, called
“biscuit books,” on aspects of AI for wider audiences in Defence.23 The organisa-
tion partners with a range of other actors – some in government, as with the two
20 
21 
22 
23 See,forexample:AssuranceofAIandAutonomousSystems:ADstlbiscuitbook.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 21

Front Line commands in the BattleLab, some outside. One important and deepen-
ing Dstl relationship is with the Defence and National Security theme at the UK’s
Alan Turing Institute, with which it has recently created a Defence Centre for AI
Research (DCAR).24 The Turing Institute, established in 2015 by a partnership of
leading universities, is the UK’s national institute for AI and data science, and en-
gages in a wide range of basic and applied research. Clearly the goal of the DCAR
is to foster connections between academic researchers who are part of the Turing’s
network, and those within Dstl. It’s not Dstl’s only AI outreach effort – the Lab is
also working to establish a Defence Data Research Centre,25 again in collaboration
with a consortium of UK universities. Still another Turing-Dstl project is its work
with the UK National Cyber Security Centre, an offshoot of the UK’s GCHQ elec-
tronic intelligence agency, to explore the employment of AI in automated cyber
defence.26 Elsewhere in the UK’s defence apparatus, likely at the recently estab-
lished interagency National Cyber Force, similar work is almost certainly underway
exploring offensive autonomous cyber techniques.27
Meanwhile, co-located with Dstl, but organisationally separate from it, is the
MoD’s Defence and Security Accelerator (DASA).28 Founded in 2016, DASA works
with private enterprises of all sizes in a bid to promote innovation – as with its
funding of Flare Bright’s hand launched Snapshot tactical reconnaissance nan-
odrone, or with Marlin Submarine’s work in rapidly prototyping the Manta large
submersible project.29 Another key MoD actor is the Future Capabilities Group of
the Defence Equipment and Support, whose role is to explore new equipment and
capabilities, working with the services in their experimental work and with industry
to supply the kit under test.30
24 “LaunchingtheDefenceCenterforAIResearch.”
25 
26 Burke,Robustartificialintelligenceforactivecyberdefence.
27 “PermanentlocationofNationalCyberForceannounced.”
28 
29 “CaseStudy:Autonomousnanodronecapturesaerialintelligenceinasnap;”“Manta:TheRoyalNavygetsitsfirstextra-large
autonomoussubmarine.”
30 
22 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

5 Funding
Defence AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 2233

Broadly, there is substantial investment in British research, and it has clearly pro-
duced excellent outputs, including some cutting-edge defence equipment. The
business sector accounts for a majority of overall R&D spending in the UK, much
of which, of course, isn’t for defence. Private business funded some £20.7bn of
R&D in 2019, some 54% of the total, comfortably outstripping the 27% spent by
the public sector.31 Defence R&D spending is also substantial, with government
spending alone amounting to some £1.1bn in 2020.
Yet the UK is surprisingly weak when measuring R&D comparatively. While ex-
penditure has been rising steadily in the UK, in nominal terms, over an extended
period of several decades, as a percentage of GDP expenditure has been broadly
flat for many years. It’s currently around 1.7% of GDP, a figure that compares
unfavourably with peer countries in Europe (Germany 3.2%, France 2.2% in 2019)
and North America (USA, 3.1% in 2019). The incumbent government has plans
to increase R&D spending to 2.4% of GDP by 2027, but even that would only be
broadly in line with the OECD average.
There are also plans to increase defence R&D. In its Command Paper responding
to the Integrated Security and Defence Review, the MoD announced its inten-
tion to rapidly expand its R&D budget over coming years. The headline figure
of £6.6bn spent over four years would represent a significant increase over the 1
billion or so currently spent annually. The fine-grained details of what gets spent
where are currently lacking – but the Review’s emphasis on AI makes it pretty clear
what the Department’s priorities are. Again, this all sounds striking – and it is far
from small potatoes. But a comparison with the United States is sobering. The cur-
rent defence budget in the US projects a 9.5% annual increase in R&D spending,
to some $130bn each year.
While Dstl is an obvious focus of research on AI for UK defence, there are plenty of
others engaged in AI R&D as part of the national security ecosystem. One major
government-funded actor is UK Research and Innovation (UKRI), a conglomeration
of the UK’s funding councils that direct funding into academic research. In 2020,
UKRI accounted for £6.1bn of investment, and while much of this would have little
direct impact on defence, plenty would – either directly in the innovation of new
technologies and applications, or indirectly in advances in basic research.
One final government initiative is noteworthy – the establishment in 2022 of a new
funding body, ARIA – the Advanced Research and Invention Agency, explicitly,
if loosely, modelled on DARPA, the US Defense Department’s research power-
house.32 ARIA is supposed to inject UK funding with a dash of risk tolerance, with
31 Hutton,ResearchandDevelopmentspending,pp.14-15.
32 “AdvancedResearchandInventionAgency(ARIA):policystatement.”
24 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

the obvious inference that other funders, notably UKRI, have been too conserv-
ative. Its explicit mission is to invest in projects with the potential for paradigm
shifting, transformative effects. This is certain to include considerable funds for
AI research, though perhaps on basic research with applications some way down-
stream. With a projected £800m budget, ARIA will be a significant part of the in-
novation ecosystem – but critically, unlike DARPA, it lacks a formal link to defence.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 25

6 Fielding
and Operating
Defence AI
2266 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

The individual Front Line Commands clearly have an interest in developing
approaches to AI. By “pulling through” emerging technologies, these commands,
perhaps at least as much as the centralised allocation of R&D budgets, will shape
the eventual employment of AI systems. There’s plenty of salient scholarship on
cultural approaches to understanding defence, including some that reflects on the
British military’s long relationship with technological innovation. A key takeout is
that ostensibly similar militaries, even allies, can employ similar technologies in
rather different ways, with dramatic effects on fighting power.
6.1 The Army
Accordingly, the Army’s Futures Directorate is considering the implications of
AI and uncrewed systems for land warfare. The Directorate’s short paper on the
Army’s Approach to Robotics and Autonomous Systems sketches some ideas for
concept development, arguing that autonomous and remotely commanded sys-
tems will allow it to increase mass and dispersal, “whilst detecting and engaging
the enemy in the most dangerous parts of the close and deep battle.”33 There isn’t
a huge amount of detail in the paper, and it’s the land domain where adoption of
AI will perhaps prove most challenging, owing to the complex terrain, both human
and physical. The army is experimenting with small tactical robots, but AI’s im-
mediate utility for the Army is likely to come in other areas, like the integration of
command, control and ISR activities, the domain-agnostic cyber-contest for digital
advantage, in tactical airpower, and perhaps in the longer-range coordination of
indirect fires.
There is considerable debate in professional forums about the future structure of
the Army, the sorts of equipment it should acquire, and how many personnel it
needs. Of the services the Army seems the most unsettled in terms of its vision for
future warfare – a reflection not just of the arrival of more sophisticated AI, but of
the muddled and unsatisfactory conclusion of longstanding deployments in Iraq
and Afghanistan, of the rapidly evolving high-intensity conflict in Ukraine, and
of the Army’s longstanding procurement difficulties with major combat systems,
like the Ajax APC, Watchkeeper UAV and Warrior IFV. The Futures Directorate is
responsible for shaping the intellectual way ahead, via its Project Wavell, which
seeks a “theory of victory” fit for an era of increased autonomy and AI. And the Di-
rectorate has an ambitious goal for the Army of fielding a light brigade enhanced
with robotic systems by 2025 – only three years hence.34
33 “TheBritishArmyapproachtoRoboticsandAutonomousSystems:GeneratingHuman-MachineTeams.”
34 Formore,see:
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 27

6.2 The Royal Marines
The Royal Marines (RM) meanwhile, have undertaken frequent small scale field ex-
perimentation with advanced technology, including autonomous weapons, often
as part of their Future Force Commando programme.
The RM have a clear vision of small, technologically sophisticated units operating
in the maritime domain and littoral, and in so-called “grey zone” conflicts, at the
threshold of major combat operations. This concept has sharpened the focus
of their field exercises. In one attention grabbing exercise, a combined RM-US
Special Operations Forces (SOF) unit with experimental technologies reportedly
outperformed a larger USMC adversary force.35 There is plenty of autonomous-ca-
pable equipment under test here – including Anduril’s small reconnaissance
helicopters and loitering munitions. But it’s the conceptual work as much as the kit
that stands out – as when the Marines experiment with platforms operating across
multiple domains simultaneously.
The other notable feature is how much of this work is being communicated public-
ly – including on YouTube.36 The RM is clearly keen to be seen to be at the cutting
edge, perhaps because in common with its American counterparts, also known for
their conceptual agility, the small force faces continued threats to its independ-
ence and funding, and so seeks a distinctive identity.
6.3 The Royal Navy
Unsurprisingly given its maritime focus, the Royal Navy (RN) has been working with
the Royal Marines on its Future Force concept. But the implications of AI systems
for the Navy are likely to be broader and more profound than that. The RN’s forays
into AI equipment are as yet relatively small scale – small (relative to crewed)
non-nuclear-powered submersibles; and similarly small drones and surface vessels,
notably autonomous minesweepers. Of course, it already employs autonomous
systems in its missile defences and torpedoes. And the F-35 aircraft that fly from
its two large aircraft carriers utilise AI in their information management systems.
Larger changes are inevitable. One example: DASA and Dstl are working with
business and academic teams on an Intelligent Ship competition, which will ex-
plore the utility of human-machine teams across a range of maritime tasks, includ-
35 Brown,“UStroopsroutedbyRoyalMarines.”
36 “DroneSwarms.”
28 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

ing engineering decisions and mission analysis.37 The Navy itself has established
a number of teams to work on technological innovation. In addition to its Chief
Technology Officer, there’s NavyX, described as an “autonomy accelerator” and
Project Nelson, which focuses on digital technologies.38
In common with the other services, there’s a palpable sense of energy and en-
terprise, but work remains relatively small scale. In time AI may challenge some
more fundamental tenets of Britain’s approach to naval warfare – whether that’s
the focus on the carrier strike group, with crewed aviation; the role of Navy nuclear
submarines as sole leg of the UK nuclear deterrent; or the way in which amphib-
ious force is projected ashore. While there will inevitably be conceptual work
underway on all these aspects and more, much remains outside the public sphere.
6.4 The Royal Air Force
The Royal Air Force (RAF) might be expected to be at the forefront of efforts to
innovate and instrumentalise AI. Certainly, many peoples’ vision of AI in national
security is of an uncrewed lethal drone. In reality, however, AI will make more
of an immediate contribution to other aspects of air power, invariably as part of
data-processing and decision-making systems that involve humans – not least
because of ethical unease about full-autonomy, but also because the technology
to do so remains immature.
Conceptually too, the RAF approach remains in its early stages. Extant air and
space power doctrine dates to 2017 and includes no mention of AI, but there is
plenty of discussion of the topic in professional air power forums and journals.39
The RAF’s Rapid Capabilities Office is one in-house area of expertise – and is
leading on the Tempest future combat fighter project. One of its other projects,
Bablefish 7, neatly illustrates an area where AI can, and increasingly is, playing an
important role; in integrating, filtering and sharing all-source information – wheth-
er that’s initially acquired from a space satellite, an aircraft of platforms on land or
sea.40 It was the RCO’s decision to abort work on the Mosquito, the RAF’s initial
stab at creating a viable “loyal wingman” drone to fly alongside its 5th and 6th
generation fighters.41 Successor wingman projects are inevitable.
37 Lye,“DASAawards£3mfundingforIntelligentShipcompetition.”
38 “TechnologyandInnovation.”
39 AirandSpacePower.
40 “RAFRapidCapabilitiesOfficedemonstratesnewtechnologiesdevelopedwithindustrypartners.”
41 Jennings,“UKcancelsMosquito‘LoyalWingman’.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 29

Another important RAF project is its work on experimental swarming, for which
it stood up a new dedicated squadron, No. 216 Test and Evaluation Squadron.42
As with the Navy, the work on drones remains small scale and low-key, with the
squadron, RCO and Dstl running a score of experimental exercises in the last few
years. The two projects neatly encapsulate an unresolved tension for the RAF –
which is the appropriate vision given the prospect of AI increasingly capable of
flying aircraft in complex, contested environments? The current emphasis is on
crewed aviation in exquisitely capable, incredibly expensive aircraft. An alternative
is large numbers of less capable, perhaps disposable, swarming platforms that
exploit mass and saturation to overwhelm air defences. Still another vision is of a
missile-centric future, with long range, hypersonic missiles exploiting pure speed.
That last vision seems the least prominent aspect of the RAF’s work and that raises
a further dilemma – of balancing limited resources against costly technologies that
are relatively unproven.
6.5 The UK Intelligence Agencies
Less publicly visible than the Commands, but certainly part of the UK’s national
security ecosystem, the UK’s intelligence agencies, notably GCHQ, have a long-
standing interest in using AI techniques to identify useful information within the
torrent of data it acquires. There’s crossover with the work of the services, particu-
larly the RAF, which has taken the lead in space power. There’s overlap too with
the work of Defence Intelligence, which leads on intelligence analysis. For his part,
the Chief of the Secret Intelligence Service (colloquially, MI6) recently pointed to
greater use of AI in his organisation. Beyond generalities, however, it’s not possi-
ble to say much. Occasional insights can be gleaned from investigative journalism
like that of Barton Gellman following the Snowdon leaks, which confirmed a good
deal of UK-US cooperation on the collection (sometimes in bulk) and analysis of
electronic information, and the use of sophisticated machine learning techniques
to parse it.43 But the technologies it details, while strikingly advanced, are already
some years old. As with other areas of AI use in national security, there are impor-
tant issues here of oversight, and a need to balance the priorities of the state with
the rights of citizens.
42 Allison,“UKtointroduceadditionaldroneswarmingsquadron”.
43 Formore,see:Gellman,DarkMirror:EdwardSnowdenandtheAmericanSurveillanceState.
30 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

6.6 What to Expect in the Future?
This snapshot of defence AI activity doubtless misses out many salient govern-
mental organisations involved in developing AI technologies and concepts,
whether in-house or in partnership with industry and academia. Still, it attests to
both the range and dynamism of work underway. Many of these organisations are
relatively new on the scene. More will likely follow in time, whether in response to
developments in technology, or perhaps the desire of ambitious organisations and
leaders to gain a foothold in what’s increasingly perceived as a critical general-pur-
pose technology. There’s certainly a sense of organisational muddle and overlap
in some areas. Skills bottlenecks and shortfalls, competition for resources, bureau-
cratic politics and organisational culture – all these will shape the AI ecosystem as
it evolves.
UK national security at the moment is likely only at the beginning of changes that
will be more profound than the creation of bolt-on organisations, or of collabora-
tions between different national security agencies. In common with other coun-
tries, there is clear potential for AI to drive fundamental change in armed forces,
and in wider society too. Such changes will inevitably be refracted via prevailing
cultures of national security, both within and across states. The UK’s Strategy for
AI, as with other MoD publications, hints at the changes – whether that’s talk of
new platforms, concepts, or personnel requirements – but does little to spell out
the details.
Can we say more about what those changes might be? In part this depends on the
capabilities of the technology itself, and this is fast changing, almost on a weekly
basis. But some large conceptual ideas are emerging in the UK context that bear
further reflection. Among these:
Human Decision-Maker: The enduring importance of the human decision-maker,
even in an era with pervasive and increasingly sophisticated machine cogni-
tion. That reflects an ethical, and also cultural, desire to preserve “meaningful”
human control. Fleshing out the tactical details will be more difficult than
expressing the desire.
Skillsets: Related is the need to “upskill” the workforce involved in defence,
and more broadly to promote AI literacy in wider society. The AI Strategy high-
lighted the need for a skilled cadre of AI specialists in defence, and hints at
the emergence of a career stream or structure that might foster that specialism
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 31

within the uniformed services.44 There are discussions about the possibility to
bring experienced mid-career professionals with relevant skills into defence –
along those lines, the AI strategy mentions the use of specialist reservists and
flexible entry paths.45 AI though is likely to be ubiquitous, and the government
will need to strike a sensible balance between promoting AI knowledge as a
generalist military competence and a specialism.
Mass and Scale: AI affords potential advantages in terms of mass, distribution
and decision-speed. The head of the British army, perhaps optimistically,
called for an army of 30,000 robots. And the head of the RAF argued that
with AI, “We can have mass and technology and technological sophistica-
tion.”46 As in other wealthy democracies, defence inflation, driven by exquisite
technology and cutting-edge designs, has shrunk the armed forces. Britain’s
armed forces are smaller, both in personnel terms and in numbers of main
platforms – tanks, surface combatants and multi-role fighter jets than at any
time in the modern era. The emerging British vision is clear – AI will enable
scale, while maintaining qualitative advantage. Whether that vision is feasible
is another question. The practical implications will be profound – whether
that’s the tactical question of how to organise (and lead) a platoon of mixed
humans and autonomous machines, or whether it still makes sense to organise
armed forces along three traditional domain/service lines.
Vulnerabilities: AI systems are potentially vulnerable, for example, to Electronic
Warfare countermeasures like jamming, or spoofing and susceptible to offen-
sive cyber warfare. If the British vision is of a clone army of 30,000 machines
– the clones had better not all feature the same Achilles heel. Then there are
difficulties of assurance and trust, as when AI is susceptible to bias in training
data. As will other states, the UK needs military AI that is reliable and trust-
worthy. Part of that demands AI that is sufficiently transparent that users can
understand its decision-making.
44 AIStrategy,p.18.
45 AIStrategy,p.19.
46 Mehta,“Britain’sRoyalAirForcechieftalksF-35tallyanddivestingequipment.”
32 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

7 Training for
Defence AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 3333

The defence AI strategy outlines in broad terms the need to develop the right
skills for the autonomous era it envisages. As yet, detailed work to flesh out that
vision is lacking. There are some early indicators of more significant changes to
come. For example, the military offers short courses in coding, including some
sponsored by its jHub innovation team. The same unit has recently launched
“innovation fellowships” for serving military officers, with the aim of fostering links
across government and the private sector.47
Elsewhere, AI is becoming increasingly prominent in professional military edu-
cation syllabuses, whether distance learning, or residential courses. The three
services have established programmes to allow competitively selected officers
time in UK higher education pursuing advanced degrees or visiting fellowships
– increasingly these are in AI or AI-adjacent subjects. Short professional develop-
ment courses in AI-related subjects are also becoming increasingly available, as
with one on data led decision-support and AI at Cranfield University’s Defence
Academy campus.48
47 
48 
accessed1October2022).
34 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

8 Conclusion:
An AI
Transformation
Debate
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 3355

The UK’s defence budget is large and projected to rise further. The current gov-
ernment has pledged further increases over the decade, although it now faces stiff
competition from other fiscal priorities. Unlike many NATO allies, the UK meets
its 2% of GDP commitment, albeit with a suspicion of some deft accounting. But
spending is stretched between competing priorities. The UK’s armed forces have
long aspired to a full range of military capabilities, and an ability to deploy and
sustain significant military power globally. This strategic culture is reflected in the
Integrated Review, with its recognition of a tilt in geopolitical power towards the
Indo-Pacific region, and an attendant desire to gear British military capabilities
for national security challenges there. That includes a reinvigorated focus on blue
water naval capabilities, the retention of long-range strategic airlift capabilities,
and some forward basing. This thinking was already reflected to some degree
ion the acquisition of two large conventional aircraft carriers and the F-35B jets to
operate from them.
The Indo-Pacific turn in the UK’s outlook also reflects the current government’s
pronounced EU-sceptism and its post-Brexit difficulties of forging a new relation-
ship with the EU. But the war in Ukraine has challenged that worldview; refocusing
attention on continental defence and creating an urgent need to restock munitions
expended in Ukraine. Balancing its budget against its Pacific ambitions, its support
for Ukraine, and its military modernisation programme, including its AI efforts, will
be difficult.
The Ukraine conflict has also prompted further reflections in Britain on the future
of warfare, not least because the UK has been one of Kyiv’s most prominent allies.
Events in Ukraine are keenly studied by those charged with modernisation of the
UK’s own forces. Part of this debate is visible in professional forums and on social
media. On one hand, modernisers observe, combat in Ukraine relies on high
technology, including AI technologies used in intelligence gathering and analysis,
or as offensive and defensive tools in the cyber domain. The fighting itself pres-
ages an era of advanced, digitised warfare – a battlefield saturated with sensors,
and the extensive use of uncrewed platforms, especially commercially available
drones. Distributed light forces, especially using man-portable air-defence systems
(MANPADs) and guided anti-tank missiles (ATGMs) were much evident in the
conflict’s early phases, where they proved effective against crewed aviation and
Russian armour. AI’s tactical strength is likewise purported by enthusiasts to lie in
distribution and scale.
But on the other hand, the Ukraine war demonstrates the continued utility of
some vintage equipment and longstanding concepts. Artillery has been dominant
in much of the fighting, especially long-range rocket systems which have been
in service with Western militaries, including the British, for decades, just as have
those MANPADs and ATGMs.
36 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

The upshot is that all sides in the British modernisation debate can take some
support from events in Ukraine. Advocates for extensive AI-related reforms can
argue plausibly that the combatants have not made full use of technologies that
are only now beginning to emerge as viable military systems. Sceptics can point
to the continued utility of existing systems and the need to hedge against the risk
of trading in too much useful equipment for unproven technology. Gauging where
the debate in the UK currently stands is a subjective exercise, but certainly the war
has tempered the degree of enthusiasm for AI in many public national security
debates, if only by drawing the focus away from what was until 2022 a prominent
feature of defence-modernisation discussions.
To some degree, these tensions are not new. The UK has a long history of de-
fence reviews in which rising defence inflation is set against the constraints of
the economy, the emergence of new technologies and an uncertain geopolitical
environment. Should the armed forces be more focused on global challenges, or
the pressing concern of a continental threat? How far should the government of
the day seek to promote domestic industry, even if the result is higher cost, lower
quality equipment? Often the result has been belt-tightening and salami-slicing.
Capabilities and personnel are thinned out, in-service dates for equipment are
extended. To remain at the cutting edge, successive defence reviews have cut
personnel numbers, rationalised formations, extended equipment in-service
dates and gapped some roles, like carrier aviation and long-range anti-submarine
aviation.
Too much despondency, however, would be wrong. Set against these challenges
are a large and growing defence budget, strong, longstanding alliances with tech-
nologically capable partners including those in NATO, and the “Five Eyes” intel-
ligence community. The UK has a track record of fielding highly capable, modern
armed forces with global reach; of developing advanced military technologies
and cooperating in so doing with allies. The UK’s armed forces are small in terms
of numbers – both of personnel and major equipment. But they are high-quality,
experienced, adept at operating in alliances and at adapting to new technologies.
Also weighing in the balance for the UK are the capabilities of likely adversaries,
most notably China and Russia. Both states are mentioned explicitly as potential
challenges in the Integrated Review, with China described as an increasingly asser-
tive “systemic competitor” and Russia as “the most acute threat to our security.”
Both challengers frame the need for the rapid and transformative adoption of AI in
defence.
Yet conflict in Ukraine has amply demonstrated that Russia’s conventional threat
was greatly exaggerated by Western analysts. Many were impressed by Russia’s
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 37

modernisation efforts, by its ability to operate at reach, and to exploit opportuni-
ties in the unconventional, “grey zone” of modern warfare – notably, for example,
through its propaganda efforts in social media. Despite longstanding efforts to
modernise its armed forces and to develop cutting-edge military technologies,
Russia’s combat performance has been poor, and advanced computer technology
not much evident.
China spends much more, has larger, more modernised armed forces, and has a
considerable research base. But China too faces substantial challenges to devel-
oping effective AI for national security, including significant corruption, skills and
equipment bottlenecks, and a centrally planned ethos in government, business
and its armed forces. Long term demographic challenges and a markedly weak-
ening economic outlook, amidst post-Covid uncertainties are additional impedi-
ments to progress.
The threats to national security and wider British interests from these two countries
were significant motivation for Britain’s own efforts to modernise defence. That
modernisation will almost certainly continue, regardless of the authoritarian states’
evident difficulties. Analysts seem predisposed to emphasise the worst-case sce-
nario when it comes to adversaries.
Compared to both these potential adversaries, however, the UK’s defence AI pros-
pects look bright. British scientists are at the forefront of AI research and have a
long history of innovation. And parts of the British state have a longstanding track
record of using machine learning techniques for national security. The two largest
challenges for the UK will be developing AI that reflects British values (as the MoD
acknowledges); and keeping pace with its vastly better resourced ally, the United
States.
38 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

Literature
“AdvancedResearchandInventionAgency(ARIA): AirandSpacePower.JointDoctrinePublication
policystatement,”DepartmentforBusiness,Energyand 0-30(Shrivenham:UKMinistryofDefence/Development,
IndustrialStrategy,19March2021, ConceptsandDoctrineCentre,2017,
government/publications/advanced-research-and-inven- publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
tion-agency-aria-statement-of-policy-intent/advanced-re- uploads/attachment_data/file/668710/doctrine_uk_air_
search-and-invention-agency-aria-policy-statement(last space_power_jdp_0_30.pdf(lastaccessed1October
accessed1October2022). 2022).
“CaseStudy:Autonomousnanodronecapturesaerial Allison,George,“UKtointroduceadditionaldrone
intelligenceinasnap,”DefenceandSecurityAcceler- swarmingsquadron,”UKDefenceJournal,14July2021,
ator,8June2021, 
case-studies/autonomous-nanodrone-captures-aerial-in- ditional-swarming-drone-squadron/(lastaccessed1
telligence-in-a-snap(lastaccessed1October2022). October2022).
“DstllaunchesDefenceDataResearchCentre,”De- Ambitious,Safe,Responsible:Ourapproachtothe
fenceScienceandTechnologyLaboratory,23June2022, deliveryofAI-enabledcapabilityinDefence(London:UK
 MinistryofDefence,2022),
fence-data-research-centre(lastaccessed1October service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
2022). attachment_data/file/1082991/20220614-Ambitious_
Safe_and_Responsible.pdf(lastaccessed1October
“LaunchingtheDefenceCentreforAIResearch,” 2022).
DefenceScienceandTechnologyLaboratory,14July
2022, AssuranceofAIandAutonomousSystems:ADstl
ing-the-defence-centre-for-ai-research(lastaccessed1 biscuitbook(London:DefenceScienceandTechnology
October2022). Laboratory,2021),
publications/assurance-of-ai-and-autonomous-systems-
“Manta:TheRoyalNavygetsitsfirstextra-large a-dstl-biscuit-book(lastaccessed1October2022).
autonomoussubmarine,”NavyLookout,31March2020,
 Burke,Anthony,Robustartificialintelligenceforac-
gets-its-first-extra-large-autonomous-submarine/(last tivecyberdefence(London:AlanTuringInstitute,2020),
accessed1October2022). 
public_ai_acd_techreport_final.pdf(lastaccessed1
“PermanentlocationofNationalCyberForce October2022).
announced,”MinistryofDefence,4October2021,
 Brown,Larisa,“USMarinesroutedbyRoyalMarines
cation-of-national-cyber-force-campus-announced(last inWarGames,”TheTimes,4November2021,https://
accessed1October2022). 
marines-in-war-games-scrx888m8(lastaccessed1
“RAFRapidCapabilitiesOfficedemonstrates October2022).
newtechnologiesdevelopedwithindustrypartners,”
RAFNews,12March2021, CombatAirStrategy:Anambitiousvisionforthe
news/articles/raf-rapid-capabilities-office-demon- future(London:UKMinistryofDefence,2018),https://
strates-new-technologies-developed-with-industry-part- assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
ners/ system/uploads/attachment_data/file/725600/Combat-
AirStrategy_Lowres.pdf(lastaccessed1October2022).
“TechnologyandInnovation,”RoyalNavy,undated,
 DefenceArtificialIntelligenceStrategy(London:
features/innovation(lastaccessed1October2022). MinistryofDefence,2022),
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 39

service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ McMahon,Liv,“MODacquiresgovernment’sfirst
attachment_data/file/1082416/Defence_Artificial_Intelli- quantumcomputer,”BBCNews,9June2022,https://
gence_Strategy.pdf(lastaccessed1October2022). 
accessed1October2022).
DefenceinaCompetitiveAge(London:Ministryof
Defence,2021), Mehta,Aaron,“Britain’sRoyalAirForcechieftalks
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ F-35tallyanddivestingequipment,”DefenseNews,
data/file/974661/CP411_-Defence_Command_Plan.pdf 10May2021,
(lastaccessed1October2022). views/2021/05/09/britains-royal-air-force-chief-talks-
f-35-tally-and-divesting-equipment/(lastaccessed1
Gellman,Barton,DarkMirror:EdwardSnowdenand October2022).
theAmericanSurveillanceState(London:Penguin,
2021) NationalAIStrategy(London:HMGovernment,
2021),
GlobalBritaininaCompetitiveAge:TheIntegrated ernment/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
ReviewofSecurity,DefenceDevelopmentandForeign file/1020402/National_AI_Strategy_-_PDF_version.pdf
Policy(London:HMGovernment,2021), (lastaccessed1October2022).
publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/975077/Global_Britain_ “DroneSwarms,”RoyalMarines,8September2021,
in_a_Competitive_Age-_the_Integrated_Review_of_Se- 
curity__Defence__Development_and_Foreign_Policy.pdf accessed1October2022).
(lastaccessed1October2022).
Russell,Stuart,“AIinWarfare,”BBCReithLecture,8
Hambling,David,“UStoequipMQ-9ReaperDrones December2021,
withArtificialIntelligence,”Forbes,11December m00127t9(lastaccessed1October2022).
2020,
bling/2020/12/11/new-project-will-give-us-mq-9-reaper- Sanders,Patrick,“SharpeningtheUK’sdefenceinthe
drones-artificial-intelligence/?sh=796cb8a7a8e6(last 2020s,”SpeechattheRUSIStrategicCommandConfer-
accessed1October2022). ence,26May2021,
speeches/commander-of-strategic-command-rusi-con-
Human-MachineTeaming.JointDoctrineNote1/18 ference-speech(lastaccessed1October2022).
(Shrivenham:UKMinistryofDefence/Development,
ConceptsandDoctrineCentre,2018), TheBritishArmyapproachtoRoboticsandAuton-
publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ omousSystems:GeneratingHuman-MachineTeams
uploads/attachment_data/file/709359/20180517-con- (London:BritishArmy,2021),
cepts_uk_human_machine_teaming_jcn_1_18.pdf(last media/15790/20220126_army-approach-to-ras_final.pdf
accessed1October2022). (lastaccessed1October2022).
Hutton,Georgina,ResearchandDevelopmentSpend- UnmannedAircraftSystems.JointDoctrinePublica-
ing.HouseofCommonsLibrarybriefingpaper,No. tion030-2(Shrivenham:UKMinistryofDefence/Devel-
SNO4223(London:HouseofCommons,2021),https:// opment,ConceptsandDoctrineCentre,2017),https://
researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk/documents/ assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
SN04223/SN04223.pdf(lastaccessed1October2022). system/uploads/attachment_data/file/673940/doctrine_
uk_uas_jdp_0_30_2.pdf(lastaccessed1October2022).
Jennings,Gareth,“UKcancelsMosquito‘Loyal
Wingman’,”Janes,27June2022,
com/defence-news/news-detail/uk-cancels-mosqui-
to-loyal-wingman
Lye,Harry,“DASAawards£3mfundingforIntelligent
Shipcompetition,”NavalTechnology,11January
2021,
sa-awards-3m-funding-for-intelligent-ship-competition/
(lastaccessed1October2022).
40 BRIGHT PROSPECTS – BIG CHALLENGES

Defense AI Observatory Studies
22|04 Kenneth Payne, Bright Prospects – Big Challenges. Defense AI in the United Kingdom
22|03 Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber, Armin Brandstetter, and Gary S. Schaal, Free
Jazz on the Battlefield. How GhostPlay’s AI Approach Enhances Air Defense
22|02 Peter Layton, Evolution not Revolution. Australia’s Defence AI Pathway
21|01 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, Joseph Verbovszky, Beware the Hype. What Military
Conflicts in Ukraine, Syria, Libya, and Nagorno-Karabakh (Don’t) Tell Us About the
Future of War