African states and The Hague
Code of Conduct against
Ballistic Missile Proliferation
Gugu Dube, Lauriane Héau, Emmanuelle Maitre and Noel Stott
Four of the five most recent subscribing states to The Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic
Missile Proliferation (HCoC) are African. Adopted in in The Hague, the HCoC’s
chief objective is to curb the proliferation of ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons, as well as related technology. When fully implemented, the HCoC holds
significant security and socio-economic benefits, and is thus of crucial importance given Africa’s
developmental context and imperatives.
AFRICA REPORT 34 | 

Key findings
As of , the great majority of African However, 94% of African states that took
states have joined the HCoC, with 41 out of the part in the UN General Assembly vote
54 African UN members having subscribed. (A/RES/75/60) in voted in
favour of the text, showing increased
A slightly different picture emerges when
support from many of the regional non-
analysing The Hague Code of Conduct against
subscribing states.
Ballistic Missile Proliferation (HCoC) subscription
on the continent by RECs. For instance, there is Many have also taken part in sub-regional
a degree of disparity between the REC with the seminars on the continent held by the
lowest subscription rate – SADC – and ECOWAS, Foundation for Strategic Research – the EU’s
which has the highest (93%) participation rate. designated implementing agency for the code.
Thirteen African UN member states have not The development of space agencies in several
yet subscribed to the HCoC: Algeria, Angola, African countries has been one of the most
Botswana, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic notable evolutions of the space landscape in
Republic of Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Eswatini, recent years, with the AU developing a space
Mauritius, Namibia, São Tomé and Príncipe, policy and aiming to establish an African
South Sudan and Zimbabwe. Space Agency by 2023.
Recommendations
The AU should encourage member states building measure. 2022 is a unique opportunity
to engage with the HCoC Executive for such states to join the regime, as
Secretariat and to support related UN General is the 20th anniversary of
Assembly resolutions. its adoption.
RECs should encourage non-subscribing The Africa Group, through the AU Observer
members to contact the Immediate Central Mission, should arrange briefings on the non-
Contact to ascertain the process and benefits proliferation benefits and peaceful use activities
of subscribing. of subscribing to the HCoC so that a common
Mechanisms to enhance the sharing of African position can be reached.
information and experiences concerning civilian
African states that have subscribed to
space activities in Africa should be discussed
the HCoC should participate more in global
on an ongoing basis.
discussions on reducing the threat posed by
African states that have not yet subscribed to missiles; integrate the code’s implementation
the HCoC should do so to reinforce their activities into their non-proliferation national
support for global disarmament and non- strategies; and regularly submit their policies on
proliferation efforts. This will enhance the ballistic missiles and space-launch vehicles via
effectiveness of the code as a confidence- the code’s mechanism of annual declarations.
2 AFRICAN STATES AND THE HAGUE CODE OF CONDUCT AGAINST BALLISTIC MISSILE PROLIFERATION

Glossary of terms1
Ballistic missile: A missile whose flight path follows through the upper layers in a shallow, random series of
a ballistic (parabolic) trajectory governed mainly by curves and turners.
gravity and aerodynamic drag once thrust is cut,
Hypersonic cruise missiles (HCM): HCMs are
comprising a launcher, a rocket-powered propulsion
powered by high-speed, air-breathing scramjet engines
system, a payload and a guidance system. and can manoeuvre at low altitudes.
Confidence-building measures: Unilateral or Missile: An unmanned, self-propelled, self-contained,
agreed actions taken by a state for the purpose of unrecallable, guided or unguided vehicle designed to
reducing uncertainties and concerns of other states deliver a weapon or another payload.
about its intentions, making the state’s behaviour
Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR): A
more predictable to other states, and promoting the
grouping of states that have agreed to, inter alia,
reduction of tensions between states.
restrict the export of missiles and related technologies.
Cruise missile: A missile that uses aerodynamic lift to
Payload: The front part of a missile that could carry a
offset gravity and a propulsion system to counteract
warhead containing a nuclear or conventional explosive
drag. Cruise missiles travel parallel to the ground and,
charge, or a chemical or biological agent. Payloads
like an aircraft, usually at a constant height.
can also be satellites with a wide range of missions:
communication, weather monitoring, planetary
Delivery system: A means of propulsion or transport
exploration and observation.
employed to carry munitions to their target. Many
delivery systems can transport both conventional Space launch vehicle (SLV): A rocket-propelled
weapons and weapons of mass destruction payloads. vehicle used to transport a spacecraft or a satellite
beyond Earth’s atmosphere, either into orbit around
Export controls: Measures designed to regulate
Earth or to some other destination in outer space.
international trade in sensitive equipment, materials
and dual-use technologies, such as weapon systems UNSC Resolution 1540: United Nations Security
and their components. Council Resolution 1540 (2004) requires all states to
refrain from providing any form of support to non-state
Hypersonic weapons: Hypersonic weapons do not
actors that attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture,
follow a ballistic trajectory and can manoeuvre en route
possess, transport, transfer or use nuclear, chemical
to their destination. There are two primary categories
or biological weapons and their means of delivery.
of hypersonic weapons, both of which fly at speeds
The resolution requires all states to adopt and enforce
of at least Mach 5 (five times the speed of sound).
appropriate laws to this effect, as well as other effective
At present, hypersonic weapons are not covered
measures to prevent the proliferation of these weapons
by any existing arms control agreements, nor by
and their means of delivery.
voluntary measures that restrict the development and
Weapons of mass destruction (WMD): WMD
proliferation of missile technology, such as the HCoC
refers to nuclear, radiological, biological or chemical
and the Missile Technology Control Regime.
weapons, ‘and any weapons developed in the future
Hypersonic glide vehicles (HGV): Launched from a which might have characteristics comparable in
rocket before gliding to a target, they leave the Earth’s destructive effect to those of the atomic bomb or other
atmosphere and then plunge back into it, gliding weapons mentioned above’.2
AFRICA REPORT 34 | 3

Introduction non-proliferation instruments must not prevent the
development of civilian technologies.
With four of the five most recent subscribing states being
African, the continent has seen considerable positive African states are also sensitive to the financial
development since 2016 with regard to The Hague and human resource costs associated with the
Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation implementation of global non-proliferation norms and
(HCoC).3 Adopted in , the HCoC’s chief commitments. They often insist on the importance
aim is to limit the proliferation of ballistic missiles, as of limiting the administrative burden for implementing
they are the preferred delivery vehicle for weapons of countries; the streamlining of reporting processes; and
mass destruction (WMD). The recent increase in their the need to adapt the frameworks to suit their context.
availability, geographic spread and sophistication, as
This report gives an overview of the HCoC and
well as their use in conflicts (such as in Yemen4 and the
its implementation on the African continent. It
Armenian-Azerbaijani5 conflict), means that they are once
points to several challenges but also a number of
again a growing security concern.
opportunities for African states and ways to increase
The HCoC not only is the only universal norm against the the HCoC’s relevance. Finally, it establishes a set of
proliferation of ballistic missile systems but also enhances recommendations going forward.
transparency in ballistic and space-launch programmes.
This transparency takes the form of a confidence- Overview of the HCoC
building mechanism, which requires subscribing states
Prior to the HCoC’s adoption, the main forum for
to notify each other before any ballistic missile or space-
discussion of ballistic missile proliferation was the
launch vehicle is launched or test flights initiated. This is
Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR). Established
referred to as pre-launch notifications.
in 1987, the MTCR is now composed of 35 states
(‘partners’). These states agree on restricting the export
The HCoC is the only universal norm of Category I missiles capable of carrying at least a
500 kg payload at a distance of at least 300 km. They
against the proliferation of ballistic
also promote restrictions on missiles intended for the
missile systems
delivery of chemical, biological or nuclear weapons, and
related technologies.6
Africa stands in a paradoxical position vis-à-vis the
In addition, the MTCR prohibits the transfer of Category
HCoC. The risk posed by ballistic missiles appears
I missile production capabilities. It has a key role in
relatively low, as few countries have embarked on
limiting the proliferation of missile equipment, material
such programmes on the continent. The proliferation
and related technologies that could be used to produce
of small arms and light weapons (SALW) is a much
systems capable of delivering WMD.7
more immediate threat for many African states.
Moreover, although on the increase, only a handful of While the MTCR focuses on the supply side, no
states are currently heavily investing in the peaceful multilateral norm existed at that time to regulate ballistic
use of rocket technologies. missile production and proliferation. Following ballistic
missile developments in, for example, the Democratic
Despite this, regional actors remain supportive of the
People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) and Iran, MTCR
HCoC and the majority of African states have subscribed
partners negotiated the International Code of Conduct
to it. A closer analysis of the position of most African
against Ballistic Missile Proliferation (ICoC) – now the
countries on the HCoC indicates that this support is an
HCoC. This move was also the result of their recognition
expression of their commitment to the struggle against
that multilateral solutions should be adopted to curb
the proliferation of WMDs and their delivery vehicles
missile proliferation.
in general. Indeed, it is integral to their unequivocal
call for the total eradication of all WMDs. This position The HCoC was adopted as a politically binding
is held in tandem with an emphasis on the fact that agreement by 93 states in The Hague in .
4 AFRICAN STATES AND THE HAGUE CODE OF CONDUCT AGAINST BALLISTIC MISSILE PROLIFERATION

It aims to contribute to international stability and security build state capacity to meet their non-proliferation and
by improving transparency and confidence among disarmament commitments.
states regarding ballistic missiles and civilian space
With the arms control and non-proliferation environment
programmes. Its intention is also to serve as a warning
mostly deteriorating since 2015, the HCoC is one
system prior to launches.
of the few instruments that remains effective, as
HCoC in the global non-proliferation regime demonstrated by the growing number of subscribing
states. This resilience is probably due to its potential to
As of , 143 states, including the 41 African
regulate behaviours and contribute to the avoidance of
states, have joined the HCoC, which remains the only
a military escalation following a misunderstanding. This
international instrument delegitimising the proliferation of
is all the more relevant at a time of increased global
ballistic missiles.
and regional tension.
While the HCoC was initially perceived as originating
in the MTCR (a perception that continues to endure
Executive Secretariat/ Immediate
in some states), it has become an integral part of the
Central Contact
global non-proliferation regime and the multilateral United
Nations (UN) framework. At the same time, there is room Austria acts as the Executive Secretariat/ICC
for improving complementarity and strengthening the and coordinates information exchange within the
implementation of their provisions, institutional linkages HCoC framework. It also organises an annual
and interactions.8 This integration can be attributed to a regular meeting, usually held in Vienna in June. To
number of factors, including: promote transparency, it runs a dedicated website
(
• The UN General Assembly’s support for the HCoC
through the passing of a biennial resolution. HCoC chair
Subscribing states nominate an annual rotating
• The linkages between the HCoC and other UN
chair. Each subscribing state can become chair of
initiatives, such as UN Security Council (UNSC)
the HCoC, and notably receives support from the
Resolution 1540 (2004) – efforts to promote the
EU to undertake its mission.
implementation of Resolution 1540 in many countries
has indirectly contributed to highlighting the relevance HCoC subscribing states
of the code in curbing the proliferation of delivery
States can join the HCoC by sending a Note
vehicles. Reciprocally, subscribing to the code
Verbale to the Austrian ICC. Subscription to the
complements the binding obligation under Resolution
HCoC is free of charge.
1540 for all states to exercise caution on transferring
missile technologies and components.9
HCoC’s role and functioning
• Outreach events held by the HCoC chair, the
Immediate Central Contact (ICC) and the Foundation The code has reinforced the normative framework
for Strategic Research (FRS) – the European Union’s against the proliferation of missiles. Since the 2000s,
(EU) designated implementing agency for the code state-to-state transfers of ballistic systems capable of
– also serve to embed the code within a global UN delivering WMDs have been rare. However, ballistic
framework. Such events usually take place on the missiles remain central to the deterrence strategy of
margins of, for example, the First Committee of the nuclear-armed states and are therefore undergoing
UN General Assembly. This committee deals with innovation, modernisation and qualitative improvements.
global challenges and threats to international peace These developments inevitably lead to in-flight testing.
and security.10 Sending pre-notifications through the HCoC mechanism
is one way of minimising risks linked to this activity.
• Events organised by applied policy institutes such
as the ISS that conduct research and provide policy Missile possessors – but also non-possessors – are
advice to governments and undertake activities to aware of this immediate benefit of the HCoC and the
AFRICA REPORT 34 | 5

role it can play in ensuring confidence even in tense A/RES/73/49, with one against [Iran] and 10 abstentions
environments. Without legitimising the nature of the on 7 ).12 This momentum is also reflected
programmes, it limits the risk of confusing a missile in recent declarations by regional organisations or states
test with a missile strike. In 2019 about 50 tests were pointing to the code as an inspiration for progress on
reported in open sources, and 30 in 2020.11 The code’s arms control.13
function in this respect is therefore of tangible benefit and
Scope of the HCoC
justifies the momentum built up over the last five years, in
Ballistic missiles are capable of carrying not only
particular in Africa, in its support.
WMD payloads but also various types of conventional
The HCoC places most of the burden of implementation
payloads. As a result, some states consider ballistic
on missile-possessor states. States without ballistic
missiles legitimate weapons for their national security.
or launching capacities have been attracted to an The HCoC thus intends to curb the proliferation of
instrument where they can get information and expect ballistic missiles used as WMD delivery vehicles,
transparency without compromising their access even if some of its confidence-building measures
to civilian technologies or diverting scarce could also in theory apply to ballistic systems used as
administrative resources. conventional weapons.
Besides additional subscribers, the code’s momentum Civilian space activities fall within the scope of the
can be seen in the record number of positive votes HCoC. This is because the same technologies used
in favour of the most recent UN General Assembly to develop and launch ballistic missiles can also be
resolution supporting the HCoC (176 votes in favour of used for peaceful purposes. Such purposes include
Table 1: Overview of the HCoC
Accede or adhere to international Prevent the proliferation of Implement transparency and
conventions and treaties related ballistic missiles capable of confidence-building measures
to the peaceful use of space delivering WMD
The Treaty on Principles Governing To curb and prevent the proliferation Submitting an annual declaration
the Activities of States in the of ballistic missiles capable of outlining their policy on ballistic
Exploration and Use of Outer Space, delivering WMD missiles and space launch vehicles,
including the Moon and Other and declare the launches of each
To exercise maximum possible
Celestial Bodies (‘Outer Space made during the year (nil declaration
restraint in the development, testing
Treaty’, 1967) for states that have not carried out
and deployment of ballistic missiles
any such launches)
The Convention on International
To exercise the necessary vigilance
Liability for Damage Caused by Sending pre-launch notifications
in the consideration of assistance to
Space Objects (1972)
Space Launch Vehicle programmes Encouraging visits to space
The Convention on Registration in any other country launch sites
of Objects Launched into Outer
Not to contribute to, support
Space (1975)
or assist any ballistic missiles
programme in countries that might
be developing or acquiring WMD
in contravention of international
disarmament and non-proliferation
treaties
Source: Adapted from paragraph 3 of the Code, See: 
6 AFRICAN STATES AND THE HAGUE CODE OF CONDUCT AGAINST BALLISTIC MISSILE PROLIFERATION

the development, use and launch of civilian rockets cruise missiles were to be included. Finally, the import
and satellites, and space exploration. Thus, while and export of cruise missiles and related technologies
the development of space launch capabilities is not are dealt within the MTCR framework. Many possessors
necessarily perceived as a threat to international peace and exporters, especially Western states, often do
and security, access to the technology required could not perceive their dissemination as a proliferation risk,
contribute to the acquisition of ballistic missiles. This is with most systems being transferred having a short or
often seen as detrimental to global and regional stability. medium range and not designed to deliver WMD.22
Regarding hypersonic manoeuvring systems, their The exclusion of cruise missiles and Unmanned
inclusion in the HCoC’s scope depends on the type Combat Aerial Vehicles (UCAVs) may, in future, become
of system. Hypersonic glide vehicles (HGVs) leave the more problematic. This is because UCAVs and cruise
Earth’s atmosphere and then plunge back into it, gliding technologies continue to be disseminated and may
through the upper layers in random curves and turns. This
become more appropriate as WMD delivery vehicles,
is intended to fool an enemy’s radar as to their intended
owing in part to the progress being made in scramjet
target. Hypersonic cruise missiles (HCMs), while not as
hypersonic technologies. UCAVs may be especially
fast, are designed to fly low but also at extremely high
challenging given their rapid spread globally, including in
speeds.14 Hypersonic manoeuvring systems can move at
Africa, where Egypt, Nigeria and South Africa, as well as
five times the speed of sound – 6 174 km/h or more,15 and
non-state actors, are already deploying them.23
are likely to impact on war fighting and strategy.16
Some analysts argue that ‘missiles are not just ballistic
anymore, even many of the ones that are called
Technologies used to develop and launch ballistic’.24 As such, according to Wilson and Dunham,
ballistic missiles can also be used for there is a need to adapt the taxonomy as this has
implications for early warning, missile defence and
peaceful purposes
arms control, as well as broader strategic policy.25 ‘This
blurring of categories [also] has the potential to erode the
Systems17 currently being developed by China, the United utility of existing arrangements on missiles, such as the
States (US), Russia and several other states fall within
export controls applied to certain missiles in the MTCR.’26
the HCoC’s scope when relying on a ballistic missile for
What is needed, according to Izumi Nakamitsu, the UN
the boost phase of a launch. This includes HGVs, which
under-secretary-general and high representative for
are initially launched by a space launcher or a ballistic
disarmament affairs, is a new ‘set of common, agreed
missile, and then complete most of their flight along a
definitions … a systematic and widely understood
non-ballistic trajectory in the atmosphere.18
taxonomy of missiles could help governments identify
Despite criticism by non-subscribing states and
particularly destabilizing or harmful types of weapons
propositions made by some experts and even
and, ultimately, means for their control’.27 The HCoC will
subscribing states,19 the HCoC does not cover cruise
therefore increasingly be faced with a need to rethink its
missiles. This limitation can be understood given the
scope and implementation, in order to remain relevant
pragmatic considerations that prevailed at the time of
with ongoing technological evolutions.
its adoption. While some regret the exclusion of cruise
missiles20 from the HCoC’s scope, the absence of an Challenges related to the HCoC
agreed definition of these systems constitutes a first
Efforts to increase transparency and confidence have
obstacle. In fact, it may be particularly problematic in the
had little impact on limiting the acquisition of ballistic
context of future or potential arms control agreements.21
missiles by some key non-subscribing states, especially
Moreover, cruise missiles are regularly used on the in Asia and the Middle East. Despite its 143 subscribing
battlefield (without carrying a WMD payload). States states, the code has yet to be signed by some of the
with cruise missile capabilities are reluctant to exercise most active states in the field of ballistic missiles and
the level of transparency that the HCoC would require if launching technologies. These include Brazil, China,
AFRICA REPORT 34 | 7

Egypt, Iran, Israel,28 the DPRK, Pakistan and Syria. In that albeit an important one. Having to give notice of the launch
context, India’s decision to subscribe to, and abide by, of a delivery system builds trust with one’s neighbours.
the code in 2016 was a positive sign reflecting the role
However, some have stressed that it may have put a
of the HCoC in contributing to regional stability, and it
damper on the need to focus on a potential multilateral
may give hope that other main actors will join the code.
treaty on ballistic missiles,33 and that this has led to a
Moreover, it should be noted that China and Pakistan
‘significant and dangerous gap in current regulatory
participate in bilateral notification mechanisms on ballistic
frameworks.’34 There is therefore ‘a need to strengthen
missiles with Russia and India respectively, displaying
existing transparency and confidence building measures’
their interest in this kind of confidence-building measure.
through ‘reinforcing and/or complementing the Code of
All subscribing states that have ballistic or space Conduct and by extending its coverage.’35 Nevertheless,
launch technologies do send pre-launch notifications
the HCoC remains to date the only existing instrument to
and annual declarations. However, other states fail to
focus on ballistic missiles, at a time when the erosion of
submit their annual declarations despite being required
the existing arms control architecture would render the
to do so – even though a ‘nil form’ was created to ease
adoption of any other (legally-binding) instrument highly
the process for states that do not possess missile or
challenging. It is a pragmatic instrument which actually
space capabilities.
works, thereby contributing to reinforcing global stability
According to Santoro and Glosserman, while the and security.
MTCR and HCoC have had some successes, the
‘missile problem has continued to worsen because HCoC’s relevance to African states
technology has diffused faster than controls have
Limited dissemination of ballistic technologies
adapted, and because some missile-technology
Ballistic missile activity in Africa has generally been
possessors have chosen not to comply with MTCR and
HCoC requirements.’29 In addition, they argue that the limited. Only South Africa, Libya, Egypt and, more
complexity of the missile problem is reflected in ballistic recently, Algeria have shown interest in acquiring or
missiles’ remaining invaluable components of national developing ballistic missiles.36 Algeria imported short-
defence strategies and often being an integral part of any range systems from Russia in 2017, which were displayed
interceptor-based defence system.30 for the first time in 2020.37 Algeria and Egypt are currently
the only African states with active ballistic missile
programmes. It is uncertain whether capacity persists in
In Africa, only South Africa, Libya, Egypt
Libya, which is presently experiencing significant political–
and Algeria have shown interest in military instability.
acquiring or developing ballistic missiles While the ballistic threat coming from African countries
therefore remains low, developments on the borders of
the continent are of concern. According to the Stockholm
Another criticism of the HCoC is that it is a product of its
International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), at least 10
time.31 At the turn of the century there were numerous
attempts to negotiate a treaty on ballistic missiles. A out of 19 MENA38 states have missiles that, launched from
number of UN-mandated Groups of Governmental the ground or from aircraft, can be used to attack high-
Experts (GGEs) worked on this issue with some measure value targets deep inside other states.39
of success. While no agreement could be reached on
Moreover, the civil war in Yemen has seen a high number
negotiating a treaty, there was general consensus that
of missile strikes since 2015, most of which originate from
it is essential to continue efforts to deal with the issue of
the Houthi-controlled territories in south-west Yemen,
missiles, both within and outside the UN.32
less than 200 km from the coasts of Eritrea and Djibouti.40
As a compromise measure, the HCoC does not ‘control’ Areas off the coasts of Djibouti, Eritrea and Somalia are
ballistic missiles. It is largely a notification instrument and, also attractive stopovers for smugglers of missile parts
as such, a confidence-building measure instrument – into the Gulf of Aden.41 As stated by the UNSC’s Panel of
8 AFRICAN STATES AND THE HAGUE CODE OF CONDUCT AGAINST BALLISTIC MISSILE PROLIFERATION

Experts on Yemen, the Houthi’s ability to project power Agency’s (IAEA) technical cooperation programmes in
beyond Yemen is thus a threat to regional stability and a Africa include the application of fertilisers through drip
challenge for future peace negotiations.42 irrigation, increased crop yields and the eradication of
agricultural pests by environmentally friendly procedures.
In addition, and as will be discussed below, a number of
They also involve the eradication of the tsetse fly; the
African countries are advancing their space programmes,
application of the Sterile Insect Technique against human
which may in the long term lead to ambitions to acquire
disease vectors, particularly mosquitoes; the assessment
launching capabilities. While this may not reflect any goal
and management of groundwater resources; and the
to develop or contribute to the development of a ballistic
investigation of water leakages in dams and reservoirs.46
programme, it nevertheless can result in the mastery
of dual-use sensitive technologies. As such, choices
made about the uses of outer space directly impact The code is of critical relevance to Africa
international peace, safety and security.43
as more states and private sector entities
Oyewole argues that ‘although most space programmes pursue outer space actions
in Africa are administered by civilians and designed
for research and development purposes, there is also
The organisation responsible for overseeing the
a military-security dimension’.44 There is therefore ‘a
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) –
need to assess the growing interest to acquire space
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
capabilities in a military-security framework in Africa,
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) – also
considering the trajectories, opportunities, motivations
focuses on the use of its verification technologies for
and possible implications’.45
civil and scientific applications. As states parties to the
Nexus between security and development CTBT, ‘African countries can take advantage of the
data generated by the international monitoring stations
The HCoC, while helping to strengthen existing
designed to collect seismological, hydroacoustic,
national and international security arrangements, also
infrasound and radionuclide data (tsunami warnings,
creates new opportunities for states to pursue their
volcanic and seismic monitoring, etc.)’.47
socio-economic and developmental goals. One could
argue that the code is of critical relevance to Africa as The African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty
more states and private sector entities pursue outer of Pelindaba), while not dealing with the means
space actions. or delivery of nuclear explosive devices per se, is
nonetheless relevant. The treaty, which enhances
For the African continent, there is a clear nexus between
both regional and global peace and security and
security and development. This is reflected in key AU
requires complete nuclear disarmament by African
frameworks and agendas, such as the African Peace
states, provides for the promotion of cooperation in the
and Security Architecture (APSA) and Agenda 2063, as
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.48
well as Africa’s implementation strategies with respect to
meeting the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals. The African Commission on Nuclear Energy (AFCONE),
established in line with Article 12 of the Treaty of
It is also reflected in a very practical way in many of the
Pelindaba, plays a key role in advancing the peaceful
conventions and treaties governing peace and security
application of nuclear science and technology in Africa. It
internationally. Each, when fully implemented, holds
also gives much-needed support to states parties to fully
significant security and socio-economic benefits, and is
benefit from nuclear science and technology applications
thus of crucial importance given Africa’s developmental
in the areas of health, agriculture and energy.49
context and imperatives.
Political and socio-economic benefits of
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
subscribing to the HCoC
(NPT), in Article IV, explicitly recognises the inalienable
right of non-nuclear armed states to pursue peaceful At first sight, some African states may be reluctant
uses of nuclear energy. The International Atomic Energy to subscribe to an additional international security
AFRICA REPORT 34 | 9

commitment such as the HCoC. These states may From an African perspective, one can be committed
fear having to dedicate scarce resources to an issue to regional, continental and international security
that is not prominent among their security priorities. while also believing that this must be done without
Nonetheless, the HCoC has several political and impeding the continued delivery of developmental
practical benefits. It allows African states to access benefits. Such benefits include nuclear, chemical and
information shared via a restricted Internet platform by biological material and related dual-use items such as
other subscribing states on their missile and launch launching technologies.
policy and on launches. It also gives them an opportunity
African countries realise the disruptive potential of
to voice concerns over matters in which they are usually
the threat from chemical, biological, radiological or
not involved.
nuclear (CBRN) weapons. This is exacerbated by the
continuous dissemination of missiles and their regular
The HCoC can be effective in use on the battlefield by non-state actors in particular.
Nonetheless, African states also recognise, especially
enhancing international cooperation
in the field of SALW, that transparency can be a positive
for space technologies
and useful tool to limit misunderstandings between
neighbours and create predictability regarding the
In addition, the HCoC provides benefits in terms of space evolution of military powers.
developments. As well as addressing ballistic missile
The HCoC, with its emphasis on confidence-
launches, the code covers space launches, given that
building and transparency measures, and its limited
the same technologies can be used for both applications
administrative requirements, can be effective in
(they have a ‘dual-use’ character). It recognises ‘that
enhancing international cooperation for the peaceful
states should not be excluded from utilising the benefits
application of space technologies.
of space for peaceful purposes’ but offers a set of
Development of space activities in Africa
principles and a framework for declaring space launches.
This can be of particular importance, as ‘developments A cursory scan of current developments in the space
in the field of space have increased in Africa in the past landscape worldwide shows that space is becoming
few years’.50 more accessible than ever before. An example of the
major structural changes taking place and the private
As noted in the Handbook of Space Security, the rapid
sector’s increasing involvement in the space arena
development of spatial activities, epitomised by the
took place in . A SpaceX Falcon rocket
emergence of ‘New Space’, means that an increasing
launched out of Florida carried 143 payloads, of all
number of countries and actors are depending on
shapes and sizes. Many of these belonged to start-up
space assets for civilian activities. This may be in
companies intent on delivering better broadband Internet
anticipating and mitigating natural disasters, improving
connections and monitoring any change on the planet
communication and navigation, studying disease
almost immediately.53
epidemiology, monitoring climate, assisting agricultural
activities or managing natural resources.51 The development of space agencies in various African
countries has been one of the most notable evolutions
By subscribing to the HCoC (and by encouraging
of the space landscape over recent years. Several space
others to subscribe to its principles), African states
research organisations are engaged in activities related
signal their readiness to further strengthen global non-
to outer space and space exploration in Africa. The
proliferation objectives without impacting or undermining
Nigerian Space Research and Development Agency is
their national security interests or their developmental
one of the first.
imperatives. This is because it is ‘not designed to impede
national space programmes or international co-operation The South African National Space Agency (SANSA),
in such programmes as long they do not contribute to established in 2010, is another key development for the
delivery systems for weapons of mass destruction’.52 continent. In 2018, a 10 kg satellite designed by South
10 AFRICAN STATES AND THE HAGUE CODE OF CONDUCT AGAINST BALLISTIC MISSILE PROLIFERATION

African engineers was put into orbit to monitor the The country’s minister of higher education, science and
country’s coastline and send home real-time information innovation, speaking at the test launch of the Phoenix-
about impending natural disasters, including fires, floods 1B Mk II-R hybrid rocket,58 stated that ‘the launch is
and drought.54 Others space agencies on the continent hugely significant for South African engineering and the
development of African satellite rocket launch capability’.
include the:
He added that ‘advancement and sustainability of the
• Algeria Space Agency
industry would play a key role in the implementation of
• Egypt Space Agency African Space Policy and Strategy’.59
In it was reported that SANSA, an entity
• Kenya Space Agency
of the DSI, had been awarded R4.47 billion to develop
• Zimbabwe National Geospatial and Space Agency
a Space Infrastructure Hub as part of the Sustainable
• Gabinete de Gestão do Programa Espacial Nacional Infrastructure Development Symposium (SIDS) initiative.
(Angola) Space infrastructure is seen as a national priority similar
to the Square Kilometre Array Project.
• Royal Center for Remote Sensing Space (Morocco)
The Space Infrastructure Hub will include a number of
• Ghana Space Science and Technology Centre
satellite builds (earth observation and space science
• Libya Center for Remote Sensing and Space Science missions), a new ground station, an expanded data
segment and a new data visualisation centre, and
• National Remote Sensing Center (Sudan)
activation of the satellite-based augmentation system
• Tunisia Space Agency over Southern Africa.60
• Agence Gabonaise d’Etudes et d’Observations
Spatiales (Gabon) According to a study by Space in Africa,
over US$3 billion has been spent on
• Ethiopian Space Science and Technology Institute55
space projects in Africa since 1998
Many of these have already had satellites launched on
their behalf. At present, these African countries do not
have domestic satellite launching capabilities. However, ‘The project will position space data as a tool for
the evolution of space systems, especially given their sustainable development, addressing government’s
substantial reduction in size and cost, may lead to national priorities and for commercial use in thematic
autonomous launch programmes in the mid to long term. areas including remote sensing, navigation, and space
sciences.’61 According to Dr Val Munsami, the CEO of
This is a renewed opportunity for African countries to
SANSA, South Africa is looking to build half a dozen
invest in this new field and grow their presence in the
satellites in the next three to four years, as well as the
space-launch sector.
ground infrastructure to support these missions.62
According to a study by Space in Africa, over
In Sudan in , the ministers of science
US$3 billion has been spent on space projects
and technology recommended that the AU Commission
in Africa since 1998. African investment in space
develop a space policy for the continent. This should
science and technology has grown, driven by
be in collaboration with relevant stakeholders and take
Earth observation development programmes and
into account remote sensing applications and satellite
the need for satellite telecommunications.56 South
imagery processing. Following the Khartoum Declaration,
Africa’s Department of Science and Innovation (DSI)
the AU Commission endorsed the establishment of a
envisages the space industry as ‘one of the key Working Group on Space Science tasked to develop
instruments in addressing South Africa’s national a draft African space policy and strategy. The group,
priorities of job creation, poverty eradication, comprising members of the African Leadership
resource management and rural development’.57 Conference and national space agencies, completed an
AFRICA REPORT 34 | 11

initial draft policy in . The final document Table 2 illustrate Africa’s firm stance on disarmament and
was adopted at the AU Summit in .63 non-proliferation issues.
In , during the 32nd ordinary session of the A slightly different picture emerges when analysing
AU Assembly, Egypt was endorsed as the official host of HCoC subscription on the continent by regional
the headquarters of the AU African Space Agency.64 The economic community (REC). For instance, disparities
AU’s Agenda 2063 proposes 2023 for the establishment exist between the REC with the lowest subscription rate
of the agency.65 – the Southern African Development Community (SADC)
– and the Economic Community of West African States
Together, the African space policy and the space agency
(ECOWAS), which has the highest participation rate in the
could improve dialogue within Africa, and between
HCoC. A total of 93% of ECOWAS member states have
Africa and other space agencies on other continents.
subscribed (see Table 2).
This could lead to greater African capacity and expertise
in earth observation, communication, navigation and
positioning, and astronomy. As stated by the economic A total of 93% of ECOWAS member states
development programme of the AU, the New Partnership
have subscribed to HCoC – the highest
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD);
participation rate on the continent
As a co-ordinated and integrated continental
initiative, the Agency aims to [be] responsive to
the social, economic, political and environmental Thirteen African UN member states have not yet
needs of the continent and to develop a subscribed to the HCoC: Algeria, Angola, Botswana,
regulatory framework that ensures that the Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Djibouti,
continent is a responsible and peaceful user of Egypt, Mauritius, Namibia, São Tomé and Príncipe, South
outer space.66 Sudan, Eswatini and Zimbabwe. It should, however, be
noted that 94% of the African states that took part in the
Implementation of the HCoC in Africa
UN General Assembly vote (A/RES/75/60) in December
High level of subscription 2020 voted in favour of the text. This showed increased
support from many of the regional non-subscribing
Though Africa has limited ballistic missile and space-
states.67 Many have also taken part in sub-regional
launch activities, there is a relatively high level of support
seminars held by the FRS.
for the HCoC among African states. As of ,
41 African UN member states have subscribed to the Algeria and Egypt remain the two African UN member
HCoC. This represents a subscription rate of 76% for the states to have systematically refrained from endorsing
continent – slightly higher than that of UN member states UN General Assembly resolutions on the HCoC. They
as a whole (73%). have done this either by abstaining (Algeria consistently
and Egypt since 2005) or by voting against them (Egypt
One African state has held the chair of the HCoC:
in 2004).68
Morocco, in 2006–2007. This position was used to
promote the subscription of African and Middle Eastern Among other arguments, non-subscribing states point
states to the code through bilateral engagement and to the HCoC’s limited scope. This, they claim, fails to
outreach in multilateral forums (Geneva, New York and address modernisation efforts by states with ballistic
Vienna in particular). As chair, Morocco emphasised the
missile capabilities and excludes cruise missiles. They
role of the code in creating a safe environment for all
also point to its genesis – in the context of the MTCR,
countries to benefit from the peaceful use of space.
with its restricted membership, rather than in an inclusive
With four of the five most recent HCoC subscribing forum.69 North Africa is also affected by regional tensions
states originating from Africa – Lesotho (2017), Togo in the Middle East, where several states possess ballistic
(2019), Equatorial Guinea and Somalia (2020) – the region missiles and which has a much lower subscription rate to
has now risen above the world average. Figure 1 and the HCoC.70
12 AFRICAN STATES AND THE HAGUE CODE OF CONDUCT AGAINST BALLISTIC MISSILE PROLIFERATION

Figure 1: Map of HCoC subscribing states and non-subscribing states in Africa
HCoC Subscribing States
HCoC Non-Subscribing States
Source: Emmanuelle Maitre and Lauriane Héau, The HCoC and African states, HCoC Issue Brief, Foundation for Strategic Research, 
While subscription to the HCoC in Africa has seen major the annual declaration and to ensure that the data is
improvements in the past few years, a closer look shows processed and forwarded to the HCoC’s Executive
that not all sub-regions have similar levels. Equally, the Secretariat or ICC.
implementation of the HCoC could be improved, namely,
Role of the AU and sub-regional organisations
the submission of annual declarations by African states.
This has been raised in regional and national seminars The AU and its affiliated sub-regional organisations
carried out by the FRS.
are increasingly active in tackling international security
One idea would be for states to nominate a relevant issues, and can therefore play a role in supporting an
point of contact to coordinate all information regarding instrument such as the code.
AFRICA REPORT 34 | 13

Table 2: African RECs’ subscription rates to the HCoC The Communiqué of the 837th AU Peace and Security
Council meeting on international disarmament, which
Regional Economic Community Subscription to
took place in , expresses ‘concerns over
the HCoC (%)
the continued impasse in global disarmament fora’.
Southern African Development 56
It also emphasises ‘the urgency for all members of
Community (SADC)
the international community to reaffirm multilateral
Economic Community of Central 73
cooperation in the field of disarmament and nuclear
African States (ECCAS)
non-proliferation and demonstrate the required sense of
Intergovernmental Authority on 75 responsibility and compromise to achieve progress’.71
Development (IGAD)
The AU Commission promotes its member states’
Common Market for Eastern and 71
compliance with international and regional disarmament
Southern Africa (COMESA)
and non-proliferation multilateral regimes. The AU
Community of Sahel-Saharan 88 also assists states in developing the required human
States (CEN-SAD) and technical capacities to implement such regimes.
There is general commitment by AU member states,
Arab Maghreb Union (AMU) 80
at the highest political level, on non-proliferation and
Economic Community of West 93
disarmament as enshrined in the AU’s Common
African States (ECOWAS)
African Defence and Security Policy (CADSP). The
East African Community (EAC) 83
CADSP guides the AU’s non-proliferation and
Source: Authors disarmament activities.
Source: Authors
14 AFRICAN STATES AND THE HAGUE CODE OF CONDUCT AGAINST BALLISTIC MISSILE PROLIFERATION
setov
fo
rebmuN
Figure 2: Votes of African countries to UNGA Resolutions in support of the HCoC

2004 2005 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Voted ‘Yes’ Voted ‘No’ Abstained

However, the challenge in subscribing to and implementing • Regional seminar on The Hague Code and ballistic
the code is the competing priorities that present a more proliferation for French-speaking African states in
immediate threat to the peace, security and stability of Lomé, Togo in 
states. The illicit proliferation of conventional arms and,
• Regional seminar on The Hague Code and ballistic
in particular, SALW is often considered a greater threat.72
proliferation for SADC member states in Livingstone,
Nonetheless, the AU Commission’s efforts underlines that,
Zambia in 
whereas conventional weapons pose an immediate threat,
WMD and their delivery systems, while considered latent, • Regional seminar on The Hague Code and ballistic
pose a grave danger precisely because of their capacity proliferation for IGAD member states in Djibouti in
for ‘mass destruction’.73 
In addition, three national workshops were held to
The AU promotes member states’ discuss the benefits of subscribing to the HCoC:
compliance with international and regional • In Algeria in 2014
disarmament and non-proliferation regimes • In Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire in 
• A virtual workshop with experts and representatives
Regional branches of international organisations can also from the government of South Sudan was held in
play an important role in the matter. The UN Regional 
Center for Peace and Disarmament in Africa (UNREC)
Key lessons learnt
has co-organised four seminars on the HCoC with the
FRS in several sub-regions in 2019. This programme has increased awareness of the
code among African states. It has also enhanced an
Established in 1986 by the UN Secretariat at the request
understanding of the challenges in implementing the
of the then Organization of African Unity (OAU), and
code and other non-proliferation norms and regimes.
headquartered in Lomé, Togo, UNREC is the African
Key lessons learnt from these series of meetings are
branch of the UN Office for Disarmament (UNODA). Its
listed below.
mandate is to ‘provide African states, at their request,
with assistance to support their initiatives and other Importance of outreach
efforts to maintain peace and security, arms limitation
There is still a lack of knowledge about the HCoC
and control as well as disarmament in the region’ (UNGA
among a number of subscribing and non-subscribing
Resolution A/66/5[Sect4] and A/RES/65/45).74
states.75 Moreover, while ballistic missile capabilities
Regional outreach are not common on the African continent, this could
change in the future. Developments are occurring in
Since 2008 the EU has designated the Paris-based FRS
the neighbouring Middle East, where ballistic missiles
to implement its decisions in support of the HCoC. The
proliferate and are regularly used on the battlefield. In
foundation has led efforts to create a dialogue on the
this regard, outreach efforts are key to enhance dialogue
code and ballistic proliferation more generally among
and expertise on the HCoC and its implementation, as
African states. Working in cooperation with UNREC
well as on the risks associated with ballistic missiles
and regional organisations, states, non-governmental
and their proliferation. Those events also tend to create
organisations (NGOs) and academic experts, several
momentum in national administrations, enabling further
events have been held. These have resulted in
discussions about the code, and gather regional actors
constructive and informative discussions on the code.
such as sub-regional organisations, thereby enabling
Examples include the:
follow-up events. Training also touches on other WMD
• Regional seminar on The Hague Code and ballistic instruments and links with SALW proliferation, thus
proliferation for African states in Cape Town, South building capacity on a number of related non-proliferation
Africa in (in collaboration with the ISS) and disarmament issues.
AFRICA REPORT 34 | 15

Relevance of WMD norms to prevent the international commitments is the amount of time needed
proliferation of SALW to fulfil obligations. Many are wary of instruments that
have extensive administrative burdens, such as progress
Participants identified common challenges to WMD, their
reports, national initiatives and measures to ensure
means of delivery and SALW proliferation. These include
implementation, and compulsory in-person meetings.
better border control and law enforcement, tracking of
Such countries assess the net benefits of joining an
sensitive imports and exports, and the need for greater
instrument against the cost and effort it may require in
awareness among officials at all levels. The processes are
terms of implementation. In this respect, the outreach
very different, especially in many African countries that
programme involved a representative of the ICC (Austria)
do not have sensitive industries on their soil. However, it
and of African states already subscribing. They were able
was agreed that by better enforcing WMD norms, African
to dispel fears of the administrative burden by pointing to
countries could improve the practices and standards
their individual experience. For subscribing states without
applied by security officials and therefore deepen a non-
missile or space launch programmes, filling out the
proliferation culture within administrative authorities. This is
annual declaration is the only task required and can be
an important precondition to ensure that the proliferation of
done using a standardised form. Because many states
SALW is prevented.
do not test ballistic missiles or launch space vehicles,
Strengthening the link between non-proliferation
they do not require a sophisticated structure to submit
and development
what may essentially be a ‘nil’ report.76
As with the other non-proliferation instruments, the
Simplifying and mutualising commitments
HCoC’s implementation faces stiff competition in the
Participants in the seminars expressed the difficulty
form of other social, political and economic challenges
of managing various commitments requiring reporting
considered to be of more immediate concern to the state
and follow up simultaneously. For instance, having
and human security. In light of this reality, African states
different points of contact for the implementation of
are increasingly considering non-proliferation initiatives
the 1540 Resolution, the Biological and Chemical
according to their ability to promote internal socio-
Weapons conventions, the UN Programme of Action
economic development. As mentioned above, several
on Small Arms and Light Weapons (UNPoA), and
instruments, such as the Biological and Chemical Weapon
the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) may create redundancy
conventions, the NPT and the CTBT, promote peaceful
and an inflation of administrative work for personnel.
activities. Therefore, they link the fight against proliferation
In addition, the segmentation of work and function
with the acquisition of civilian technologies for medical
requirements regarding the type of weapons
diagnosis and therapies and geological hazard mitigation.
addressed may lead to a tendency to see instruments
The seminars have been useful to evoke the link between
in isolation. This, in turn, could result in missed
the code and peaceful space exploration. Indeed, the
opportunities to mutualise implementation.
code has brought transparency to both missile testing
One of the objectives of the seminars was to present the
activities and space launches. As such, it removes
code in the context of other instruments, in particular
ambiguity regarding the nature of launches. Transparency
Resolution 1540, which also aims to limit the proliferation
about space-related activities is in the interest of all states
of ballistic missiles. The discussions explored ways in
and not only those currently deploying space launchers.
which commonalities between various non-proliferation
The code also has the potential to facilitate the integration
instruments could be reinforced. Participants thought
of national companies with international trade circuits,
about the bridges that could be built so that the
including companies working on potentially sensitive or
implementation of one instrument could have a positive
dual-use technologies.
impact on the implementation of another. They also
Fear of administrative burden
tried to identify common challenges and best practices
Because African countries tend to have limited that could be adopted on the ground to facilitate the
administrative resources and staff, a key concern related to implementation of non-proliferation policies in general.
16 AFRICAN STATES AND THE HAGUE CODE OF CONDUCT AGAINST BALLISTIC MISSILE PROLIFERATION

Keeping track of instruments and access proliferation and the need to ensure predictability in this
to information area.77 By joining the HCoC, a state signals its readiness
to strengthen global non-proliferation objectives
The multiplicity of initiatives and reporting mechanisms
without undermining its national security interests or
in recent years makes it more difficult to keep track of
developmental imperatives. Subscribing to the HCoC
all the instruments and their evolution. The problem is
shows a political commitment to the non-proliferation of
amplified by the frequent turnover of staff in ministries
ballistic missiles.
of foreign affairs, which results in the loss of institutional
memory. Some participants had little knowledge of the Importantly, some of the major producers of technologies
status of their country with regard to the HCoC. They required for the exploration and utilisation of space
did not know whether a point of contact had been may look at the non-proliferation credentials or profile
nominated; whether an annual declaration had been of a state before making a decision on allowing satellite
submitted; and, most critically, whether the state was technology exports. Subscribing to the HCoC may help
subscribing or not. in improving one’s credentials – although it should be
noted that this is still not a guarantee for condition of
This lack of knowledge prevents the effective sharing
supply, as decisions on allowing exports are a sovereign
of information with relevant stakeholders in subscribing
right of states.
states and in helping to fulfil each state’s obligations. As
the code does not have an implementing agency, it is In light of this, the AU should encourage its member
mostly other subscribing states that are charged with states to proactively engage with the HCoC’s ICC
sharing information and reinforcing the implementation (Executive Secretariat) and to support related UN
of the code. Austria, as the ICC, and the rotating chairs General Assembly resolutions. It could also effectively
involved in the seminars noted the necessity to better link up countries that may need information or assistance
reach out to African countries, promote the nomination with actors in a position to help them, such as UNREC.
of points of contact, and use the Internet platform
The code also covers peaceful space-launch activities,
dedicated to subscribing states. Finally, participants
which is of critical relevance to Africa as more states and
agreed that the participation of African states in the
private sector entities pursue initiatives in outer space.
annual regular meetings in Vienna should be improved.
The code is designed in such a way as to not impede
Language proficiency national space programmes or international cooperation
in these programmes – as long as they do not contribute
During the meeting organised in Lomé for francophone
to WMD delivery systems.
countries, the question of language was raised as a
potential difficulty. Some officials tasked with Although space programmes in Africa are at various
implementation, especially in defence or law enforcement stages of development, some already have operating
circles, may not be familiar with English-only platforms. satellites providing tangible benefits. These are
The organisation of a meeting in French was therefore in sectors such as human settlement monitoring,
greatly appreciated, as was the distribution of translated telecommunications, agriculture, environmental and
material on the code. The meeting led to a wider water management, soil assessment, disaster planning,
reflection on the best way to promote language meteorological data collection and global positioning
inclusiveness in the reporting system used by the code. system technology.
Similar analysis may emerge from Arabic, Spanish and
By subscribing to the HCoC, African states will receive
Portuguese-speaking countries in Africa.
advance notification of any ballistic missile and space-
launch vehicle flights. In addition, it will also allow
Conclusion
them not to fall behind in what is clearly a rapidly
Africa is not exempt from the threat posed by ballistic growing and developing space-launch landscape.
missiles, and all African states are within reach of African universities should also be encouraged to
ballistic missiles. This illustrates the risks posed by their develop curricula and offer academic courses on
AFRICA REPORT 34 | 17

space studies, including legal and policy frameworks • increase their participation in global discussions on
governing space activities and applications applicable how best to reduce the threat posed by missiles
both internationally and domestically. • integrate the code’s implementation activities into
their non-proliferation national strategies
All African states, except Algeria and Egypt, have voted
• regularly submit their policies on ballistic missiles and
at least once in favour of a UN General Assembly
peaceful-launch vehicles via the code’s mechanism
resolution supporting the code. The continent
of annual declarations
therefore overwhelmingly supports the HCoC. Formally
subscribing to the code is one way for African states, They could also consider following in Morocco’s steps
both individually and as part of the African community, by putting forward their candidacy to hold the rotating
to stay informed of developments in a field that presents
chair. This would give African voices a platform to
many opportunities for the private sector. At the same
express their priorities and perspectives within this
time it furthers their commitment to strengthening
multilateral framework.
the global non-proliferation regime and enhancing
• International organisations such as UNREC and
international and regional peace and security.
think tanks such as the FRS and ISS should make
Recommendations continued efforts to address African states’ lack of
information and need for training. At a national level
• The AU should continue to encourage its member
these countries are keen to create and strengthen
states to engage with the HCoC Executive
links with various officials in order to facilitate
Secretariat and to support related UN General
coordinated approaches to multilateral cooperation.
Assembly resolutions.
A lack of knowledge excludes developing countries
• RECs should encourage non-subscribing members from international debates. This highlights the
to contact the ICC located within the Austrian Foreign
need for capacity-building and awareness-raising
Ministry to discover the benefits of subscribing.
support to improve capacity for counter-proliferation
• Although the AU’s Agenda 2063 proposes 2023 as the activities. Awareness-raising exercises should involve
year for the establishment of the African Space Agency, regional and sub-regional organisations such as
mechanisms to enhance the sharing of information and the AU and SADC, for example. This will ensure the
experiences on civilian space activities in Africa should universalisation of the code and its implementation
be discussed in the meantime. through regional approaches.78
• African states that have not yet subscribed to the • Given that the private sector has largely overtaken
HCoC should consider doing so to reinforce their the role of state entities in developing and operating
support for global disarmament and non-proliferation launch facilities, the HCoC’s African subscribers
efforts, and to enhance the effectiveness of the code should lobby for further outreach activities to
as a confidence-building measure. In this respect, encourage a culture of transparency within the
2022 is a unique opportunity for such states to join the industry. This industry should also be included in
regime, as is the 20th anniversary of discussions at annual regular meetings.
the HCoC’s adoption.
• The AU should mobilise resources for the launching
• The Africa Group, through the AU Observer Mission,
and subsequent activities of the African Space Agency.
which coordinates Africa’s efforts on issues of peace
NEPAD should be supported by individual member
and security, should arrange briefings on the non-
states, RECs and other civic and private organisations
proliferation benefits and peaceful-use activities of
and companies in its effort to build capacity. As
subscribing to the HCoC so that a common African
articulated in the African Space Policy and Strategy,
position can be reached.
areas requiring support and capacity building include:
• African states that have subscribed to the HCoC earth observation; satellite communication, navigation
should: and positioning; and space science and astronomy.79
18 AFRICAN STATES AND THE HAGUE CODE OF CONDUCT AGAINST BALLISTIC MISSILE PROLIFERATION

Annex: Text of the HCoC c. Recognition that adherence to, and full compliance
with, international arms control, disarmament and
Preamble
non-proliferation norms help build confidence as to
The subscribing states: the peaceful intentions of states;
Reaffirming their commitment to the United Nations d. Recognition that participation in this Code is
Charter; voluntary and open to all States;
Stressing the role and responsibility of the United Nations e. Confirmation of their commitment to the United
in the field of international peace and security; Nations Declaration on International Cooperation
in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for
Recalling the widespread concern about the
the Benefit and in the Interest of All States taking
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
into particular Account the Needs of Developing
means of delivery;
Countries, adopted by the United Nations General
Recognizing the increasing regional and global
Assembly (Resolution 51/122 of 13 );
security challenges caused, inter alia, by the on-going
proliferation of Ballistic Missile systems capable of f. Recognition that states should not be excluded from
delivering weapons of mass destruction; utilising the benefits of space for peaceful purposes,
but that, in reaping such benefits and in conducting
Seeking to promote the security of all states by fostering
related cooperation, they must not contribute to the
mutual trust through the implementation of political and
proliferation of Ballistic Missiles capable of delivering
diplomatic measures;
weapons of mass destruction;
Having taken into account regional and national security
g. Recognition that Space Launch Vehicle
considerations;
programmes should not be used to conceal Ballistic
Believing that an International Code of Conduct against Missile programmes;
Ballistic Missile Proliferation will contribute to the process
h. Recognition of the necessity of appropriate
of strengthening existing national and international
transparency measures on Ballistic Missile
security arrangements and disarmament and non-
programmes and Space Launch Vehicle
proliferation objectives and mechanisms;
programmes in order to increase confidence and to
Recognising that subscribing States may wish to promote non-proliferation of Ballistic Missiles and
consider engaging in co- operative measures among Ballistic Missile technology;
themselves to this end;
3. Resolve to implement the following General Measures:
1. Adopt this International Code of Conduct against
a. To ratify, accede to or otherwise abide by:
Ballistic Missile Proliferation (hereinafter referred to as
“the Code”); • the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of
States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
2. Resolve to respect the following Principles:
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies
a. Recognition of the need comprehensively to prevent (1967),
and curb the proliferation of Ballistic Missile systems
• the Convention on International Liability for
capable of delivering weapons of mass destruction
Damage Caused by Space Objects (1972), and
and the need to continue pursuing appropriate
international endeavours, including through the • the Convention on Registration of Objects
Code; Launched into Outer Space (1975);
b. Recognition of the importance of strengthening, b. To curb and prevent the proliferation of Ballistic
and gaining wider adherence to, multilateral Missiles capable of delivering weapons of
disarmament and non-proliferation mechanisms; mass destruction, both at a global and regional
AFRICA REPORT 34 | 19

level, through multilateral, bilateral and national • make an annual declaration providing an
endeavours; outline of their Space Launch Vehicle policies
and land (test-) launch sites;
c To exercise maximum possible restraint in the
development, testing and deployment of Ballistic • provide annual information on the number
Missiles capable of delivering weapons of mass and generic class of Space Launch Vehicles
destruction, including, where possible, to reduce launched during the preceding year, as
national holdings of such missiles, in the interest of declared in conformity with the pre-launch
global and regional peace and security; notification mechanism referred to hereunder,
in tiret iii);
d. To exercise the necessary vigilance in the
consideration of assistance to Space Launch • consider, on a voluntary basis (including on
Vehicle programmes in any other country so as the degree of access permitted), inviting
to prevent contributing to delivery systems for international observers to their land (test-)
weapons of mass destruction, considering that launch sites;
such programmes may be used to conceal Ballistic
iii. With respect to their Ballistic Missile and Space
Missile programmes;
Launch Vehicle programmes to:
e. Not to contribute to, support or assist any Ballistic
• exchange pre-launch notifications on their
Missile programme in countries which might
Ballistic Missile and Space Launch Vehicle
be developing or acquiring weapons of mass
launches and test flights. These notifications
destruction in contravention of norms established
should include such information as the generic
by, and of those countries’ obligations under,
class of the Ballistic Missile or Space Launch
international disarmament and non- proliferation
Vehicle, the planned launch notification
treaties;
window, the launch area and the planned
4. Resolve to implement the following: direction;
a. Transparency measures as follows, with an b. Subscribing States could, as appropriate and on
appropriate and sufficient degree of detail a voluntary basis, develop bilateral or regional
to increase confidence and to promote non- transparency measures, in addition to those above.
proliferation of Ballistic Missiles capable of delivering
c Implementation of the above Confidence Building
weapons of mass destruction:
Measures does not serve as justification for the
i. With respect to Ballistic Missile programmes to: programmes to which these Confidence Building
Measures apply;
• make an annual declaration providing an
outline of their Ballistic Missile policies. 5. Organisational aspects Subscribing States
Examples of openness in such declarations determine to:
might be relevant information on Ballistic
a. Hold regular meetings, annually or as otherwise
Missile systems and land (test-) launch sites;
agreed by Subscribing States;
• provide annual information on the number and
b. Take all decisions, both substantive and procedural,
generic class of Ballistic Missiles launched
by a consensus of the Subscribing States present;
during the preceding year, as declared in
conformity with the pre-launch notification c. Use these meetings to define, review and further
mechanism referred to hereunder, in tiret iii); develop the workings of the Code, including in such
ways as:
ii With respect to expendable Space Launch
Vehicle programmes, and consistent with • establishing procedures regarding the
commercial and economic confidentiality exchange of notifications and other information
principles, to: in the framework of the Code;
20 AFRICAN STATES AND THE HAGUE CODE OF CONDUCT AGAINST BALLISTIC MISSILE PROLIFERATION

• establishing an appropriate mechanism for disseminating Confidence Building Measures
the voluntary resolution of questions arising submissions, receiving and announcing the
from national declarations, and/ or questions subscription of additional States, and other
pertaining to Ballistic Missile and/or Space tasks as agreed by Subscribing States;
Launch Vehicle programmes;
• and others as may be agreed by the
• naming of a Subscribing State to serve as an Subscribing States, including possible
immediate central contact for collecting and amendments to the Code.
Notes
1 This glossary is compiled from various sources, including, but 11 Non-exhaustive data gathered independently by FRS from open
not limited to, S Tulliu and T Schmalberger, Coming to terms with source.
security: A lexicon for arms control, disarmament and confidence- 12 United Nations (UN), General Assembly, adopting 66 First
building, Geneva: UN Institute for Disarmament Research, 2004;
Committee texts, calls on states to revitalize stalled disarmament
China Atomic Energy Press, Glossary of key nuclear terms, Beijing:
machinery, tackle chronic, emerging security threats, 7 December
China Atomic Energy Press, , 5; UN Panel of Governmental
2020, 
Experts, The issue of missiles in all its aspects: report of the
13 European External Action Service (EEAS), Non-proliferation:
Secretary General, New York: UN General Assembly, 2002; the
Statement by the spokesperson on the subscription of Saint
website of the UN Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA), https://
Vincent and the Grenadines and Equatorial Guinea to the Hague
 Encyclopaedia Britannica; the US
Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation, 4 February
Department of Defense’s Defense Technical Information Center;
2020, 
and various resolutions and decisions adopted by the UN General
homepage/73991/non-proliferation-statement-spokesperson-
Assembly.
subscription-saint-vincent-and-grenadines-anden; G7 France, G7
2 United Nations General Assembly, Resolution A/RES/32/84-B.
NPDG declaration on the countering of illicit and/or destabilising
3 In 2016, the ISS published an ISS Policy Brief on this topic. See: missile activities, 6 , 
 pdf/g7_npdg_declaration_on_the_countering_of_illicit_andor_
conduct-against-ballistic-missile-proliferation-relevance-to-african- destabilising_missile_activities_cle056c1c.pdf; Swiss Federal
states Department of Foreign Affairs, Switzerland seeks to build trust
4 See I Williams and S Shaikh, Lessons from Yemen’s missile war, between states to stop the proliferation of delivery systems for
Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), Missile Threat, weapons of mass destruction, 3 , 
11 , gov/en/start/documentation/media-releases.msg-id-79328.html
missile-war/; Reuters, Yemen’s Houthis attack Saudi oil heartland 14 A Gatopoulos, Project Force: Hypersonic weapons and the new
with drones, missiles, 8 , space race, Al Jazeera, 9 , 
article/us-yemen-security-saudi/yemens-houthis-fire-missiles- features/2021/3/9/project-force-hypersonic-weapons-and-the-new-
drones-at-saudi-oil-facilities-idUSKBN2AZ03F?il=0 space-race
5 S Shaikh and W Rumbaugh, The air and missile war in Nagorno- 15 Ibid.
Karabakh: Lessons for the future of strike and defense, CSIS, Missile
16 For a useful report explaining the technology behind hypersonic
Threat, 8 , 
weapon systems, current hypersonic developments and their likely
missile-war-in-nagorno-karabakh-lessons-for-the-future-of-strike-
impact on war fighting and strategy, see A Davies, Coming ready or
and-defense/
not, Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI), Strategic Insights, 23
6 JL Black-Branch and D Fleck, Nuclear non-proliferation in , 
international law – Volume III: Legal aspects of the use of nuclear hypersonic-weapons
energy for peaceful purposes, Den Haag: TMC Asser Press and
17 For a recent description of hypersonic weapons capabilities,
Springer, 2016.
see M McWhinney, The risks of hypersonic weapons, Project
7 Missile Technology Control Regime, Ploughshares, , 
html plpublications/the-risks-of-hypersonic-weapons/
8 K Brockmann, Controlling ballistic missile proliferation: Assessing 18 A Gatopoulos, Project Force: Hypersonic weapons and the new
complementarity between the HCoC, MTCR and UNSCR 1540, space race, Al Jazeera, 9 , 
Foundation for Strategic Research, HCoC Paper 7, , features/2021/3/9/project-force-hypersonic-weapons-and-the-new-
 space-race
Assessing-the-complementarity-vf.pdf
19 German UN Mission, Statement by Ambassador Friedrich Däuble,
9 1540 Committee, Permanent Representative of Germany to the United Nations
10 N Stott et al., The Hague Code of Conduct against ballistic missile in Vienna and other International Organisations, HCoC Annual
proliferation: Relevance to African states, Institute for Security Conference of States Signatories, 28–29 , 
Studies (ISS), Policy Brief 90, 29 , diplo.de/iow-de/aktuelles/-/2089842; UN, Hague Code of Conduct
org/research/policy-brief/the-hague-code-of-conduct-against- against ballistic missile proliferation welcomed in text approved by
ballistic-missile-proliferation-relevance-to-african-states Disarmament Committee, First Committee, GA/DIS/3286,
AFRICA REPORT 34 | 21

26 , ballistic-missile-proliferation-relevance-to-african-states; E Maitre
doc.htm. See also D Gormley, Missile contagion: cruise missile and L Héau, The HCoC and African States, FRS, HCoC Issue Brief,
proliferation and the threat to international security, Praeger Security , 
International, 2008; M Smith, The HCoC: current challenges and
37 Military Watch, Africa’s most dangerous offensive weapon: Algeria
future possibilities, HCoC Research Paper, 1, Paris: Fondation pour
confirms deployment of Iskander hypersonic ballistic missiles, 17
la Recherche Strategique (FRS), 2014; S Delory, E Maitre and J
, 
Masson, Opening HCoC to cruise missiles: A proposal to overcome
most-dangerous-offensive-weapon-algeria-confirms-deployment-of-
political hurdles, Hague Code of Conduct (HCoC), HCoC Paper 5,
iskander-hypersonic-ballistic-missiles
, 
to-cruise-missiles-a-proposal-to-overcome-political-hurdles/. 38 MENA consists of Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Oman, Qatar, Tunisia, Turkey, Saudi Arabia,
20 For a discussion of the technology behind cruise missiles, and how
Syria and Yemen.
the proliferation of cruise missiles has proceeded, see the report by
F Hoffman, Cruise missile proliferation: Trends, strategic implications, 39 T Erästö and PD Wezeman, Addressing missile threats in the Middle
and counterproliferation, London: European Leadership Network, East and North Africa, Stockholm International Peace Research
. Institute (SIPRI) Policy Brief, , 
stable/pdf/resrep27027.pdf
21 Ibid.
40 Ian Williams and Shaan Shaikh, The missile war in Yemen: a report
22 For a useful analysis of the debate around extending the HCoC’s
of the CSIS Missile Defense Project, CSIS, , https://
scope to include cruise missiles, see S Delory, E Maitre and J
missilethreat.csis.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/The-Missile-
Masson, Opening HCoC to cruise missiles: A proposal to overcome
War-in-Yemen_June-2020.pdf
political hurdles, Hague Code of Conduct (HCoC), HCoC Paper 5,
, 41 UN Security Council, Letter and report of the Experts on Yemen
to-cruise-missiles-a-proposal-to-overcome-political-hurdles/ Panel, prepared in accordance with paragraph 5 of Resolution 2204
(2015) dated 22 addressed to the President of the
23 C Weidlich and J Altmann, Unmanned aerial vehicles a challenge
Security Council, UN Security
to a WMD/DVs free zone in the Middle East, Policy Brief for the
Council, Letter and report prepared in accordance with paragraph
Middle East Conference on a WMD/DVs Free Zone, 8, Wiesbaden:
8 of Resolution 2511 (2020) dated 22 from the Panel
Academic Peace Orchestra Middle East, .
of Experts on Yemen addressed to the President of the Security
24 For an interesting analysis of the need to re-characterise missiles
Council, 
because ‘using outdated heuristics’ may result in one being ‘ill-
42 UN Security Council, Letter and report prepared in accordance with
equipped to confront current and anticipated threats’, see S Wilson
paragraph 8 of Resolution 2511 (2020) dated 22 from
and S Dunham, The missile threat: a taxonomy for moving beyond
the Panel of Experts on Yemen addressed to the President of the
ballistic, The Aerospace Corporation, 26 , https://
Security Council, 
aerospace.org/paper/missile-threat-taxonomy-moving-beyond-
ballistic 43 UN Office for Outer Space Affairs, Benefits of space: international
peace and security, 
25 Ibid.
space/international-peace-and-security.html
26 I Nakamitsu, Rapidly evolving missile threats require modern,
44 S Oyewole, The quest for space capabilities and military security
multilateral approaches, The Diplomat, 11 , https://
in Africa, South African Journal of International Affairs, 27: 2, 2020,
thediplomat.com/2020/09/rapidly-evolving-missile-threats-require-
modern-multilateral-approaches/ 147–172, 
20.1782258
27 Ibid.
45 Ibid.
28 Israel, for example, has a technologically advanced ballistic missile
46 FAO/IAEA Centre of Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture,
programme. See Arms Control Wonk, Unraveling the Israeli
NAFA success stories, 
ballistic missile program, Podcast, 4 , 
armscontrolwonk.com/archive/1210922/unraveling-the-israeli- ss.html
ballistic-missile-program/ 47 N Stott, A Broodryk (du Rand) and D Dye, Africa’s development
29 D Santoro and B Glosserman, Time for a reckoning: Missiles have and the threat of weapons of mass destruction: Update 3, Africa’s
flown under the radar for too long in Asia, London: International Policy Imperatives, 4, , 
Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), 1 . documents/3442/WMDPolicyBriefMarch2011.pdf
30 Ibid. 48 These 13 states have signed the treaty, but not ratified it: Central
African Republic, Cape Verde, Djibouti, Democratic Republic of
31 Interview with government official from South Africa, 25 .
Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Liberia, Morocco, Sierra Leone, Somalia, São
32 See UN Office for Disarmament Affairs, Missiles, Tomé & Príncipe and Uganda. South Sudan is yet to accede to the
un.org/disarmament/wmd/missiles/ treaty.
33 Interview with government official from South Africa, 25 . 49 JL Black-Branch and D Fleck, Nuclear non-proliferation in
34 K Kubiak, Missile control: it’s not rocket science, Policy Brief, international law – Volume III: Legal aspects of the use of nuclear
London: European Leadership Network, 27 . energy for peaceful purposes, Den Haag: TMC Asser Press and
Springer, 2016.
35 K Kubiak, Missile control: it’s not rocket science, Policy Brief,
50 K-U Schrogl (Ed.), Handbook of space security: Policies, applications
London: European Leadership Network, 27 .
and programs, New York: Springer, 2020.
36 For a brief overview of the history of missile development in Egypt,
51 Ibid.
Libya and South Africa, see N Stott et al., The Hague Code of
Conduct against ballistic missile proliferation: Relevance to African 52 N Stott et al., The Hague Code of Conduct against ballistic missile
states, ISS, Policy Brief 90, 29 , proliferation: Relevance to African states, Institute for Security
org/research/policy-brief/the-hague-code-of-conduct-against- Studies (ISS), Policy Brief 90, 29 , 
22 AFRICAN STATES AND THE HAGUE CODE OF CONDUCT AGAINST BALLISTIC MISSILE PROLIFERATION

org/research/policy-brief/the-hague-code-of-conduct-against- 65 T Aganaba-Jeanty, Creating greater inclusion for an African Space
ballistic-missile-proliferation-relevance-to-african-states Agency, Africa Portal, 16 , 
53 J Amos, SpaceX: World record number of satellites launched, BBC features/creating-greater-inclusion-african-space-agency/
News, 24 , 66 AU Development Agency, African Outer Space Programme, https://
environment-55775977 
54 K Jagmohan, SA sends Africa’s most advanced satellite to space, programme
Independent Online, 30 . Note also that the satellite
67 In 2018, 96% of African states that took part in the previous vote (A/
was launched from Russia as part of the Russian Soyuz Kanopus
RES/73/49 in ) voted in favour of the text. From 2004
mission and that it was created by engineers and scientists based at
to 2018, the UN General Assembly adopted eight resolutions in
the French/South African Institute of Technology, which is part of the
support of the HCoC: A/RES/59/91 (); A/RES/60/62
Cape Peninsula University of Technology.
(); A/RES/63/64 (); A/RES/65/73
55 See Space in Africa, List of space agencies in Africa, 
(); A/ RES/67/42 (); A/RES/69/44
africanews.space/list-of-space-agencies-in-africa/
(); A/RES/71/33 (); and A/RES/73/49
56 T Aganaba-Jeanty, Creating greater inclusion for an African Space (). On some occasions certain states did not
Agency, Africa Portal, 16 , participate in the vote, for technical reasons.
features/creating-greater-inclusion-african-space-agency/
68 In 2020, Algeria, Egypt and Madagascar abstained. See also N
57 DefenceWeb, UKZN hybrid rocket achieves record 18 km altitude in
Stott et al., The Hague Code of Conduct against ballistic missile
Overberg launch, 10 , 
proliferation: Relevance to African states, ISS, Policy Brief 90,
aerospace/aerospace-aerospace/ukzn-rocket-achieves-record-18-
29 , 
km-altitude-in-overberg-launch/
the-hague-code-of-conduct-against-ballistic-missile-proliferation-
58 The rocket was developed by university students with the assistance relevance-to-african-states
of Rheinmetall Denel Munition (RDM), which has substantial
69 Ibid.; M Smith, The HCoC: current challenges and future
experience in the manufacture of rocket motors, warheads and
launchers, including for FZ-90 rockets, as well as motors, warheads possibilities, HCoC Research Paper, 1, Paris: FRS, 2014.
and safety and arming devices for the Umkhonto, Ingwe, Mokopa 70 Interview with UNREC Director, 1 .
and A-Darter missiles.
71 The report and communiqué are posted on the website of the AU
59 DefenceWeb, UKZN hybrid rocket achieves record 18 km altitude in Peace and Security Department, 
Overberg launch, 10 , psc.837.comm.disarmament.nuclear.weapons.4.4.2019.pdf
aerospace/aerospace-aerospace/ukzn-rocket-achieves-record-18-
72 Interview with African Union official, 21 .
km-altitude-in-overberg-launch/
60 The Village News, SANSA awarded funding for new Space Hub, 73 Ibid.
9 , 74 UN Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, Who we
funding-for-new-space-hub/ are, 
61 K Helfrich and G Martin, SA looking at space launch capability, we-are
DefenceWeb, 17 , 75 Interview with UNREC director, 1 .
aerospace/aerospace-aerospace/sa-looking-at-space-launch-
76 Interview with government official from South Africa, 25 .
capability/
77 N Kasprzyk, Africa must pull its weight in stopping ballistic missile
62 S Wild, SA’s new R4.5bn space hub will build up to 6 new satellites,
proliferation, ISS Today, 22 , 
Business Insider SA, 27 , 
co.za/business/space-infrastructure-sa-six-satellites-2020-8 iss-today/africa-must-pull-its-weight-in-stopping-ballistic-missile-
proliferation
63 T Aganaba-Jeanty, Creating greater inclusion for an African Space
Agency, Africa Portal, 16 , 78 Interview with government official from Madagascar, 23 .
features/creating-greater-inclusion-african-space-agency/ 79 AU Development Agency, African Outer Space Programme, https://
64 AU, Statute of the African Space Agency, 
statute-african-space-agency programme
AFRICA REPORT 34 | 23

About the authors
Gugu Dube, at the time of writing, was a researcher in the ENACT transnational organised
crime programme at the ISS. She was a consultant to the 2013 UN Group of Governmental
Experts for the UN Register of Conventional Arms.
Lauriane Héau is the Foundation for Strategic Research’s (FRS) European projects manager.
She previously worked as a research assistant at the Clingendael Institute, and for the Group
for Research and Information on Peace and Security.
Emmanuelle Maitre is a research fellow at the FRS. Previously, she worked as a research
assistant at the Brookings Institution. She has an MA in public affairs from Sciences Po
in Paris.
Noel Stott is a Senior Researcher at the Verification Research, Training and Information Centre
(VERTIC) based in London. From to , Noel was employed by the ISS.
About the ISS
The Institute for Security Studies (ISS) partners to build knowledge and skills that secure Africa’s
future. The ISS is an African non-profit with offices in South Africa, Kenya, Ethiopia and Senegal.
Using its networks and influence, the ISS provides timely and credible policy research, practical
training and technical assistance to governments and civil society.
About the Foundation for Strategic Research
The Foundation for Strategic Research (FRS) is a non-profit, independent think tank based in France
that conducts research on security issues and advises decision makers through policy-oriented
studies and by fostering debate on strategic issues. Since 2012, FRS has been the designated
implementing agency for the European Union’s Council Decisions in support of The Hague Code of
Conduct (most recently 2017/2370/CFSP).
Development partners
The ISS is grateful for support from the members of the ISS Partnership Forum: the Hanns
Seidel Foundation, the European Union, the Open Society Foundations and the governments of
Canada, Denmark, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the USA.
© 2021, Institute for Security Studies
Copyright in the volume as a whole is vested in the Institute for Security Studies and the authors, and
no part may be reproduced in whole or in part without the express permission, in writing, of both the
authors and the publishers.
ISSN 2617-7749 Print
ISSN 2617-7757 Digital
The opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the ISS, its trustees, members of the
Advisory Council or donors. Authors contribute to ISS publications in their personal capacity.
Cover image: © Amelia Broodryk/ISS, adapted from Army Recognition
9 772617 775008