A REPORT OF
THE CSIS
AEROSPACE
SECURITY
PROJECT
S P A C E
T H R E A T
A S S E S S M E N T
2 0 2 5
Authors
CLAYTON SWOPE
KARI A. BINGEN
MAKENA YOUNG
KENDRA LAFAVE

S P A C E
T H R E A T
A S S E S S M E N T
2 0 2 5
Authors
CLAYTON SWOPE
KARI A. BINGEN
MAKENA YOUNG
KENDRA LAFAVE
A REPORT OF THE
CSIS AEROSPACE SECURITY PROJECT

ABOUT CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy
research organization dedicated to advancing practical ideas to address the world’s
greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding
former U.S. senator Sam Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who
has served as president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set
of values—nonpartisanship, independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary
scholarship, integrity and professionalism, and talent development. CSIS’s values work
in concert toward the goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their re-
search, analysis, and recommendations. We organize conferences, publish, lecture, and
make media appearances that aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and salience
of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policy-
makers and the thinking of key influencers. We work toward a vision of a safer and more
prosperous world.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein
should be understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2025 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
All rights reserved.
ABOUT ASP
The Aerospace Security Project (ASP) is a trusted resource for policymakers, offering
insightful thoughts and in-depth analyses on policy issues, operational concepts, tech-
nology trends, and economic drivers in the space and air domains. Our mission is to
educate and inform policymakers and the public, conduct independent research and
analysis, and convene experts with broad perspectives to advance creative and practical
solutions that address the security challenges facing the United States and our allies
and partners. ASP also fosters the next generation of scholars in national security space
and air power policy through fellowship and internship opportunities.
Part of the Defense and Security Department at CSIS, Aerospace Security is led by Senior
Fellow Kari A. Bingen and includes a distinguished group of expert affiliates spanning
national security, civilian, commercial, and international aerospace issues.
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
202-887-0200 | 
II SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report is made possible by general support to CSIS. No direct sponsorship contributed
to this report.
ASP would like to thank Dane Brumm, Jenny Christen, Hilary Cohen, Jim Cooper, Karen
Cox, Hector Falcon, Benoit Figuet, Alyson Fredette-Graves, John Gass, Max Geissbuhler,
Greg Gillinger, Bob Hall, Jason Lapadula, Mairead Levison, Kate Maliga, Darren McKnight,
Erin Miller, Raphael Monstein, Nate Notargiacomo, Madeline Reto, Audrey Schaffer, Jade
Stanton, Mallory Stewart, and Martin Strohmeier for contributing their time, energies, and
resources to help produce this year’s report. Thanks also to the operators of several private
social media accounts for their prompt and thorough coverage of space safety events
during the past year, including Jim Shell, COMSPOC, HEO, Integrity ISR, LeoLabs, LSAS
Tec, s2a systems, and Slingshot Aerospace, which greatly benefited the report’s authors.
Additionally, the authors would like to thank the CSIS publications team, Hunter Hallman,
Phillip Meylan, Kelsey Hartman, and Madison Bruno, CSIS designers Sabina Huang and
Lauren Bailey, and our external copyeditor, Katherine Stark. This annual report would not
be possible without their thorough, responsive, and diligent work.
Special thanks also to ASP interns Ioannis Nikas, Anna Kelly, and Mia Thiagarajan for
their work on the report, assisting with research and analysis of datasets. Finally, thanks
to Victoria Samson and Laetitia Cesari for their partnership and willingness to continue
collaboration with ASP on tracking and assessing global counterspace threats.
III

CONTENTS
1 INTRODUCTION
3 COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
6 CHINA
10 RUSSIA
15 OTHERS
15 Iran
16 North Korea
16 India
16 Israel
16 Europe
17 FEATURED ANALYSIS
17 GPS Jamming and Spoofing
22 The Drip-Drip of Cyber Attacks
24 RPOs: Benevolent or Cruel Intentions
27 Points of Instability: Unintentional Space Debris Generation
29 The Coming Collision of Commercial and Counterspace
30 WHAT TO WATCH
34 CONCLUSION
36 ABOUT THE AUTHORS
37 ENDNOTES
IV SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

INTRODUCTION
ELCOME TO THE 2025 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT by the
W
Aerospace Security Project at the Center for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS). This resource for policymakers
and the public leverages open-source information to assess key
developments in foreign counterspace weapons. Drawing on eight years of
collected data and analyses, this series describes trends in the development,
testing, and use of counterspace weapons and enables readers to develop a
deeper understanding of threats to U.S. national security interests in space.
Since the publication of the 2024 Space Threat Assessment, there have been
few headline-grabbing counterspace developments. No nation was known
to have tested or used kinetic anti-satellite missiles, commonly called direct
ascent anti-satellite (DA ASAT) weapons. There was no public indication that
any nation tested or used counterspace weapons such as laser dazzlers or
directed energy weapons. While Russia’s pursuit of a nuclear anti-satellite
capability topped the news last year, no information has publicly surfaced
revealing how close Russia might be to launching this system, though the
United States and its international partners remain concerned that Russia
could decide to deploy such a weapon.1
But a closer look reveals that the past year, from the perspective of counter-
space developments, has been anything but uneventful. Rather than entirely
new developments, the past year mostly witnessed a continuation of the
worrisome trends discussed in prior reports, notably widespread jamming
and spoofing of GPS signals in and around conflict zones, including near and
in Russia and throughout the Middle East.2 Chinese and Russian satellites in
both low Earth orbit (LEO) and geostationary Earth orbit (GEO) continue to
display more and more advanced maneuvering capabilities, demonstrating
operator proficiency and tactics, techniques, and procedures that can be
used for space warfighting and alarming U.S. and allied officials.3 Finally,
U.S. companies providing a commercial space service to government users,
particularly defense and military ones, remain squarely in the crosshairs of
nation states, with Russia in particular vocal about its intention to consider
commercial assets used by the U.S. military as legitimate targets.4
This past year also saw the growth of commercial and military dual-use
technologies that could be modified to serve a counterspace purpose. Com-
panies working on in-space servicing and debris removal reached important
milestones, demonstrating their ability to conduct rendezvous, proximity, and
docking operations, techniques that could be used by anti-satellite weapons.
The behaviors of commercial satellites pursuing in-space servicing, inspection,
debris removal, and other business use cases could easily be confused for
counterspace operations, creating risks of misunderstandings and possibly
unintended escalations in a crisis.
Though this report has not historically covered U.S. counterspace capabilities,
it would be difficult to assess the global counterspace landscape without noting
the evolving U.S. posture toward counterspace weapons and operations. In
response to China’s rapid buildup of military space capabilities in all orbital
regimes, U.S. Space Force senior leaders have repeatedly emphasized over
the last year that the United States is prepared to conduct offensive and de-
fensive space operations and intends to field more counterspace capabilities.5
This report also does not typically address unintentional debris creation in
1 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

orbit, but this year the assessment includes a discussion on the latent risks
to space operations posed by accidental debris-causing events.
Finally, a common thread throughout this year’s report is how space fits into
the future of warfare. The normalization of space as a military operational
domain and its integral role in joint operations mean that space is fair game
during conflict. Warfighting will happen in, through, and from space, mean-
ing that a future peer-on-peer conflict may very well bring disruption and
destruction to space on the same scale that it would bring to other places
closer to Earth. Counterspace threats should be viewed within the broader
context of efforts by adversaries to degrade the ability of the United States
and its allies to fight and win a war and disrupt the economy and day-to-day
life on Earth, not merely as efforts to degrade a space capability. Overall,
space is likely becoming a more dangerous place and woven ever more into
both peacetime and wartime activities.

COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
COUNTERSPACE
WEAPONS
HIS CHAPTER PROVIDES AN OVERVIEW of different types of coun-
T
terspace weapons and a useful taxonomy to classify and differentiate
them. Counterspace weapons vary significantly in the technical
methods they use to create effects against space systems, in how
they are deployed, and in the level of technology and resources needed for
their development and fielding. For the purposes of this report, counterspace
weapons are organized into four main categories: kinetic, non-kinetic, and
electronic weapons and cyber operations.
Kinetic weapons are defined here as those using physical, material means
such as bombs, bullets, missiles, and other munitions. All kinetic weapons are
Illustration considered as meant to destroy or damage. This category includes weapons
A ballistic missile can be used as that target spacecraft, such as DA ASAT missiles outfitted with conventional
a kinetic counterspace weapon. warheads, and projectile attacks launched from one on-orbit satellite to
another. It also includes weapons that target terrestrial space infrastructure,
such as ground stations, launch sites, rocket and satellite factories, and space
monitoring infrastructure. Orbital grappling satellites are another form of
kinetic weapon. Such a grappler physically handles a target spacecraft to do
it harm or attaches itself to a spacecraft and maneuvers it to another location.
Non-kinetic weapons are defined as those that use radiated energy to destroy,
damage, or interfere with space systems. This energy can be directed, such as
with laser or microwave energy, or distributed through nuclear detonations
or electromagnetic pulse (EMP) events. High-powered lasers and dazzlers
and high-powered microwave ASAT systems are included in this category.
3 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
Table 1
COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS OF CHINA, RUSSIA, IRAN, AND NORTH
KOREA AS OF 
Cyber
Kinetic Weapons Non-Kinetic Weapons Electronic Weapons
Operations
Terrestrial
Direct-Ascent Nuclear Directed
Infrastructure Orbital ASAT Jamming Spoofing
ASAT Detonation Energy
Attack
China Yes Yes Maybe Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Russia Yes Yes Probably Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Iran Yes No No No No Yes Yes Yes
North
Yes No No Yes No Yes Yes Yes
Korea
csis aerospace security project research and analysis
Dazzlers are intended to temporarily blind The final category, cyber operations, in- to target space systems and verify attack
an optical satellite, although they may also cludes any offensive activity in cyberspace success.2 In order to attack a satellite on-or-
unintentionally damage targeted satellites. that targets space systems, including ground bit, an aggressor would need to know its
Nuclear detonations in the upper atmos- infrastructure, satellite terminals, space- precise location and where it is moving.
phere or space are included in this category ports, and spacecraft. Cyber operations can The aggressor will also want accurate battle
because these attacks primarily damage destroy or permanently disable a targeted damage assessments. For example, if a sat-
electronics through the resulting EMP and system, although they can also be used to ellite is targeted through a cyberattack that
lingering radiation that gets trapped by temporarily disrupt it or to conduct espio- allows the attacker to disable its controls,
Earth’s magnetic field. Other nonnuclear nage, including gaining access to proprietary SSA or intelligence insights will be necessary
weapons that create EMP events in space or sensitive technical information on a target to determine if the attack was successful
would also be included in this category. network. A network exploitation can be a by monitoring the satellite’s movements
beachhead for any of these purposes, as a and network activity. Although this report
Electronic weapons use the electromagnetic
cyber operation’s intent is often ambiguous.1 tracks counterspace weapons trends, it is
spectrum to deny or interfere with a target’s
important to acknowledge the critical data
ability to use space services and capabilities. Many of these counterspace capabilities
needed to develop and employ many of
These weapons cannot destroy; they only depend on robust space situational aware-
these weapons against their targets.
ness (SSA) and intelligence information from
impart temporary effects for as long as the
both terrestrial and space-based platforms
electronic system engages its target. This
category includes jamming and spoofing of
global navigation satellite system (GNSS)
and satellite communications (SATCOM)
signals. Spoofing, sometimes also called
signal hijacking, is a form of electronic
attack where an attacker tricks a receiver
into believing a fake signal produced by
the attacker is the real signal it is trying to
receive. Also included in this category are
any electronic attacks to jam space-based
radar and the reception of radio frequency
(RF) signals by the user of a satellite service Illustration
on Earth, the satellite itself, or the ground Uplink jamming is a form of
station of a space system. electronic counterspace attack. Transmitter Truck-Mounted Jammer Receiver Receiver Truck-Mounted Jammer Receiver
DOWNLINK JAMMER
4 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

Table 2
TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
Cyber
Kinetic Weapons Non-kinetic Weapons Electronic Weapons
Operations
Terrestrial
Direct-Ascent Nuclear Directed
Infrastructure Orbital ASAT Jamming Spoofing
ASAT Detonations Energy
Attack
Ground- Ground- Ground- Ground-
to-Ground; to-Ground; to-Ground; to-Ground;
Origin to Ground-to- Ground-to-
Space-to-Space Ground-to- Ground-to- Ground-to- Ground-to- N/A
Destination Ground Space
Space; Space- Space; Space- Space; Space- Space; Space-
to-Space to-Space to-Space to-Space
Varies, Varies,
Permanence of
Permanent Permanent Permanent Permanent dependent on Not Permanent Not Permanent dependent on
Attack
mode of attack mode of attack
Widespread, Limited to Limited and Limited and Limited and Limited to
Widespread,
Scale of Attack if node sup- Widespread, Regional, Regional, Regional, Widespread,
if orbital debris Widespread
Effects ports multiple dependent on dependent on dependent on dependent on dependent on
creation
satellites mode of attack mode of attack mode of attack mode of attack mode of attack
Variable Can be attrib- Modest attribu- Modest attribu-
Limited or
Attributability of attribution, Launch site can uted by track- Launch site can Limited attri- tion depending tion depending
uncertain attri-
Attack depending on be attributed ing previously be attributed bution on mode of on mode of
bution
mode of attack known orbit attack attack
Requires Space
No Yes Yes No No No No No
Launch Capability
Requires Space
Domain Aware- No Yes Yes No Yes No No No
ness
csis aerospace security project research and analysis
Illustration A laser is an exam-
ple of a non-kinetic counter-
space weapon.

CHINA
CHINA
EIJING’S ACTIONS OVER THE LAST YEAR point to an ever-increasing
B
emphasis by the People’s Republic of China (PRC) on the military use
of space. Since the publication of the last threat report, continuing
past trends, China demonstrated dual-use, highly maneuverable
satellites in orbit and the tendency to maneuver and use fuel seemingly
without regret. These activities point to growing operator proficiency and
maturing space tactics, techniques, and procedures. Beijing also reorganized
its armed forces, creating a specific force oriented around space operations.
Though China has continued its aggressive cyber operations, few seem to
specifically target space systems. Additionally, PRC officials and academics
are more willing to publicly criticize U.S. behaviors in space, pointing to
examples of where they claim the United States engages in the same space
activities for which it criticizes China.1
Over the last year, the most concerning development to U.S. observers should
be the launch and operation of increasingly advanced Chinese satellites.
China continues to launch and operate highly maneuverable satellites,
demonstrating an advanced level of technological and operational acumen
that, if not already deployed for such purposes, could enable a formidable
on-orbit counterspace arsenal. Through the use of these satellites, Chinese
operators are gaining experience in developing tactics and procedures that
can be used for space warfighting, to include both defensive and offensive
advanced space operations. Additionally, China is dramatically increasing its
space launch capability, with several commercial providers coming online in
the next few years.2 Each year, the PRC is launching more and more satellites,
making characterization of those satellites more challenging year after year.3
6 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

Continuing trends described in prior editions the sophistication and frequency of Chinese
of Space Threat Assessment, U.S. experts satellite maneuvers, was provided by SSA
and military officials expressed concerns companies sharing their observations on
in about unusual and po- social media platforms. Integrity ISR, a
tentially threatening behaviors of Chinese space and intelligence, surveillance, and
satellites in GEO.4 According to an expert at CHINA reconnaissance (ISR) training company,
ExoAnalytic, these behaviors demonstrate and LSAS Tec, a company providing support
China’s proficiency in conducting sophisti- CONTINUES services for space operations, released a
cated satellite maneuvering and willingness video on YouTube documenting several TJS-
to expend fuel to conduct rapid maneuvers.5 TO LAUNCH 10 maneuvers in that eventually
To emphasize these points, the expert also brought the satellite to within 25 kilometers
AND OPERATE
noted that the Chinese satellite TJS-2 was (km) of another Chinese satellite in GEO,
tracked during the last year maneuvering TJS-3, on May 16, 2024.7
HIGHLY
at 44 mete rs per second, which is unusually In , China launched SJ-25,
high and uses significantly more fuel than MANEUVERABLE which official sources claim will be used
the more standard range of 0.5–1 meters per for testing satellite fuel replenishment
second for repositioning satellites in GEO.6 SATELLITES, and life extension service technologies.8
The expert further described how another After launch, according to analysis from
satellite, TJS-4, maneuvered to position itself [WHICH] COULD COMSPOC and Integrity ISR, SJ-25 entered
between a U.S. space surveillance satellite a coplanar orbit with SJ-21, a satellite which
ENABLE A
and the Sun, creating a disadvantageous in 2022 attached to and moved a defunct
geometry for imaging the Chinese satellite. Beidou satellite from its position in GEO
FORMIDABLE
to a graveyard orbit, suggesting SJ-25
The following three Chinese satellite pro-
may intend to refuel SJ-21.9 Additionally,
grams usually feature prominently in each ON-ORBIT
in , suspected Chinese GEO
edition of Space Threat Assessment, and
this year is no exception. There is often little COUNTERSPACE inspector satellite TJS-3 moved to within
one degree latitude of SJ-21, possibly
public information about these spacecraft
ARSENAL. suggesting a supporting role for TJS-3 in
capabilities or specific missions, outside of
an upcoming refueling attempt.1011
official Chinese government statements,
which are almost certainly designed to con- On two occasions in the last year, Integrity
ceal the true purposes of military satellites. ISR published an analysis on the behaviors
Most public information about the activities of SY-12-01 and SY-12-02, a pair of satellites
of Chinese satellites in GEO, documenting launched in whose purpose
Table 3
CHINESE SATELLITE SERIES THAT OFTEN EXHIBIT RPOS
English Satellites Entered
Program Orbit Purpose
Translation11 into Operation*
suspected military early
“communication
Tongxin Jishu Shiyan (TJS) 17 GEO warning and signals
technology test”
intelligence missions
LEO, GEO, Sun-
“best practice” or “put Synchronous Orbit (SSO), various experimental
Shijian (SJ) 43
into practice” and Highly Elliptical Orbit missions
(HEO)
“experiment,” “pilot,” or various experimental
Shiyan (SY) 45 LEO, GEO, SSO, and HEO
“trial” missions
*includes operational, decayed, and failed missions
csis aerospace security project research and analysis, current as of april 18, 2025

CHINA
is described by Chinese media as “spatial
environment exploration and related tech-
nical tests.”12 At the time of publication for
last year’s Space Threat Assessment, these
satellites had been drifting in opposite
directions across the entire GEO belt. They
continued to drift this year. According to
the Integrity ISR assessments, in Novem-
ber 2024, SY-12-02 reached its turnaround
point of 17.3 degrees east (over central Eu-
rope) and began a new eastward journey.13
In , SY-12-01 reached its
turnaround point of 178.9 degrees east
(over the Pacific Ocean) and began a new
westward journey.14
In addition to its progress in GEO, over
Test satellite Shijian-25 is sent into maneuvers over several months in late 2024
the last year China has demonstrated the
space on January 7, 2025. by LDPE-3A, a U.S. satellite characterized
ability to execute increasingly complicated
as a “freight train” for experiments to GEO,
spacecraft maneuvering in LEO. In May photo by du xinxin/getty images
that placed it about 25 km from and with
2024, the Shenlong space plane released,
favorable lighting conditions for viewing
maneuvered with, and possibly captured
Chinese satellite SJ-23, which in this case
an object before returning to Earth in Sep-
tember 2024, after having been in orbit for also monitoring and assessing U.S. space- did not maneuver in response.23 China is
over 260 days, according to analysis by based SSA capabilities and is more willing to likely increasingly willing to publicly discuss
Slingshot Aerospace.15 The space plane had publicize the results of its assessments.20 The observed GSSAP behaviors to influence
previously released six other space objects CASI report details the increasing number of international opinions, probably aiming
soon after it launched in .16 Chinese academic publications that analyze to portray the United States as having a
In , three satellites believed to the patterns of life of U.S. Geosynchronous double standard—engaging in the same
be technology demonstrators—SY-24C-01, Space Situational Awareness Program (GS- activities for which it criticizes China as
SY-24C-02, and SY-24C-03—conducted cork- SAP) satellites, including publicly naming being unsafe and unprofessional.
screw maneuvers around SJ-6-05B, believed the satellites most visited by GSSAP. China There is little public information on new
to be another technology demonstrator likely obtains data on close approaches Chinese cyber or electronic warfare activi-
with potential signals collection capabili- from its own sensors, the Russian-led Inter- ties since the last Space Threat Assessment.
ty, as described in an analysis by Integrity national Scientific Optical Network (ISON), During the last year, experts expressed
ISR.17 Additionally, in March and , and publicly available information from U.S. concerns about the impacts of Chinese-at-
SY-24C-03 and SJ-6-05A conducted rendez- and European SSA databases.21 The PRC’s tributed Salt Typhoon cyber operations on
vous and proximity operations (RPO), with SSA capabilities rely on domestic ground- space infrastructure.24 More detailed infor-
each satellite maneuvering and the closest based infrastructure, foreign datasets, and mation was officially released on another
approach distance less than 1 km—essen- at least 10 spacecraft.22 PRC state-sponsored cyber group targeting
tially face-to-face for satellites traveling From an operational standpoint, China’s satellite services and other sectors, Volt Ty-
at around 17,000 mph—on April 22, 2024, attention to the patterns of life of U.S. space- phoon, including descriptions of the actor’s
according to analysis by s2a solutions, a craft has likely influenced how Chinese satel- techniques and recommended remedies.25
Swiss company.18 In , a senior
lites respond when approached by suspect- Additionally, public threat reporting from
Space Force official characterized these
ed U.S. space surveillance satellites. Notable indicated that an unknown
behaviors as “dogfighting” in space.19
examples of such behavior in GEO include cyber threat actor tied to Chinese-speaking
While continuing to advance its abilities how SY-12-01 and SY-12-02 responded to groups has focused on supply chains for
to conduct sophisticated maneuvering in the approach of USA 270 in late 2023 and defense-related industries, with a particular
both LEO and GEO, according to a study TJS-4 behaviors described by ExoAnalytic focus on drone manufacturers, in Taiwan.26
released by the China Aerospace Studies and noted earlier in this section. Integrity ISR It would be reasonable to assume these
Institute (CASI) in , China is and LSAS Tec published information about Chinese-speaking groups were affiliated in
8 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

some way with China. It has been mostly that emerges from these articles is that
quiet on the electronic warfare front, as China’s counterspace capabilities will be
there were only sporadic reports of Chinese CHINA IS LIKELY less effective against a U.S. satellite con-
jamming or spoofing of GPS or other satellite stellation composed of a mix of proliferated
signals over the last year.27 Though there INCREASINGLY constellations.”33
is not much cyber or jamming news this
In early 2025 it was reported that Chinese
WILLING TO
past year, based on findings presented in
scientists have run artificial intelligence-cre-
prior editions of Space Threat Assessment,
PUBLICLY ated simulations of targeted attacks on
China undoubtedly maintains advanced
Starlink satellites to disrupt services.34 A
cyber and electronic warfare capabilities
DISCUSS Nanjing University of Aeronautics and As-
that can affect space systems.28
tronautics team published a study that
A reorganization of China’s armed forces OBSERVED alleges 99 Chinese satellites could disrupt
during the last year points to a focus on 1,400 Starlink satellites within a 12-hour pe-
GSSAP
warfighting in space, as well as in cyberspace riod, targeting not individual satellites, but
and the information operations domain, large sections of the Starlink constellation.35
BEHAVIORS
that cuts across and supports the service Inspired by how whales hunt in teams and
branches. Specifically, in , China direct large swaths of fish into their mouths
TO INFLUENCE
announced the reorganization of the Peo- in open water, the study describes Chinese
ple’s Liberation Army (PLA) into four servic- satellites “hunting” Starlink satellites by
INTERNATIONAL
es—the PLA Ground Force, Navy, Air Force, using directed-energy weapons, such as
and Rocket Force—and four cross-cutting OPINIONS. lasers and microwaves. Notably, Nanjing
arms—the PLA Aerospace Force, Cyberspace University has been called one of the “seven
Force, Information Support Force, and Joint sons” of China’s national defense, founded
Logistics Support Force.29 Though the Joint by the Chinese Ministry of National Defense
Logistics Support Force has existed since and sanctioned by the United States and
same wide range of both fixed and mobile
2016, the Aerospace Force, Cyberspace Taiwan for its involvement in developing
electronic warfare systems that can inter-
Force, and Information Support Force are military technologies.36
fere with satellite communications links,
new organizations, created by dividing up
GNSS signals, and synthetic aperture radar
the responsibilities of the now defunct Stra-
(SAR) intelligence-gathering satellites, as
tegic Support Force, which had previously
described in the 2024 report.
handled space-based intelligence, recon-
naissance, electronic countermeasures, Over the past year, it has also become clear
signals intelligence, information warfare, that Beijing assesses a military threat posed
and communications. The Aerospace Force by LEO systems like Starlink. Researchers at
is responsible for managing all PLA space- East China Normal University and the PLA-af-
based capabilities, including counterspace filiated National University of Defense Tech-
weapons, and PLA space launch facilities. nology have written about the military and
strategic implications of Starlink satellites,
Throughout the last year, Chinese scien-
arguing that SpaceX’s relationship with the
tists published several research papers on
military technologies, including high-pow- U.S. government may have lasting security
ered microwave and laser technologies, implications. Three articles, published in
that—though not described as counterspace Chinese journals focused on intelligence
weapons in the papers—could be applied and international security studies, outline
to counterspace weapons developments.30 concerns of broad deployment of Starlink
However, there is no new publicly available satellites by the United States and Starlink’s
information on specific military programs ability to transmit data that may be used
aimed at developing or testing these tech- for new combat styles, citing the impact
nologies. As noted in Space Threat Assess- Starlink had on the battlefield in Ukraine.32
ment 2024, the PRC has already fielded Importantly, these assessments overstate
ground-based laser weapons capable of the capabilities of Starlink and assume the
blinding or damaging satellites and con- satellites have been integrated into U.S.
ducted research on mobile high-powered Department of Defense (DOD) architectures
microwave weapons for general military and intelligence missions. Further, as one
applications.31 China also maintains the U.S. scholar observes, a “clear PRC concern

RUSSIA
RUSSIA
HROUGHOUT THE PAST YEAR, Russia has engaged in several
T
provocative counterspace activities, in addition to allegedly work-
ing on a nuclear space-based anti-satellite weapon, according to
revelations that first surfaced in .1 In , the
United States accused Russia of launching a counterspace weapon, assess-
ing it had “characteristics resembling previously deployed counterspace
payloads” in 2019 and 2022.2 Not long after launch, the Russian satellite,
designated Cosmos 2576, proceeded to enter into a coplanar orbit with a
U.S. government satellite, USA 314, maneuvers the U.S. government justifi-
ably viewed with concern, as such actions could signal the positioning of a
counterspace weapon.3
As of late , Cosmos 2576 was no longer operating in a syn-
chronized orbit with USA 314, having begun maneuvers to raise its orbit
in mid-, possibly coinciding with the thaw in U.S.-Russian
relations.4 In , Russia launched Cosmos 2581, Cosmos 2582,
and Cosmos 2583, acknowledged by Moscow as belonging to the Ministry
of Defense, but little else is publicly known about their mission.5 Since then,
Cosmos 2581 and Cosmos 2582 have moved in formation, coming as close as
100 meters apart on March 5, 2025—by any measure, a very close approach
for two satellites.6 Though Cosmos 2583 has yet to maneuver since reaching
orbit, it did pass as close as 0.5 km to Cosmos 2581 and Cosmos 2582 on
March 7, 2025.7 Additionally, as it has done since its launch in ,
Cosmos 2558—a satellite that the U.S. Space Force asserts is also a counter-
space weapon—remained in a coplanar orbit with USA 326.8
10 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

Meanwhile, Russia’s Luch (Olymp) sat- through radiation effects or the resulting EMP.15 weapon with a nuclear payload. Howev-
ellites have continued to prowl the GEO The United States not only publicly condemned er, it was disclosed that Moscow’s efforts
belt. Since the publication of the last the development of this new weapon but also have been years in the making, with a
Space Threat Assessment, Luch (Olymp) sought to apply international pressure through senior U.S. official shedding light on
2 has spent time near Eutelsat Konnect, the United Nations. To date, Russian officials the intended orbital regime for such a
RASCOM-QAF 1, Astra 4A (originally Sirius continue to deny accusations that Russia is even counterspace weapon and connecting a
4), Thor 7, SES 5, Intelsat 3-F7, Thor 6, pursuing such a weapon. “scientific” satellite currently in-orbit “in
and Intelsat 10-02, according to data from a region not used by any other spacecraft
Slingshot Aerospace.9 These satellites . . . of higher radiation than normal low-
provide communications and broad- er-Earth orbits” to the effort.17 Satellite
cast services to a wide range of areas, trackers deduced that the satellite is
AS OF LATE
including Africa, Europe, the Middle likely Cosmos-2553, a satellite launched
East, and South America. Some ana- , in into a 2,000 km orbit
lysts assess that Luch (Olymp) 2 may that the Russian ministry of defense
have come as close as 5 km to Thor 7 COSMOS 2576 stated was a “technological spacecraft
in and less than 1 km from . . . equipped with newly developed
Intelsat 10-02 in .10 Believed WAS NO LONGER onboard instruments and systems for
to be a signals collection satellite, it testing them under the influence of ra-
is not surprising that Luch (Olymp) 2 OPERATING IN A diation and heavy charged particles.”18
loitered near satellites providing data While reports claim this satellite car-
SYNCHRONIZED
and broadcast services over Europe, ries a “dummy warhead,” U.S. officials
consistent with past Luch behavior.11 ORBIT WITH USA stress that, should a nuclear weapon be
Prior to the arrival of Luch (Olymp) 2 detonated at a 2,000 km altitude, the
near Astra 4A in (providing 314. effects would be “indiscriminate” and
internet services across Europe), Astra 4A render LEO unusable “for some period
signals were jammed—likely by ground- of time,” perhaps a year.19 The only other
based Russian jammers—interfering satellites in orbits near Cosmos-2553
with Ukrainian broadcasts.12 Though are one nonoperational Russian satellite
On March 14, 2024, the United States and Japan
unlikely mere coincidence, the specific and 10 nonoperational U.S. satellites.
introduced a draft resolution to reaffirm states’
relationship between the two events is According to one expert, if the satellite
obligations under Article IV of the OST, calling on
not clear. Since 2023, Luch (Olymp) 1 is testing new technologies, it may
nations not to develop nuclear weapons specif-
had been parked near Intelsat 37e at 342 have been placed in such a remote
ically designed to be placed in orbit around the
degrees East latitude, though in March orbit because there would be less
Earth. The draft resolution underwent a series
2025 it moved slightly lower than the risk of affecting other satellites and it
of negotiations and redrafts leading to a vote on
geostationary belt, starting an eastward would be difficult to monitor.20 Based
April 24, 2024. While 65 member states cospon-
drift of about half a degree per day.13 upon persistent radar monitoring by
sored the draft resolution, Russia cast a veto, and
LeoLabs of Cosmos-2553, there is high
Though revelations that Moscow is
the draft resolution failed to be adopted. China
confidence it has been tumbling since
developing a space-based nuclear an-
abstained from the vote. The United States and
mid-.21 This observation
ti-satellite weapon were covered in last
Japan released a joint statement expressing their
strongly suggests the satellite is no
year’s assessment, this issue continued
disappointment and continued commitment
longer operational.
to develop throughout last year and
to ensuring countries cannot deploy nuclear
remained a significant counterspace In addition to its counterspace efforts in
weapons in space. Soon after, Russia and China
headline in 2024. Not long after the space, Russia engages in jamming and
circulated their own resolution calling on broad
first reports surfaced in , spoofing GPS signals on Earth. Russian
international prohibitions on space weapons. As
U.S. officials publicly addressed their efforts to interfere with GPS signals
it has done when Russia and China raised such
concerns that Russia was developing a stretch from the Baltic and Nordic na-
language in the past, the United States opposed
“troubling” anti-satellite counterspace tions, through Ukraine and Russia itself,
this resolution, previously calling the Russian
weapon with alleged nuclear capa- to countries in the Black Sea region.22
and Chinese proposal fundamentally flawed and
bilities.14 A breach of the 1967 Outer Though efforts to jam and spoof GPS
noting that it lacks a verification mechanism and
Space Treaty (OST), which prohibits in Ukraine, including around Crimea
does not address ground-based ASAT weapons.16
signatory nations from stationing nu- in the Black Sea, have been ongoing
clear weapons in space, such a weapon Piecing together statements from U.S. officials since the start of the war, those efforts
would disable or destroy hundreds—if and other publicly available sources, it appears mushroomed to include many other
not thousands—of satellites in LEO that Russia has not yet launched an anti-satellite regions in mid-2024.23

RUSSIA
Figure 1
TIMELINE OF RUSSIAN NUCLEAR ASAT THREAT AND RESULTING
DEVELOPMENTS
FEBRUARY 14, 2024
U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence Chairman Michael Turner issues a
cryptic statement “concerning a serious national security threat” that press reports later
reveal as a potential Russian nuclear anti-satellite weapon designed to target satellites
orbiting the Earth.
FEBRUARY 15, 2024
During a press conference, a White House spokesperson, John Kirby, confirmed that Russia
has obtained a "troubling" new ASAT weapon, an accusation that Russia denied as a
"malicious fabrication.”
FEBRUARY 20, 2024
Russian President Vladimir Putin comments on the topic of nuclear weapons in space
during a working meeting in Moscow with Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu, “Our
position is clear and transparent: We have always been categorially against, and are now
against, the placement of nuclear weapons in space. . . . On the contrary, we call for
compliance with all agreements that exist in this area and proposed to strengthen this joint
work many times over.”
MARCH 14, 2024
The United States and Japan circulate a draft resolution to the UN Security Council that
would affirm the goal of preventing an arms race in space and reiterate the Outer Space
Treaty’s prohibition on placement in Earth orbit of objects carrying nuclear weapons or any
other kinds of weapon of mass destruction.
APRIL 24, 2024
The UN Security Council votes—13 votes in favor, 1 against (Russia), and 1 abstention
(China)—on the draft resolution which fails to be adopted due to Russia's veto. Russia and
China had proposed an amendment to the draft resolution calling for a ban on placing any
weapons in space. The amendment was not adopted because it failed to get the minimum
level of support in the UN Security Council needed to add an amendment.
12 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

NORMALIZATION OF DEVIANCE
MAY 1, 2024
U.S. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space Policy John Plumb testifies before the U.S.
House Armed Services Committee that Russia is developing a nuclear ASAT weapon
intended to “fly in space” that, while “not an imminent threat,” could render LEO unusable
“for some period of time,” perhaps a year, if detonated.
MAY 3, 2024
U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Arms Control, Deterrence, and Stability Mallory Stewart
discusses concerns that Moscow is “considering the incorporation of nuclear weapons into
its counterspace programs.” She further says that the United States had been aware of this
effort for years and gave clues about the intended orbital regime and a connected
“scientific” satellite currently in-orbit “in a region not used by any other spacecraft . . . of
higher radiation than normal lower-Earth orbits.”
MAY 20, 2024
The UN Security Council votes on a Russian-led draft resolution, containing similar
language as the U.S.-Japan–led resolution vetoed by Russia on April 24, 2024, with the
addition of the previous Russia-China–led amendment and text calling for negotiations on
a legally binding agreement for the prevention of an arms race in outer space. The UN
Security Council does not adopt the resolution—seven votes in favor, seven votes against,
and one abstention (Switzerland).
JUNE 20, 2024
Chairman Turner deliveres remarks at CSIS warning of the threat posed by a Russian
nuclear ASAT weapon.
MARCH 26, 2025
In his written testimony to the House Armed Services Committee, Subcommittee on
Strategic Forces, the Commander of U.S. Space Command General Stephen N. Whiting
describes Russia’s placement of a nuclear weapon in space as “most concerning,” noting its
ability to potentially disrupt the use of space.
the house permanent select committee on intelligence, the white house, bbc news, the house armed services committee, csis,
and the senate armed services committee

Russia has on at least one occasion during the
last year employed electronic warfare activities
RUSSIAN outside of Ukraine that affected more than GPS
and television signals. In , when flying
EFFORTS TO
near Kaliningrad, a UK military aircraft returning a
senior official to the United Kingdom from a visit
INTERFERE WITH
to Poland experienced GPS and communications
interference for about 30 minutes.30 It remains
GPS SIGNALS
unclear whether the official’s flight was the specific
target of the jamming attack, with UK officials
STRETCH FROM
publicly noting that it is not uncommon for aircraft
THE BALTIC to experience GPS interference near Kaliningrad.
Russia also continues to pursue capabilities de-
AND NORDIC signed to defeat Starlink, having announced in
 the development of a new moni-
NATIONS . . . TO toring system called Kalinka that can identify and
locate Starlink terminals.31
COUNTRIES IN
As it has done in prior years, Russia threatened
THE BLACK SEA the private sector for supporting the U.S. national
security mission in space. In , a spokes-
REGION. person for Russia’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs said
that Russia is “aware of Washington’s efforts to
attract the private sector to serve its military space
ambitions,” and that such systems “become a
legitimate target for retaliatory measures, in-
GPS interference in the Nordic and Baltic re-
cluding military ones.”32 Russia also complained
gions is not new. For example, in the fall of
during the UN General Assembly in 
2018, Norway accused the Russian military
that the United States and its allies use civilian
of jamming GPS signals in the Kola Peninsula
and commercial space infrastructure for military
during NATO’s largest military exercise since the
purposes, arguing that such activities jeopardize
Cold War.24 However, the past two years have
the peaceful use of space.33
seen a surge in reports of GPS interference in
these regions, as noted by the Finnish trans-
port and communications agency Traficom,
which saw roughly 2,000 reports filed in 2024
compared to 239 reports in 2023.25 While it
is difficult to point to a clear explanation for
Russia’s interest in jamming and spoofing GPS
signals across these regions, the growth of GPS
interference in Russia itself is a response to
Ukrainian attacks on Russia using GPS-guided
drones and missiles as point defense.26
Russia has also tried to interfere with Ukrainian
television broadcasts from satellites, including
attempting to jam signals from one of the Amos
satellites in .27 Additionally, tele-
vision signal jamming and hijacking affected
Ukrainian broadcasts on Eutelsat’s Hotbird
in March and .28 In response to in-
creased jamming over the last year, a number
of European countries lodged complaints with
the International Telecommunication Union
in , which then condemned Russian
interference with GPS and television signals.29

OTHERS
OTHERS
IRAN
Since the beginning of last year, Iran has continued to increase its proficiency
in space launch, successfully launching satellites in , , and from Iranian launch sites.1 The 
launch placed three satellites into orbit. Iran claimed one of those three sat-
ellites was a space tug, called Saman-1, that could reposition other satellites
in orbit, a capability with obvious counterspace uses.2 In ,
Russia launched two Iranian remote sensing satellites, called Kowsar and
Hodhod, which Iran claims are the first two satellites operated by its private
sector.3 Russia has launched other Iranian satellites before, including Iran’s
first satellite, Khayyam, in .4
Iran has pursued cyberattacks against aerospace and satellite infrastructure,
among other targets, over the last year.5 Microsoft and Palo Alto Networks
published reports in March and , respectively, that provided more
details on the Peach Sandstorm incidents.6 Both reports assessed that this
cyber campaign was directed by the Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps as part of ongoing efforts to gather intelligence and conduct social
engineering attacks. According to Microsoft, this same Iranian cyber threat
actor has conducted prior attacks targeting the aerospace, construction,
defense, education, energy, financial services, healthcare, government, sat-
ellite, and communications sectors in multiple countries.7 In ,
Mandiant reported on malicious cyber activity, aimed at espionage, linked
to Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps that targeted the aerospace and
defense sectors in the Middle East and possibly Turkey, India, and Albania.8
15 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

OTHERS
NORTH KOREA
North Korea’s only space launch attempt in
2024 ended in failure when a rocket carrying
the country’s second reconnaissance satellite
exploded after liftoff in .9 North
Korea continues to operate its Mallygyong-1
satellite, which was launched in , and executed maneuvers to raise the
satellite’s altitude in February and .10
It was reported that North Korea successfully
tested a new ballistic missile in 
South Korean news broadcast shows North Korea’s launch of its Malligyong-1 satellite in
and new intermediate-range hypersonic .
missile in , which followed a
jung yeon-je/getty images
prior test in .11 Though none of
these developments specifically relate to
counterspace weapons, they demonstrate
increasing North Korean proficiency with proximity operations and docking activities.15 not appear that Israel intends to use these
space, missile, and rocket technologies. Though not publicly associated with a military weapons for a counterspace purpose, Israel
program, such capabilities have clear counter- effectively maintains a latent anti-satellite
During the past year, South Korea repeatedly
space uses. As of , India may capability, particularly when paired with its
raised concerns about North Korean efforts to
be in talks with Russia to acquire a ballistic satellite detection and tracking knowledge.
jam GPS signals around the Korean Peninsula
missile early warning and space surveillance Israel likely conducted an exoatmospheric
and near the border between North and South
radar with a 6,000-km range for placement missile intercept in when it
Korea. Without providing more specific infor-
in southern India.16 Such a system may be shot down a Houthi ballistic missile.
mation, in , then–U.S. Secretary
intended for monitoring missile launches
of State Antony Blinken warned that Russia
from Pakistan, though it could also play a role
was close to sharing “advanced space and
EUROPE
satellite technology” with North Korea.12 in monitoring satellites and space objects.
In , the FBI and other partners is-
Only two countries in Europe made coun-
sued a joint cybersecurity advisory warning
ISRAEL
terspace news over the last year—France
of North Korean cyber espionage activities
and Germany—with both countries publicly
targeting defense, aerospace, nuclear, and
describing new counterspace initiatives.
engineering entities around the globe with Though Israel has not featured prominently
These would involve deploying satellites
the goal of advancing North Korea’s mili- in past editions of Space Threat Assessment,
capable of performing inspection and space
tary and nuclear capabilities.13 Mandiant it is hard to ignore this year due to its efforts
domain awareness (SDA) missions, as well as
identified a cyber threat group in June to interfere with GPS in the eastern part of
roles protecting other satellites from attack,
2024 with probable ties to North Korea that the Mediterranean Sea, Syria, Lebanon,
possibly using lasers or other non-kinetic
conducted phishing attacks pretending to parts of Egypt, and Israel itself. No doubt
weapons. The new French program, called
be from an energy company and aerospace aiming to protect itself from missile and
Toutatis, would include two LEO satellites:
industry entity while targeting other entities drone threats launched by Iran, Hamas, Hez-
Lisa-1, performing an SDA mission, and
in those sectors.14 bollah, and the Houthis, Israel conducted
Splinter LEO, a highly maneuverable sat-
markedly more widespread, persistent GPS
ellite capable of tracking hostile satellites
jamming and spoofing, specifically around
and potentially positioning itself between
INDIA , when it was expecting Iranian
a hostile satellite and the target satellite.18
retaliation to an Israeli strike in Syria that
Germany plans to launch the German In-
killed two senior Iranian officials.17
In , the Indian Space Research spector Satellite for Multiple Operations.19
Organisation’s Space Docking Experiment Israel continues to develop and refine di- The satellite, publicly revealed in 2024,
(SpaDeX) mission successfully demonstrat- rected-energy weapons, such as Iron Beam, would be equipped with robotic arms and
ed India’s ability to conduct rendezvous and for use in missile defense. While it does be capable of inspecting other satellites.
16 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

FEATURED ANALYSIS
FEATURED ANALYSIS
GPS JAMMING
AND SPOOFING
AST YEAR’S SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT NOTED that GPS jamming
L
and spoofing were becoming ubiquitous across parts of the world,
particularly in areas of active military conflict. This past year saw a
continuation and growth of that same trend. Many regions of the
world, from the Arctic through Eastern Europe, to the Middle East and parts
of South Asia, have been affected by GPS jamming and spoofing nearly every
day since the publication of last year’s report.
Though difficult to measure, the societal and economic impacts of such long-
term disruptions to GPS service are significant, and no doubt compounded
by ongoing conflict and political strife affecting many of these same areas.
Qualitatively, however, GPS interference disrupts the lives and work of millions
of people and in some cases (such as civil and commercial aviation) poses
significant risks to public safety. Several UN agencies have also emphasized
the harms of jamming and spoofing, noting that interference with satellite
navigation signals is a threat to air and maritime safety and security.1
17 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

But GPS jamming and spoofing have pro- Figure 2
duced—at least in part—the desired military
NORMAL GPS RECEPTION VS GPS JAMMING
effect, as munitions and drones that rely on
GPS to find their targets have been made AND SPOOFING
significantly less effective in GPS-denied
environments.2 That said, there is no sign
No GPS interference GPS interference
that GPS interference is an air defense magic User receives signal from GPS satellites Jamming or spoofing signal overpowers
bullet. It is the many layers of modern inte- GPS signal
grated air defense systems, including jam-
ming and spoofing, that have demonstrated
effectiveness at blunting, for example, air
threats to Israel and Russian drone and
missile attacks on Ukraine. Likewise, the
United States and European countries are
implementing technical measures and oper-
ational techniques to mitigate such effects
on their weapon systems.3 Employing such
GNSS jamming and spoofing systems to pro-
tect military and other critical infrastructure
from attack—whether in Israel, Ukraine,
or Russia—demonstrates the increasing
gps spoofing workgroup, GPS SPOOFING
tactical battlefield utility of counterspace
weapons, and it is a trend that is expected
to continue.
The most complete public picture of GPS ming worldwide were logged in the Aviation It is instead likely an example of Russian
interference around the globe at any point Safety Reporting System. On the whole, use of hybrid warfare directed at NATO’s
in time comes from maritime automatic these reports describe localized, ephemeral newest members, as the rise in spoofing
identification system (AIS) and Automatic events.5 For example, in 2015, one of these responds to the timing of their ascension
Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) incidents involved intermittent GPS interfer- to the alliance in spring of 2024.10
aircraft transponder signals. Aircraft pilots ence near a regional airport in Philadelphia
Today, Russian efforts to spoof GPS signals
and drone operators have also been able that Federal Communications Commission
extend from the Black Sea to the Arctic, with
to report instances of GPS jamming and agents attributed to a jammer being used
impacts to several NATO members, and
spoofing through the Federal Aviation Ad- by a driver to disable the tracking feature
include many major cities and regions in
ministration’s (FAA) Aviation Safety Report- on his truck.6 Several other reports in 2014
Russia itself. Additionally, the start of Israel’s
ing System and through a dedicated portal and 2015 related to GPS disruptions near war in Gaza in coincided with
for reporting GPS anomalies.4 a Mexico City airport that could have been a massive increase in GPS spoofing incidents
The International Air Transport Association caused by jamming.7 in the eastern Mediterranean Sea and Middle
also operates databases containing informa- Until 2017, when several ships reported East. At the time of this report’s publication,
tion about instances of GPS interference: the GPS spoofing in the Black Sea, documented over twenty countries experienced endemic
Incident Data eXchange, a tool for reporting incidents of spoofing were still rare and GPS interference over all or parts of their
flight security and safety concerns, and the mostly corresponded to transient events, territories. That interference can include
Flight Data eXchange, a global flight data such as the protection of traveling high-level both GPS jamming and spoofing, as jam-
repository. NOTAMs (originally called Notices government officials in Russia.8 As recently ming a real GPS signal can make spoofing
to Airmen), issued by national aviation au- more effective.
as the start of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine
thorities to warn pilots about possible GPS
in , widespread reports of Specifically, a jamming signal is broadcast at
interference, can also provide clues about
GPS spoofing were mainly confined to the sufficient strength to overpower legitimate
the location and timing of GPS anomalies.
Middle East.9 But Ukrainian drone attacks GPS signals, alongside a spoofing signal
Until the last five years, though not en- into Russia provoked an increase in spoofing slightly more powerful than the jamming
tirely uncommon, GPS jamming did not by Russian forces not just in Ukraine, but one, leading a GPS receiver to lock onto the
have a widespread or persistent impact on also across western Russia. Russian spoof- spoofed signal. A spoofing signal is meant
global aviation. Although other instances ing of GPS in the Baltic Region is harder to appear like a legitimate GPS signal, but
undoubtedly went unreported, between to explain as a Russian force-protection the spoofing signal transmits incorrect
2013 and 2017, only 90 reports of GPS jam- measure due to its distance from Ukraine. positional information. Though criminals,

FEATURED ANALYSIS
Figure 3
TIMELINE OF NOTABLE GPS SPOOFING AND JAMMING ATTACKS
FEBRUARY 26, 2024
▪ The Norwegian Communication Authority reports an increase in spoofing and jamming
incidents after the onset of the Russia-Ukraine war.

▪ California-based GPS developer oneNav conducts a field study, confirming “widespread
Russian GPS jamming from Finland to Turkey.” The company reports it has tested new
technology designed to counter interference attacks in northern Israel.
▪ GPS jamming incidents increase in Lebanon, sparking protests in Beirut “over the threat
to civil aviation.”

▪ Pilots flying over the Baltic Sea, the Black Sea, and the eastern Mediterranean report an
increase in GPS disturbances, likely caused by Russian jammers.
▪ Due to cases of GPS interference, Finnish airline Finnair cancels daily flights to Tartu,
Estonia, from April 29 to May 31, 2024.
MAY 29–JUNE 2, 2024
▪ Approximately 500 planes and hundreds of ships experience GPS issues due to North
Korean interference.

▪ A United Airlines flight from New Delhi to New York suffers a GPS spoofing attack
originating in the Black Sea region. The attack compromises navigation systems for the
rest of the flight.
▪ The number of flights affected by spoofing increases from “a few dozen in February to
over 1,100 in .”

▪ Approximately 1,000 flights per day report suffering from interference when flying over
northern Israel and Ukraine.
▪ Finland’s Coast Guard reports GNSS and GPS disturbances in the Baltic Sea, stating that
“tankers were spoofing their location data to cover up visits to Russia.”
19 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

OCTOBER 4, 2024
▪ South Korea reports 578 total instances of GPS interference between January and
August.
NOVEMBER 8–9, 2024
▪ North Korean GPS interference impacts an unspecified number of flights and vessels for
two days in a row, according to South Korean military officials.

▪ An increasing number of spoofing incidents are reported in Jordan, impacting roughly
244 flights.
JANUARY 17, 2025
▪ A Ryanair flight from London to Vilnius is diverted to Warsaw, Poland, due to GPS
spoofing attacks near NATO’s eastern border.

▪ Pakistani airports report GPS signal interference, which impacts aircraft flying into and
around the Karachi, Lahore, and Islamabad airports.
FEBRUARY 26, 2025
▪ The International Air Transport Association releases its 2024 Annual Safety Report,
citing Türkiye, Iraq, and Egypt as GNSS interference hotspots and noting a 500%
increase in GPS spoofing incidents between 2023 and 2024.

▪ Airlines report 465 instances of GPS interference and spoofing around Amritsar and
Jammu between and .
▪ Business aircraft crews report increased incidents of “GPS jamming and spoofing
interference during international trips, especially in the Middle East.”
MARCH 26, 2025
▪ UN agencies issue a joint statement expressing “grave concern” about the rise of RNSS
jamming and spoofing attacks.
itu, NEWSWEEK, BREAKING DEFENSE, gps world, reuters, and the national business aviation associaton

FEATURED ANALYSIS
Figure 4
LOCATIONS OF SIGNIFICANT GPS INTERFERENCE EVENTS BETWEEN
 AND 
Countries with significant GPS
interference events
csis aerospace security project research and analysis, zhaw/skai data services using opensky network, and gpsjam.org
terrorists, and other nonstate actors may able to Israel as part of its efforts to combat Ukraine continued to launch drone attacks
still find it easier to acquire and use GPS threats from Hamas, Hezbollah, and Iran. The on Russia, executing one of its largest drone
jammers, nation states that have access greatest spike in spoofing incidents over the strikes on Moscow in .14 Up until
to powerful long-range electronic warfare last year, in mid-, followed Israel’s early 2025, Ukraine had maintained a steady
capabilities have clearly found that spoofing airstrike on April 1, 2024, targeting senior cadence of drone attacks on targets in Rus-
can be more effective than jamming alone Iranian commanders in Syria, while Israel sia, likely prompting Russia to continue
because GPS receivers often do not realize awaited possible Iranian retaliation, which GPS jamming and spoofing as part of an
they are being spoofed but easily recognize ultimately came on April 13, 2024.12 integrated air defense campaign to defeat
when a GPS signal is blocked. drones.15 In , Ukraine destroyed
Also, around , the Black Sea region
an abandoned offshore gas platform in the
According to publicly available data, esti- and Russia experienced a surge in the num-
Black Sea that Russia had been using for GPS
mates for the number of worldwide commer- ber of flights daily reporting GPS spoofing,
spoofing operations, though it is not clear
cial flights experiencing spoofing increased with these activities plausibly attributed to
how the rig’s destruction impacted Russia’s
from 500 or fewer per day between January Russian efforts to defend against missiles
spoofing capabilities.16
and mid- to a peak of nearly and drones launched from Ukraine. This
3,000 flights in , before leveling off time frame coincides with a drone attack Outside of the Middle East, Russia, and
at between 1,000 and 1,500 affected flights deep into Russia from Ukraine, a major drone Baltic and Black Sea regions, several other
per day for the following several months.11 attack on a Russian airbase, and stepped-up regions experienced significant GPS inter-
Most of these spoofing incidents occurred drone attacks on other important targets ference from to ,
in the Middle East and were likely attribut- inside Russia.13 Over the next several months, when this report was published.17 These
21 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

Figure 5 a challenge. The presence of a persistent
cyber threat actor on a network may be
DAILY NUMBER OF AFFECTED FLIGHTS PER
discovered without revealing the hackers’
SPOOFED-TO AREA aims, leaving questions about the actual
target of the attack. For the authors of this
report, this ambiguity makes it difficult
Middle East Russia Black Sea Kaliningrad Asia
to determine which cyberattacks qualify
Number of Flights
as attacks on space systems and related
2000 Most of the spoofing that occurred infrastructure and, thus, deserve atten-
in the Middle East is likely
tion in this report. For example, a threat
attributable to Israel as part of its
efforts to combat threats from actor might be detected on the servers
Hamas, Hezbollah, and Iran.
of an academic research institute with an

aerospace engineering department. Was
this attacker targeting space systems (i.e.,
worth mentioning in a report on counter-
1000 space threats)?
Additionally, because some cyberattacks are
only made public by the attackers with no
500 confirmation from the victim organization, it
can be difficult to understand the full impact
of hacks or even know for certain whether
an attack took place. Frequently, hackers
Jan 2024 Mar 2024 Jul 2024 Sep 2024 Nov 2024 Dec 2024 publicly post screenshots or other evidence
of a successful cyber exploit, to demonstrate
zhaw/skai data services, using opensky network
data theft, to claim credit for the hack, or in
the case of ransomware attacks, to pressure
victims to comply with financial demands.24
But hackers, particularly ones motivated by
areas include the region between Lahore, aviation agency, admonished North Korea
geopolitical or ideological aims, could also
Pakistan, and New Delhi, India, particularly for repeatedly jamming GPS signals near
theoretically claim credit for attacks that
along the countries’ shared border, and its border with South Korea in May and
Myanmar. In Myanmar, GPS interference , GPS interference was still being never took place or exaggerate the scope
is a response by Myanmar’s military to the reported around the Korean Peninsula as of of their exploits for propaganda purposes.
rise in drone attacks carried out by armed .22 In spite of complaints
groups affiliated with the opposition party about its efforts to disrupt GPS, Israel
in the country’s ongoing civil war.18 Some continues to spoof signals throughout
GPS spoofing was observed near the bor- the region, with the eastern Mediter- IT CAN BE
der between North Korea and South Korea ranean region widely affected during
throughout 2024, peaking around June.19 the past year.23 DIFFICULT TO
There were also some reports of sporadic
spoofing in Beijing in .20 UNDERSTAND
To date, there are no indications that dip- THE DRIP-DRIP OF
THE FULL IMPACT
lomatic pressure or condemnation has
CYBERATTACKS
discouraged any nation state from deploying
OF HACKS OR
GPS jamming and spoofing systems in and
around conflict zones or within their own Continuing trends noted in past re- EVEN KNOW
national territories. Neither broad warnings ports, there has been no shortage over
from the International Telecommunication the last year of cyberattacks targeting FOR CERTAIN
Union, the UN agency charged with facilitat- government, critical infrastructure,
ing international coordination on spectrum and other sectors, including space. WHETHER AN
use, nor directed complaints from affected But developing a way to accurately
ATTACK TOOK
countries have altered Russia’s behaviors.21 tally and characterize certain key
Even though the International Civil Avia- aspects of cyberattacks, such as at-
PLACE.
tion Organization, the United Nations’ civil tacker motivations and objectives, is
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025 22

FEATURED ANALYSIS
Table 4
REPORTED CYBER INCIDENTS IN 2024 IMPACTING THE SPACE SECTOR
Attack Description Source of Attack Disclosure Affected Sectors
Unknown threat actors stole credentials of employees
Energy, finance, government, health, space,
of 30 companies across various industries worldwide Incident disclosed by IT-security company.
and telecommunications
beginning in early .
Unknown threat actors compromised the company
Incident disclosed by victim. Space and critical manufacturing
network of Maxar Space Systems on October 4, 2024.
Chinese-speaking threat cluster TIDRONE has targeted
Taiwanese military and satellite industries with malware Incident disclosed by IT-security company. Defense, space, and telecommunications
toolsets CXCLNT and CLNTEND since .
Iran-linked Peach Sandstorm used malware to backdoor
Australian, UAE, and U.S. organizations between April and Incident disclosed by IT-security company. Energy, government, and space
.
Pro-Ukrainian hacktivists BO Team targeted Russian State
Research Center on Space Hydrometeorology, “Planeta,” Incident disclosed by government authorities. Research and space
in .
“european repository of cyber incidents (ERCI),” german institute for international and security affairs, accessed march 24,
2025, 
poc.
Beyond the challenges in understanding worldwide cyberattacks, there were about That there were only five reported cyber
hacker goals, positively identifying the 720 reported incidents across all sectors in incidents affecting the space sector in 2024
physical location of hacker groups can be 2024, with roughly 57 percent of incidents according to the ERCI dataset may leave
difficult. For example, experts do not yet targeting critical infrastructure.26 Of that some readers of this report scratching their
know who is behind the IntelBroker hack- total number, the database lists five attacks heads, as there is a widespread perception
er group, which has targeted aerospace as specifically targeting the space sector in that space systems face constant cyber
related entities in the last year, with some 2024, approximately the same number of threats. In , the head of the Space
indications it may be a lone-wolf actor attacks that targeted the space sector in Information Sharing and Analysis Center
from Serbia, and others that it might be 2023, according to ERCI. (Space ISAC)—a nonprofit organization set
affiliated with Iran.25 This lack of clarity on up in 2019 to improve threat sharing and
The cyberattack documented by ERCI tar-
mitigation for space systems and comprised
affiliation and physical location of a hacker
geting Maxar Space Systems in October
of over 100 members across the public and
group complicates attribution, making it
2024 provides few insights into the motives
private sectors within the United States and
hard for the United States and other victims
or aim of the attackers.27 At the time of dis-
internationally—said that the organization
of attacks to calibrate their response to
covery, hackers had only gained access to
records over 100 instances of cyberattacks
hacks. It also makes it difficult to predict
employee data on Maxar’s networks. There
targeting “infrastructure related to space
where such hackers may strike next and who
is no public indication of whether personal systems” each week.28 Though on the sur-
should be particularly on guard for attacks
information was the goal of the hack or
face these numbers are clearly at odds with
from mysterious groups like IntelBroker.
whether gaining this limited access was the rather low number of cyber incidents
For all these reasons, the authors of this the first step in a broader effort to breach targeting the space sector according to the
report have found it hard to count year-by- operational or other systems specific to ERCI figures, the Space ISAC figures include
year the number of cyberattacks targeting Maxar’s satellites or space systems. The attempted intrusions and hack claims made
space systems. Though their numbers differ, hackers may very well have been targeting by attackers and not only, as the ERCI records
some organizations try to keep tallies of Maxar because it is a space company, but report, successful attacks publicly acknowl-
cyberattacks by the type of entity and sector it is equally plausible that Maxar’s servers edged by hack victims. Additionally, the
targeted, among other criteria. According to were just one IP address on a long list of Space ISAC statistic speaks to the number
the European Repository of Cyber Incidents unrelated entities, ones for which they of attacks targeting infrastructure related
(ERCI), a free database containing reports of merely found an exploitable vulnerability. to space systems, which seems to include
23 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

Table 5
CYBERATTACKS IN 2024 IMPACTING THE SPACE SECTOR
Hacker Affiliation Threat Actor Name(s) Probable Threat Actor Motivation
Stormous, SpaceBears, NoName057(16) , LockBit, Phoenix, and
Russia Data theft
others
China TIDRONE, BianLian Data theft
Iran Peach Sandstorm, UNC1549 Data theft
North Korea Andariel (Onyx Sleet) , UNC2970 Data theft
Anonymous Bangladesh (BD), SN BLACKMETA, IntelBroker, Data theft, financial gain (ransomware), politically motivated
Other or unknown
Sapphire Werewolf , and others disruptions
data provided by the space isac
more types of networks than are included RPOS: BENEVOLENT reasons—or, at least, reasons that do not
in the term “space sector” used by ERCI. involve the use of a weapon—to move closer
OR CRUEL
to another active satellite. A spacecraft may
In yet another attempt to tally cyberat-
INTENTIONS even have a non-hostile reason to conduct
tacks targeting space systems, ETH Zurich,
RPO and docking operations near a nonco-
a Swiss university, published a report in
operative space object, such as a defunct
 that documented over 120 Though space has never been a static envi-
satellite or piece of space debris—this is the
publicly known cyber operations, between ronment—relative to the center of the Earth,
business case for companies like Astroscale
 and , target- the orbital speed of GEO satellites is 7,000
and Clearspace. But a U.S. observer noting
ing the space sector in the context of the miles per hour and LEO satellites around
war in Ukraine.29 The report identified 12 17,500 miles per hour—most spacecraft a Chinese or Russian satellite shadowing or
moving closer to one of its own satellites
pro-Ukrainian and 19 pro-Russian cyber have generally tended to stay away from
would reasonably view that behavior as
threat actors who made claims to have other space vehicles to avoid potential col-
threatening. Chinese or Russian observers
targeted space systems. Of the attacks as- lisions. However, government-owned and
sessed in the report, the vast majority—65 commercial satellites are becoming more probably have the same reaction when a
percent—were distributed denial of ser- maneuverable and flying closer togeth- GSSAP satellite approaches their spacecraft.
vice attacks, with 11 percent identified as er, conducting rendezvous and proximity The issue is that the United States and its
network intrusions and 9 percent listed as operations, or RPOs, and docking with allies rightly do not take Russian or Chinese
leak operations. A further nine categories other spacecraft on an increasingly regular statements about the purposes of maneu-
of hack types were specified in the report, basis. In 2024, there was strong private vering spacecraft at face value and find
including credential theft, data breach, sector interest in developing satellites to little assurances from Russian or Chinese
malware, software cracking, and data breach perform maintenance, repair, assembly, assertions of peaceful intentions in space.
extortion, among others. manufacturing, and inspection missions. But analyzing behaviors alone does little
One final observation is that, though the Government agencies continue to work to clarify what their spacecraft are actually
available data points to attempted and on systems that use orbital maneuvering, doing. Knowledge about a satellite’s capa-
successful cyberattacks targeting systems RPO, and docking capabilities, such as bilities and context—for example, that it has
associated with the space sector, there are space planes, crewed spacecraft, and sci- a grabber arm or device capable of latching
no public reports in the last year that these entific missions.31 Additionally, no matter a onto another satellite or that it “birthed” a
cyberattacks have specifically targeted satellite’s specific function, it may need to smaller object in proximity to a U.S. govern-
spacecraft or satellites in space. Referenc- maneuver to avoid collision with another ment satellite—can help more fully assess
satellite or a piece of space debris.
es to satellite hacking usually relate to the purpose of a satellite exhibiting RPO
attacks on ground infrastructure, the user Given the variety of use cases for maneu- behaviors. Some of these satellites display-
terminal only, or the companies and insti- vering one spacecraft around another, it can ing RPO behaviors are probably designed
tutions involved in satellite development be difficult to characterize a spacecraft’s as counterspace weapons, meaning they
and operations.30 This does not mean that purpose using only data about its behaviors have capabilities intended to blind, jam,
cyber threat actors have not compromised in space. Some spacecraft exhibiting RPO damage, or destroy other satellites. Other
satellites in space, only that there is no behaviors may be counterspace weapons or satellites are possibly performing a space
open-source indication of such efforts in testing technologies for use on such weap- surveillance mission or are testing on-orbit
the last year. ons. Other spacecraft may have peaceful satellite servicing technologies.

FEATURED ANALYSIS
Coincidentally, the U.S. government and arguably, the same satellite could perform counterspace weapons could expose U.S.
U.S. companies are fielding more space both roles. Though the United States should satellites doing those missions to increased
systems aimed at some of these purposes. view attempts to surveil its satellites by Russian and Chinese counterspace risks.
Broadly speaking, the U.S. Space Command Russia and China with concern, it would In addition, grouping satellites with coun-
(USSPACECOM) is increasingly focused undoubtedly respond with considerably terspace weapons into the same category
on using satellites that are designed for more restraint to a surveillance satellite as surveillance satellites will make it more
frequent orbital maneuvering.32 The Space approaching one of its own satellites than a difficult for spacecraft operators to identify
Force operates GSSAP, whose purpose is to counterspace weapon exhibiting the same and calibrate responses to real threats that
collect SSA data.33 The Space Force is also behaviors. Greater transparency and aware- could damage, degrade, or destroy their
investigating a next-generation constellation ness about specific satellite capabilities space systems. Grouping both types of
of scout satellites in GEO.34 U.S. company is a possible way to delineate between a space systems together also increases the
True Anomaly is planning to operate its own weapon and surveillance capability. But risk of misunderstanding and miscalculation
satellites carrying out inspection operations, a lack of trust between the United States between geopolitical competitors in space.
having launched its first and second mis- and its allies on one side and Russia and
At the same time, satellites conducting
sions in 2024.35 Another company, HEO, is China on the other would impede efforts to
RPOs can still pose a security threat and
using sensors on satellites to collect data increase transparency, since both sides likely
safety hazard to others. For example, the
about other space objects in LEO, though mistrust each other’s ability to be truthful
revelation in that PRC satellites
HEO’s approach is to use naturally occurring about the purpose of their satellites. The had practiced “dogfighting” maneuvers in
flybys rather than active maneuvering to U.S. Space Force is building up its space in- space should be concerning. The authors
obtain data.36 Beyond near Earth, the Air telligence collection, analysis, and targeting could imagine scenarios where adversary
Force Research Laboratory is developing to enable a deeper understanding of foreign satellites maneuver against a target (like a
two satellites designed to obtain SSA data capabilities and to support commanders’ U.S. government satellite) as to force it to
from cislunar space.37 operational needs.40 Meanwhile, research- move, expend fuel, and degrade its mission.
ers from LeoLabs, the University of Bern,
There are no indications that any of the For these reasons, the authors of this report
and Maxar are developing characterization
aforementioned U.S. satellites are weapons, assert that satellites designed solely for
methods that combine radar measurements,
though their maneuvering signatures and obtaining SSA data or performing space
information from ground-based optical
behaviors may mirror those of on-orbit surveillance roles should not be considered
telescopes, and non-Earth imagery data to
counterspace weapons. The perception counterspace weapons but, understandably,
provide new insights that can be used for
that satellites like these are weapons could satellites conducting RPOs without a clear
assessing a spacecraft’s purpose.41
increase the risk of miscalculation, a risk understanding of capability and intent may
compounded as more and more satellites Such a distinction between surveillance as- still be viewed as threats depending on the
are launched with missions that include sets and weapons aids the United States and circumstances. As in other domains, the
orbital maneuvering. But some maneuver- its allies in calling out unsafe, irresponsible, United States, Russia, China, and other
able satellites, including those operated by and escalatory behaviors, especially when countries should eye warily but expect their
U.S. allies and some planned by the United adversaries target surveillance assets as they adversaries and geopolitical competitors
States itself, are intended as counterspace have done in other domains. For example, in to conduct surveillance and intelligence
weapons. France, for example, publicly 2019, Iran shot down an unarmed, unmanned collection against their space assets. Sur-
stated in 2024 that it plans on building LEO U.S. Global Hawk surveillance aircraft oper- veillance activities in space should not
satellites that can actively defend against ating over international waters, and both provoke the same reaction as deployment
attacks in space, having already announced China and Russia continue to harass U.S. and use of actual counterspace weapons.
plans for a similar GEO capability, called and allied airborne ISR assets operating in Creating a public expectation that inspec-
YODA, in 2021.38 The Trump administration’s international airspace over the South China tor or surveillance satellites are a hostile
 executive order on “The Iron Sea and Black Sea, respectively.42 threat to be treated as weapons puts U.S.
Dome for America” (now Golden Dome) companies with business plans around
There is further danger in this lack of distinc-
includes direction to develop and deploy doing those very same things more into
tion and transparency. Given that the U.S.
space-based interceptors to defend the U.S. the crosshairs of U.S. adversaries than they
government and private sector, as well as
homeland against advanced missile attacks.39 would likely already be.
allied nations and geopolitical competitors,
Based on satellite behaviors alone, there operate satellites with space surveillance There is no doubt that satellites conducting
is hardly a way to distinguish between a and SSA missions, considering maneuvera- surveillance on other satellites to under-
surveillance tool and a weapon, though ble surveillance satellites as threats akin to stand their purpose and capabilities serve
25 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

Table 6
CHINESE AND RUSSIAN SATELLITES EXHIBITING UNUSUAL BEHAVIORS
BETWEEN AND 
Satellite Country Timeline Description
Tracked maneuvering at 44 meters per second, which is
TJS-2 China 2024 unusually high and uses significantly more fuel than the more
standard range of 0.5 to 1 meters per second
Maneuvered to position itself between a U.S. space
surveillance satellite and the Sun, creating shadows
TJS-4 China 2024
that potentially blocked the U.S. satellite from properly
photographing TJS-4
TJS-10 came within 25 kilometers of another Chinese satellite
TJS-10 China May 16, 2024
in GEO, TJS-3, on May 16, 2024
Entered a coplanar orbit with SJ-21, a satellite which in 2022
attached to and moved a defunct Beidou satellite from its
SJ-25 China 
position in GEO to a graveyard orbit, suggesting SJ-25 may
intend to refuel SJ-21
Moved to within one degree latitude of SJ-21, possibly
TJS-3 China suggesting a supporting role for TJS-3 in an upcoming
refueling attempt
After travelling westward, it reached 17.3 degrees East
SY-12-02 China (over central Europe) and changed direction to begin a new
eastward journey
After travelling eastward, it reached 178.9 degrees East (over
SY-12-01 China the Pacific Ocean) and changed direction to begin a new
westward journey
SY-24C-01, SY-24c-02, and SY-24C-03–conducted corkscrew
maneuvers around SJ-6-05B, believed to be another
SY-24C-01/02/03 China 
technology demonstrator with potential signals collection
capability
SY-24C-03 and SJ-6-05A conducted rendezvous and proximity
SY-24C-03 and SJ-6-05A China operations, with each satellite maneuvering and the closest
approach distance less than one kilometer
Entered into a coplanar orbit with a U.S. government satellite,
Cosmos 2576 Russia 
USA 314
Cosmos 2581 Russia
Cosmos 2581 and Cosmos 2582 have moved in formation,
March 5, 2025
coming as close as 100 meters apart
Cosmos 2582 Russia
Passed as close as 0.5 kilometers to Cosmos 2581 and Cosmos
Cosmos 2583 Russia March 7, 2025
2582, but has yet to maneuver since reaching orbit
May have come as close as 5 kilometers from Thor 7, a
Luch (Olymp) 2 Russia 
European communications satellite
May have come less than 1 kilometers from Intelsat 1002, an
Luch (Olymp) 2 Russia 
international communications satellite
csis aerospace security project research and analysis

FEATURED ANALYSIS
a military and intelligence purpose. But they can also
help to prevent misunderstandings, ensuring that deci-
sionmakers can better discriminate between satellites DEBRIS-PRODUCING
that are weapons (i.e., threats) and ones that are not.
EVENTS THAT
They also can play an important role in space safety
for both government and commercial space operators,
GENERATE NO
helping to build a comprehensive picture of what is
happening in the space environment and understand
PUBLIC ALARMS . . .
which satellites are truly counterspace weapons threats.
CREATE EVEN MORE
POINTS OF INSTABILITY: RISKS.
UNINTENTIONAL SPACE
DEBRIS GENERATION
debris-generating incident is caused by a spacecraft
Several debris-fragment-generating events in space associated with the U.S. government, Russia’s Vimpel
have taken place since the publication of the last space object catalog is sometimes updated to reflect
Space Threat Assessment, though there is no indi- new debris fragments quicker than Space-Track.44
cation that any of these were intentional or caused During the last year, USSPACECOM only publicly an-
by counterspace weapons. Previous editions of this nounced five debris-causing breakup events, yet this
threat assessment have not specifically addressed section describes eight such events.45 Furthermore, for
accidental debris-causing incidents; however, this each event acknowledged by USSPACECOM, this report
report will discuss them, as they have the potential highlights the differences between the official Space-
to create geopolitical complications and instability. Track numbers of cataloged debris fragments, as well as
Catalogued and tracked debris fragments pose risks the timeliness of their cataloging, and other space-ob-
to space safety and, should debris produced by a sat- ject-tracking options. One reason for the discrepancies
ellite of one nation cause harm to satellites operated may relate to the Space-Track fidelity standards, which
by other nations, can lead to increased international relate to how well an object is understood before it is or
tensions. Debris-producing events that generate no is not cataloged. But no matter the cause, delays and
public alarms, uncatalogued debris fragments, and inconsistencies in adding debris fragments resulting
inadequately characterized debris clouds create even from spacecraft breakups and energetic events to Space-
more risks, adding an unnecessary and avoidable Track create avoidable space safety risks and may affect
element of surprise to the calculus. the credibility of the United States in the eyes of other
international partners during discussions on norms
For inexplicable reasons, certain debris-causing inci-
of behaviors and rules of the road for space activities.
dents are widely covered in the media, while others go
entirely under the radar, without widespread public Resurs-P1 (Russia): Russia’s Resurs-P1 broke up
coverage. Though USSPACECOM often makes public on June 26, 2024. Launched in 2013, Resurs-P1 was
announcements of debris-generating events, it did a commercial remote sensing satellite in LEO that
not issue statements for all events in the last year. operated until 2021, when it was deactivated upon
However, commercial SSA entities often make public its replacement by Resurs-DK1. USSPACECOM noted
announcements of such events, as will the Office of that the breakup generated over 100 trackable debris
Space Commerce once its Traffic Coordination System fragments, while LeoLabs stated that it was tracking
for Space (TraCSS) is operational.43 Additionally, it about 180 pieces of debris immediately after the event.46
can sometimes take weeks if not months before the Though not confirmed, experts speculate the breakup
Space Force enters new debris fragments into Space- was caused by improper or incomplete passivation
Track. In many cases, private sector SSA organizations efforts upon the retirement of the satellite in 2021. As
announce they are tracking far more pieces of debris of early , 18 pieces of debris were included
than are either announced by USSPACECOM or logged in Space-Track. Due to the low altitude of the breakup,
by Space Force in Space-Track. Especially when the all other fragments have likely already decayed and
27 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

burned up in the atmosphere. 2004, three other DMSP and two NOAA
satellites using a similar design have all
Upper Stage, Long March 6A (China):
experienced similar malfunctions attributed
Most likely caused by residual propellant,
to battery explosions. In early ,
the upper stage of a Long March 6A broke
Space-Track started listing debris from this
up in LEO, creating several hundred pieces
satellite, with 19 fragments cataloged by
of trackable debris—according to LeoLabs,
March 10, 2025.
potentially as many as 900 debris frag-
ments—on August 6, 2024.47 By early March Blue Ring Pathfinder/Upper Stage, New
2025, over 650 fragments were logged in Glenn (United States): Though not publicly
Space-Track. This rocket had been launched reported by USSPACECOM, Blue Origin’s New
by China on that same day carrying satellites Glenn upper stage, to which the Blue Ring
for the Qianfan (“Thousand Sails”) LEO Pathfinder mission is attached, probably
broadband satellite constellation. This was experienced a debris-generating event
not the first time that the upper stage of a upon passivation in HEO on January 16,
Long March 6A rocket broke up in orbit.48 2025.54 Though originally thought to be
ice and other effluent, which should have
Centaur Upper Stage, Atlas V (United
naturally dissipated, the debris fragments
States): On September 6, 2024, the Cen-
are probably a combination of thermal con-
taur upper stage of an Atlas V rocket broke
up in a geotransfer orbit. The upper stage trol materials and other unknown objects.55
had been passivated after launching a U.S. As of early , over 50 pieces
government weather satellite in March of debris remained in orbit, with about 67
2018. As of early , Space-Track logged in Russia’s space object catalog. As of
contained no debris fragments associated , there are no debris fragments
with this breakup, though an outside expert associated with this event in Space-Track.
identified over 950 debris fragments by that Garpun 11L (Cosmos 2473) (Russia): On
time.49 This is the fourth breakup of a Cen- May 28, 2024, a nonoperational Russian
taur upper stage, with two other breakups military communications satellite in GEO,
in 2018 and another in 2019. The cause of Garpun 11L (Cosmos 2473), experienced
all four breakups is not known. some kind of energetic event that raised
Intelsat IS-33e (United States): Intelsat the satellite 5 km and produced at least one
IS-33e broke up on October 19, 2024, due new space object, identified in Russia’s space
to unknown reasons. Prior to the breakup, object catalog.56 Launched in September
the satellite had been a telecommunications 2011, Garpun 11L has not been operational
satellite in GEO, launched in 2016 with a since experiencing an on-orbit malfunction
planned service life of 15 years. Immedi- in . USSPACECOM did not make
ately following the breakup, USSPACECOM any public announcements about this event
announced that it was tracking around 20 and there is no indication of debris from this
pieces of debris.50 The number of debris event in Space-Track as of .
fragments eventually reached at least 500,
Fregat RB/Cluster 2 Upper Stage, Soyuz-U
according to ExoAnalytic.51 Space-Track,
(Russia): An experimental Russian up-
however, only listed 18 pieces of debris
per stage, called Fregat RB/Cluster 2, of a
associated with this breakup event by early
Soyuz-U rocket launched in ,
.
experienced an energetic event on April
Defense Meteorological Satellite Program 8, 2024, resulting in a 3-km change in the
(DMSP) F-14 (United States): Probably object altitude and some kind of residual
Photos of Resurs-P1 before and
due to a battery explosion, a defunct DMSP propellant outgassing.57 Though USSPACE-
after the June 26, 2024, breakup
F-14 weather satellite in LEO generated event (top to bottom). COM has not provided a public notification
a number of fragments on December 19, of this event or listed any resulting debris
HEO
2024.52 Space-Track did not list any debris fragments in Space-Track, the Russian space
associated with this event by the end of object catalog lists more than 300 pieces
, but both LeoLabs and of debris generated by this event.58 There
Slingshot Aerospace were tracking debris is no indication of debris from this event
fragments resulting from this event.53 Since in Space-Track as of .

FEATURED ANALYSIS
THE COMING commercial services such as imagery and space technology. Commercial companies
broadband communications were widely are developing on-orbit servicing capabil-
COLLISION OF
distributed in the early days and weeks of ities that are designed to extend an assets’
COMMERCIAL AND the conflict and largely continue today. life on orbit. But with capabilities like robotic
arms and grapplers, these technologies
COUNTERSPACE Governments around the globe have seen the
have the potential for nefarious use. For
impact that a space industrial base has on
example, Japanese company Astroscale is
programs and economic bolstering, so com-
Over the last decade, space has become partnering with BAE Systems to test in-orbit
mercial companies are being encouraged in
increasingly commercial, and the past ap- servicing technology, in a contract funded
most spacefaring nations to innovate along-
proach of sectioning space off into different by the European Space Agency to service a
side or outside of government priorities. The
military, civil, and commercial segments test satellite. The Astroscale satellite would
U.S. Department of Defense and Space Force
has become much more difficult. While do this servicing by conducting proximity
have each released commercial integration
space has traditionally been dominated operations to get close to the test satellite,
strategies, and other nations around the
by government activity and specialized then using a robotic arm to take a part off of
globe are investing heavily in a commercial
defense contractors, the last decade has the test satellite and replace it with a new
space sector, hoping to integrate innovative
witnessed the growth of a diverse com- part.63 European space company Airbus,
technologies into all facets of government
mercial space sector. Today, commercial through its Surrey Satellite Technology
capabilities. Multilateral organizations are
companies act independently, with goals Limited subsidiary, demonstrated a debris
also noting the importance of commercial
and actions to implement separate from removal concept releasing a net and pen-
capabilities, and NATO will reportedly publish
government strategies or contracts. cil-sized harpoon to capture space debris.64
a commercial space strategy in 2025.59
While the objective of these test missions is
In the rapidly advancing domain of space
The rise of satellite companies offering
civil in nature, similar technologies could be
exploration and satellite technology, com-
critical services to governments, business-
used in the future for harming or disabling
mercial space companies have become
es, and individuals means that these pri-
an adversary satellite.
integral players, providing services ranging
vate sector players are now directly in the
from satellite communication and Earth The development of dual-use technologies,
crosshairs of geopolitical competitors and
observation to space tourism and lunar with both commercial and potential counter-
adversaries. As noted earlier in the report,
exploration. As these companies expand space applications, underscores the delicate
in 2024, a Russian official indicated Russia
their activities in LEO and beyond, they face balance between actors in the space domain
would consider companies supporting U.S.
an increasing risk of being caught in the today. In an arena traditionally dominated
“military space ambitions” as legitimate
crossfire of geopolitical tensions and the targets for retaliation.”60 by government agencies, private enterprises
growing arms race in space. The impact of are now not only shaping the future of space
Beyond current capabilities such as com-
commercial space capabilities has been well exploration but also becoming entangled
munications or Earth imaging, commercial
documented in the war in Ukraine, where in geopolitical and security concerns. As
companies around the globe are testing
these companies expand their capabilities
technologies that could have counterspace
and develop technologies that could have
applications. French company Dark plans
both peaceful and defensive applications,
to “forge the space armory” by building
the lines between civilian, commercial, and
THE IMPACT OF advanced defense systems to place on
military activities in space are becoming
orbit to protect other satellites from being
increasingly blurred.
COMMERCIAL
targeted.61 Further, the Dark website states
that space has already become a battlefield.
SPACE
The company is developing a platform
called Interceptor, launched from a plane
CAPABILITIES
that would travel to LEO to move or deorbit
HAS BEEN WELL satellites or pieces of debris. The company’s
CEO has described Dark as aiming to be the
DOCUMENTED “S.W.A.T. team of space,” and the Interceptor
capability as ready to operate on call, akin
IN THE WAR IN to air defense missiles.62
Other technology developments are not as
UKRAINE.
blunt, but could be considered a counter-
29 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

WHAT TO WATCH
WHAT
TO WATCH
DISTINGUISHING BETWEEN PEACETIME
NORMS AND WARTIME ACTIONS
Senior administration and Pentagon officials have repeatedly made clear
that the U.S. military intends to be a responsible, good neighbor in space.1 To
meet that goal, the secretary of defense published a memo in 2021 outlining
DOD tenets of responsible behavior in space.2 Those tenets specify that DOD
will operate in, from, to, and through space with due regard to others and in
a professional manner; limit the generation of long-lived debris; avoid the
creation of harmful interference; maintain safe separation and safe trajec-
tory; and communicate and make notifications to enhance the safety and
stability of the domain.
30 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

In , USSPACECOM proposed China nor Russia have agreed to these re- dissimilar from the use of GPS jammers and
eight specific behaviors, which map to the strictions—for responsible behaviors that spoofers for force protection in Ukraine,
five tenets, for DOD space operations, which do not directly correlate to the expectations Russia, and Israel described earlier—draw-
USSPACECOM notes complement broader placed on combatants by the laws of war. ing a distinction between offensive and
U.S. efforts to establish space norms and defensive space and emphasizing the U.S.
Rather than self-imposed tenets, applica-
best practices.3 Additionally, the United intention to use space for deterrence and
ble to one side and not the other, a better
States has tried to discourage the testing approach to space operations, particularly not aggression.9
of destructive DA ASAT weapons, which
U.S. operations vis-à-vis China and Russia, In the next year, the United States may
have the potential to generate space debris.
could be one modeled on the 1971 agree- want to consider publicly revealing more,
In , the United States declared
ment between the United States and Soviet though not all, of its counterspace capabil-
a moratorium on its testing of DA ASAT
Union on incidents on and over the high ities—as France and Germany are already
weapons. And in , along
seas.7 The goal of this agreement was not
doing—because acknowledging some U.S.
with several other nations, it introduced a
to cover wartime actions, but to prevent
UN resolution calling nations not to conduct counterspace weapons, beyond just jam-
peacetime incidents from becoming more
destructive DA ASAT testing. The resolution mers, can be used to deter hostile action
serious. The lessons from this approach for
was supported by over 150 countries.4 in space or other domains.10 Additionally,
space operations are twofold. First, it could
talking more publicly about counterspace
The tenets and eight behaviors are clearly
help establish norms of behavior for space
weapons means the U.S. military can more
applicable to day-to-day space operations
that could improve overall space safety for
easily partner with space companies already
and establish sensible norms for peacetime
military, civilian, and commercial operators.
working on commercial technologies, such
space activities, which apply to military
Second, it could help reduce the risk of mis-
as servicing, debris removal, hyperson-
space operations just the same as civilian
understanding between the United States,
ics, and atmospheric reentry, that could
and commercial ones. The moratorium
China, and Russia for space activities such
on debris-generating destructive DA ASAT be transformed into new military space
as RPOs and other on-orbit behaviors.
testing is a de facto peacetime restriction, capabilities. For classified projects, the
as the preponderance of weapons test- This model also implicitly acknowledges military also cannot tap into innovative
ing would surely happen prior to a war that wartime actions are entirely different space startups, as these companies often
or conflict. What is less clear is how these from peacetime behaviors, with guardrails do not have the right security clearances
placed around wartime behaviors estab-
rules apply to wartime actions, though they to even know what the government wants
lished by the law of armed conflict, which
have probably influenced the apparent to buy, let alone bid on the work.
is domain agnostic. Given the frequency of
U.S. emphasis on low-debris-causing and
non-kinetic counterspace weapons, and how both Chinese and Russian RPOs and U.S.
efforts oriented around space sustainability emphasis on space norms, a concerted U.S.-
and safety, like the tenets, relate to the law led effort over the next year to establish a
of armed conflict.5 space equivalent to the 1972 U.S.-Soviet THE UNITED
agreement on incidents on and over the
The general aims of the universal laws of war,
high seas would be beneficial both to U.S. STATES MAY
including international humanitarian law,
interests and to the overall chances of suc-
are to protect those not fighting and those no
cess for the growth of the space economy. WANT TO
longer able to fight, which includes avoiding
harm to civilians or things that are essential
CONSIDER
to their survival.6 Though certainly open to
MAKING MORE
interpretation, the operation of satellites PUBLICLY
in space is undeniably less essential than, COUNTERSPACE
and several steps removed from, the pro- REVEALING
WEAPONS PUBLIC
vision of things like food, water, medicine,
and clothing to noncombatants. Except for MORE, THOUGH
humans on the International Space Station Historically, U.S. officials have shared little
NOT ALL, OF ITS
or China’s Tiangong station, operations in publicly about U.S. counterspace capabili-
space are unlikely to directly harm civilians. ties and operations. To date, the only pub-
COUNTERSPACE
Operations on land, sea, and air are far licly acknowledged counterspace weapons
more likely than those in space to harm operated by the Space Force are the Counter CAPABILITIES.
people or cause disruptions to the delivery Communications System and the Remote
of the essentials of life. Yet the United States Modular Terminal, both electronic warfare
assigns the space domain a special set of capabilities.8 The United States has empha-
tenets—though one-sided, since neither sized these are defensive capabilities—not

DEVELOPMENT non-kinetic weapons, such as jammers and March 24, 2025, according to Space-Track.13
lasers, or kinetic weapons, such as projec- The glaring exception is China’s test of a DA
OF BODYGUARD
tiles or grappling capabilities, to disable ASAT in 2007. Because of the altitude of that
SATELLITES attacking satellites. There is no reason to
test, around 800 km, nearly 70 percent of
delay efforts to develop such capabilities
resulting debris remains in orbit.14
and no reason to make such efforts secret.
As noted in this report, China has demon-
Though not directly related to the opera-
strated it can operate highly maneuverable
tion of large constellations, one trend to
satellites in both LEO and GEO and track
GENERATION OF watch is China’s tendency to date of leaving
and synchronize orbits with U.S. govern-
the upper stages of Long March 6A and 8
ment satellites. China also remains the DEBRIS FRAGMENTS
rockets used to launch its LEO broadband
only country to conduct a noncooperative
constellations at altitudes near 800 km. At
capture of one satellite by another in GEO,
Though experts frequently warn of increased
when SJ-21 moved a defunct Beidou satellite that altitude, the rocket bodies could remain
risks of collisions and creation of space de-
into a graveyard orbit in 2022. These capa- in orbit for more than 100 years, creating
bris resulting from the deployment of large
bilities should be seen as ominous signs of increased collision risks and the potential
satellite constellations, most debris-generat-
the potential for China to develop, if it has for debris-generating collisions or other
ing incidents over the past year have nothing
not already done so, sophisticated on-orbit to do with operating satellite constellations. events.15 With plans to launch thousands
counterspace weapons against which U.S.
Of the eight debris-causing events described of satellites for these constellations, unless
satellites have limited, if any, defenses.
earlier in this report, only one involves China takes a different tack in the future,
To date, France is the only country that an active satellite (e.g., Intelsat IS-33e). the risks from these rocket bodies will grow.
has consistently talked about building Further, while concern has focused on the
The fact is that most space debris fragmen-
and deploying on-orbit satellite systems risk of collisions in congested LEO orbits,
tation events result from breakups involving
designed to guard, defend, and protect only one related to LEO constellations, and
old satellites and incidents involving spent
high-value satellites. However, in , even that connection is tangential because
the European Commission announced that the event relates to the launch vehicle, the rocket bodies. These objects are ticking time
the European Defense Fund included €6.5 Long March 6A upper stage, and not the bombs, which have a tendency to regularly
million ($7 million) for an “Autonomous satellites themselves. Additionally, most and spectacularly go off, creating the vast
SSA Bodyguard Onboard Satellite” that of these events were caused by defunct majority of debris-generating incidents
would perform SSA and threat detection, spacecraft that were at least 10 years old, since the publication of last year’s threat
but also “counteract [threats] with a robot or rocket bodies. assessment. But so far, little is being done
or laser.”11 It remains to be seen how the Just as the operation of large satellite by the United States or other countries,
public acknowledgment of such initiatives constellations to date has not caused a including China and Russia, to address
will influence counterspace weapons trends, commensurate rise in space debris, neither
these main causes of increasing space de-
though one likely response from countries has testing or use of kinetic counterspace
bris. Though most breakup events are not
like China and Russia would be to develop weapons. Most debris from the U.S. mili-
caused by nefarious acts, debris-generating
new counterspace systems. This cat-and- tary’s shoot down of a defunct U.S. satel-
breakups pose just as much risk to the space
mouse game between offensive and de- lite in 2008, called Operation Burnt Frost,
fense space capabilities will likely make deorbited within days.12 Additionally, the environment as the counterspace weapons
space operations more expensive for both Russian ASAT test in 2021 created around regularly chronicled in this report, and
government and commercial operators, as 1,800 catalogued debris fragments, yet only debris-generating breakups will continue
space operators will likely want to invest around 9 tracked pieces remained in orbit by to do so in the future.
in systems and methods that protect their
space assets. It will also raise questions
about what commercial operators are legally
allowed to do to protect their satellites,
MOST DEBRIS-GENERATING
similar to the issues raised in cyberspace
about whether cyberattack victims can
INCIDENTS OVER THE PAST
“hack back” against their attackers.
YEAR HAVE NOTHING TO DO
Looking to the future, the United States
and its allies, beyond just France, will want
WITH OPERATING SATELLITE
new on-orbit technologies—like bodyguard
satellites—to protect against on-orbit coun-
CONSTELLATIONS.
terspace threats. Such systems could employ

WHAT TO WATCH
COUNTERING catastrophic potential. At the same time, as launch withing minutes of a rocket leaving
countries like China utilize pLEO constella- the launch pad, challenging an adversary’s
PROLIFERATED
tions to close their own “space-enabled kill ability to reconstitute satellite systems dam-
SATELLITE chains,” the United States will also seek ways aged in a conflict. Taking a step further, SBIs
to erode their capabilities.19 The distinction may very well open the door to a broader
CONSTELLATIONS
for Washington will be to do so in ways that conversation among policymakers on how
do not lay waste to orbits for all who use to unlock the full military potential of the
The alarming news of 2024—that Russia is them to advance commerce, science, and space domain for warfighting, including
pursuing a space-based nuclear anti-satellite security in contrast to Moscow’s approach capabilities that operate “in, from, and
weapon—brought the first signs of active and even those hinted by Beijing. through” space.23
development, including on-orbit testing,
of a counterspace weapon believed to be
designed to counter proliferated LEO (pLEO) SPACE AND MISSILE
constellations en masse.16
DEFENSE NEXUS
Governments and commercial operators
alike have embraced pLEO constellations:
from first-mover Starlink, to the U.S. govern- While this report does not describe U.S.
ment through its investment in hundreds of counterspace weapons, it is impossible to
satellites for ISR and missile detection and ignore the counterspace implications of the
tracking, to China and its ISR and SATCOM “Golden Dome” missile defense initiative
system expansion. These architectures offer announced by the White House in January
clear advantages: enhanced persistence, 2025. Specific details remain scarce, but the
higher technology refresh rates, lower per executive order points to the centrality of
unit costs, and greater resilience. Russian space for missile defense—encompassing
efforts to interfere with Starlink in Ukraine space-based sensors for missile detection and
have been largely stymied by the sheer tracking, data relay networks, and renewed
number of satellites still able to connect interest in space-based interceptors (SBIs).20
with ground terminals and SpaceX’s ability Historical analyses suggest that thousands
to rapidly update its systems. of SBIs in low Earth orbit would be neces-
However, no advantage is permanent and, sary to intercept ballistic missiles in their
as previous editions of this report have cau- boost phase, before countermeasures or
tioned, adversaries will seek new methods maneuverable reentry vehicles are released.21
to erode it. Both this report and previous These SBIs are certain to become high val-
ones have drawn attention to PLA-affiliat- ue counterspace targets. Russian officials
ed research into attack simulations that have already accused the United States of
could wipe out planes of LEO satellites, undermining “Russian and Chinese strategic
cyber penetrations of satellite networks deterrence capabilities” with its Golden
and infrastructure that could impact sat- Dome plans.22 Adversaries may well gravitate
ellite command and control, and high-al- to nuclear ASATs or other wide area-effects
titude nuclear detonation (HAND) effects weapons to neutralize such orbiting systems
on satellites.17 Further, Moscow is signaling at scale.
new redlines with threats that commercial
Furthermore, though intended as a missile
satellites, like Starlink, supporting military
defense system, SBIs also have utility as
operations are legitimate targets.18
counterspace weapons. An SBI equipped
The authors fully expect to see more coun- with a kinetic payload, laser, or microwave
ter-pLEO threats in the years to come, a device could be used as a bodyguard sat-
reminder that proliferation is but one means ellite or to degrade an adversary’s space
of enhancing resilience. The United States systems. It also could be used to entirely
must figure out how to deter and defend cut off access to space, as it could be ca-
against such attacks and minimize their pable of destroying any attempted space
33 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

CONCLUSION
CONCLUSION
HAT THIS REPORT CHRONICLES NO NEW SPECTACULAR COUN-
T
“The years teach TERSPACE DEVELOPMENTS does not mean nothing interesting
much which or noteworthy happened. To understand the events, and the
significance, of this past year, one must look at the trends over a
the days never
wider time horizon. Doing so reveals patterns that illuminate the direction of
know.”
U.S. adversaries, as well as of the United States and its allies in space. China
— RALPH WALDO and Russia, as well as, to a lesser degree, Iran and North Korea, are actively
EMERSON FROM ESSAYS: working to test new technologies and concepts of operations in space that
SECOND SERIES, 1844 have clear applicability and use for counterspace weapons capabilities.
Meanwhile, building on trends noted in past years, jamming and spoofing
GPS signals has become ubiquitous in certain regions of the world, and cyber
operations targeting space systems continue to take place and are uncovered
on a regular basis.
34 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

To date, the United States has not publicly revealed its
own counterspace-specific capabilities beyond two elec-
tronic warfare capabilities. Of its allies, only France has
routinely acknowledged its intent to develop on-orbit
counterspace capabilities that could perform defensive
and offensive missions. From what is publicly known,
the United States and its allies appear to be developing
a much narrower range of counterspace weapons than
their potential adversaries. This imbalance is possibly
attributed to the commonly held assumption that the
use of kinetic counterspace weapons in conflict is
incompatible with maintaining a usable space envi-
ronment for military space operations and somehow
in conflict with the law of war. But the United States is
reevaluating these assumptions, talking about kinetic
counterspace weapons and space-based missile inter-
ceptors as part of the Golden Dome initiative.1
Ultimately, Russia and particularly China are demon-
strating sophisticated counterspace capabilities in
orbit, as well as deploying cyber and electronic warfare
capabilities targeting space systems. Iran is growing
more capable in space, deploying more satellites and
having greater success with indigenous space launch
capabilities. The United States has, to date, constrained
its counterspace emphasis to non-kinetic capabilities
and publicly expressed no interest in developing bod-
yguard satellites or other systems to defend against
attacking satellites in space. But the United States is
shedding those restraints.2 Additionally, the secrecy
that surrounds U.S. counterspace capabilities has to
date limited its usefulness for deterrence purposes. In
this complicated and increasingly threatening space
environment, to retain its edge in space, the United
States will need all the counterspace tools it can get its
hands on, including bodyguard-style satellites. It should
also be more public about the U.S. arsenal, ensuring
that these systems can be used to the maximum extent
for deterrence as well as warfighting.

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
CLAYTON SWOPE is the deputy director of the Aerospace Security Project and a senior fellow in
the Defense and Security Department at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS).
Before joining CSIS, Swope led national security and cybersecurity public policy for Amazon’s Project
Kuiper, an initiative to increase global broadband access through a constellation of satellites in low
Earth orbit. While at Amazon, he also worked on cloud policy issues. Prior to his time at Amazon,
Swope served as a senior adviser on national security, space, foreign affairs, and technology policy
issues for a member of the U.S. House of Representatives. He also worked for more than 14 years
at the Central Intelligence Agency, serving largely in the Directorate of Science and Technology. He
holds a Bachelor of Science in mechanical engineering from the University of Notre Dame.
KARI A. BINGEN is the director of the Aerospace Security Project and a senior fellow in the the De-
fense and Security Department at CSIS. Before joining, she was the Chief Strategy Officer at HawkEye
360, an innovative space technology company. She previously served as the deputy undersecretary
of defense for intelligence and security, overseeing the nation’s defense intelligence and security
enterprises. Prior, Kari was the policy director on the House Armed Services Committee and staff
lead for its Strategic Forces Subcommittee, advising members of Congress on defense policy, pro-
gram, and budget matters. Prior to government service, she worked in the national security space
sector, supporting U.S. defense and intelligence community organizations. In addition to her work
at CSIS, Kari is an adjunct assistant professor at Georgetown University. She is a member of the
U.S. National Intelligence University’s Board of Visitors, a member of the U.S. Strategic Command
Strategic Advisory Group, and serves on a number of corporate and nonprofit advisory boards. She
holds a degree in aeronautics and astronautics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
MAKENA YOUNG is a fellow with the Aerospace Security Project at CSIS. Her research interests in-
clude international collaboration, space security, and orbital debris. Prior to joining CSIS, Ms. Young
worked for the Federal Aviation Administration as an aerospace engineer, focusing on automatic
dependent surveillance-broadcast certification and integration in small aircraft. She holds a BS in
aeronautical and astronautical engineering from Purdue University with minors in international
relations and environmental engineering.
KENDRA LAFAVE is a program coordinator and research assistant with the Aerospace Security Pro-
ject at CSIS. She previously served as a program coordinator with the Hess Center for New Frontiers
at CSIS. Prior to her time at CSIS, Kendra worked at the U.S. Civilian Research and Development
Foundation (CRDF) Global and interned with the U.S. Department of State’s Office of Peacekeeping
Operations. Kendra graduated summa cum laude with a BA in international affairs from James
Madison University. She is currently pursuing an MA in international science and technology policy
from George Washington University, concentrating in space policy.

ENDNOTES
INTRODUCTION
1 Dan De Luce, “Pentagon official warns Russian anti-satellite nuclear weapon could be devastating,”
NBC News, May 1, 2024, 
ti-satellite-nuclear-weapon-devastat-rcna150314.
2 Matt Burgess, “The Dangerous Rise of GPS Attacks,” Wired, April 30, 2024, 
story/the-dangerous-rise-of-gps-attacks/.
3 Zachary Cohen and Oren Liebermann, “Pentagon is closely monitoring Russia and China test military
capabilities in space,” CNN, March 16, 2025, 
gon-monitoring-russia-china-space/index.html.
4 Dmitry Antonov, Felix Light, and Guy Faulconbridge, “Russia warns United States: use of SpaceX for
spying makes its satellites a target,” Reuters, March 20, 2024, 
warns-united-states-use-spacex-spying-makes-its-satellites-target-2024-03-20/.
5 Secretary of the Air Force Public Affairs, “Saltzman outlines Space Force priorities, what’s necessary
to achieve them,” U.S. Space Force, March 13, 2025, 
play/Article/4093782/saltzman-outlines-space-force-priorities-whats-necessary-to-achieve-them/;
and “A Conversation with Secretary of the Air Force Frank Kendall on The Department of the
Air Force in 2050,” CSIS, January 13, 2025, 
tary-air-force-frank-kendall-department-air-force-2050.
COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
1 Antonia Chayes, “Rethinking Warfare: The Ambiguity of Cyber Attacks,” Harvard Law School, Har-
vard National Security Journal, no. 6 (): 474–519, 
loads/2015/06/Chayes.pdf.
2 Space situational awareness (SSA) generally refers to the “knowledge and characterization of space
objects and their operational environment” as defined in U.S. Space Policy Directive-3, National
Space Traffic Management Policy, The White House, June 18, 2018, 
chives.gov/presidential-actions/space-policy-directive-3-national-space-traffic-management-policy/.
CHINA
1 Kristin Burke, “China Can Track GSSAP,” China Aerospace Studies Institute, September 9, 2024,

2 Andrew Jones, “China to debut new Long March and commercial rockets in 2025,” SpaceNews,
January 2, 2025, 
in-2025/.
3 Andrew Jones, “China nears record launch year with Ceres-1 and SAR satellite missions,” SpaceNews,
December 19, 2024, 
satellite-missions/.
4 Theresa Hitchens, “China’s space moves: Highly mobile satellites stalking GEO spook Space Force,”
Breaking Defense, December 10, 2024, 
highly-mobile-satellites-stalking-geo-spook-space-force/.
5 Guy Norris, “Concerns Grow Over Chinese Space Maneuvering Capability,” Aviation Week, August 21,
2024, 
Greg Hadley, “China’s Orbital Maneuvers Have Space Force Leaders Seeking Better Options,” Air and
Space Forces Magazine, December 11, 2024, 
maneuver/; and “Integrity Flash: Analysis of Developments in the Space Domain, Issue 104,” Integrity
ISR, September 1, 2024, 
pdf.
6 “Integrity Flash: Analysis of Developments in the Space Domain, Issue 104,” Integrity ISR.
37 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

7 “TJS-3 and TJS-10: Space Events ,” LSAS Tec, YouTube video, June 17, 2024, 
youtube.com/watch?v=mTVacnXslpE.
8 Andrew Jones, “China Launches Shijian-25 Satellite to Test On-Orbit Refueling and Mission Extension
Technologies,” SpaceNews, January 6, 2025, 
lite-to-test-on-orbit-refueling-and-mission-extension-technologies/.
9 Greg Gillinger (@Integrity ISR), “Fill ‘Er Up? Shijian-25 Launched, Co-Planar with Shijian-21: Integrity
Flash-Lite 8,” LinkedIn, January 16, 2025, 
launched-co-planar-shijian-21-integrity-yxw8e/.
10 “Integrity Flash: Analysis of Developments in the Space Domain, Issue 113,” Integrity ISR, January 19,
2025, 
11 A report published in by the China Aerospace Studies Institute draws a distinction be-
tween the purpose of the SY and SJ programs, assessing that the SJ program aims to operationalize
systems that have already been integrated and tested, while the SY program’s goal is to integrate new
technologies into one satellite system, see Kristin Burke, “Initial Analysis of Two Chinese Satellite
Series: Shi Jian and Shi Yan,” China Aerospace Studies Institute, March 28, 2022, 
versity.af.edu/CASI/Display/Article/2975081/initial-analysis-of-two-chinese-satellite-series-shi-jian-
and-shi-yan/.
12 China Aerospace News, “ [Just Now! Chang-7A Hainan Take-Off],” Weibo.cn,
刚才！长七A海南起飞
December 23, 2021, Translated by Microsoft Translator, 
13 “Integrity Flash: Analysis of Developments in the Space Domain, Issue 111,” Integrity ISR, December 8,
2024, 
14 “Integrity Flash: Analysis of Developments in the Space Domain, Issue 105,” Integrity ISR, September
15, 2024, 
pdf.
15 Slingshot Aerospace, “The Slingshot Global Sensor Network is tracking a new object in low Earth orbit
(LEO),” LinkedIn, May 29, 2024, 
global-sensor-network-is-tracking-activity-7201624236233289729-Z3rF; and Andrew Jones, “Chi--
na’s Secretive Reusable Spaceplane Lands after 267 Days in Orbit,” SpaceNews, September 6, 2024,

16 Andrew Jones, “China Launches Mystery Reusable Spaceplane for Third Time,” SpaceNews, December
14, 2023, 
17 “Integrity Flash: Developments and Analysis in the Space Domain, Issue 113” Integrity ISR; and Justin
Davenport, “Long March 4B with Shijian-6 Group 5 satellites launches successfully from Jiuquan,”
NASA Spaceflight, December 9, 2021, 
an-6/.
18 s2a systems (@s2a_systems), “For one of our clients (thanks for permission to share the information)
we are currently taking a closer look at SHIYAN 24C 03 (2023-206C/58652) and SHIJIAN 6 05A (2021-
122A/49961),” X, April 20, 2024, 1:38 a.m., 
19 Simone McCarthy, “China is practicing ‘dogfighting’ with satellites as it ramps up space capa-
bilities: US Space Force,” CNN, March 21, 2025, 
na-space-force-dogfighting-satellites-intl-hnk/index.html.
20 Kristin Burke, “China’s Different Approach to Space Situational Awareness,” China Aerospace Studies
Institute, December 2, 2024, 
nas-different-approach-to-space-situational-awareness/.
21 Ibid.
22 Ibid.
23 LSAS Tec (@LSAS-Tec), “Check out the intriguing interactions between USA LDPE-3A and China’s SJ-
23 satellites in GEO during late 2024,” LinkedIn, , 
tec_spaceanalysis-geo-satelliteinteraction-activity-7292584494052564994-9oBK; and “Next Space
Force payload arrives in Florida ahead of launch,” media release, U.S. Space Systems
Command, November 14, 2022, 
RELEASES/Next%20Space%20Force%20payload%20arrives%20in%20Florida%20ahead%20of%20
January%202023%20launch.pdf?ver=a9Bcr8my-xTYIYzVnCuMEw%3D%3D.

24 Joel Francis, “Briefing 29: Implications of the Ongoing Salt Typhoon Campaign on Telecommunica-
tions and Space,” Constellations, January 15, 2025, 
articles/implications-of-the-ongoing-salt-typhoon-campaign-on-telecommunications-and-space.
25 Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency et al., “Joint Cybersecurity Advisory: PRC
State-Sponsored Actors Compromise and Maintain Persistent Access to U.S. Critical Infrastructure,”
U.S. Department of Defense, February 7, 2024, 
1/-1/0/CSA-PRC-COMPROMISE-US-CRITICAL-INFRASTRUCTURE.PDF; and Josh Hanrahan, “VOLTZITE
Espionage Operations Targeting U.S. Critical Systems,” Dragos, Inc. , 
dragos.com/hubfs/116-Datasheets/Dragos_IntelBrief_VOLTZITE_FINAL.pdf?hsLang=en.
26 Pierre Lee and Vickie Su, “TIDRONE Targets Military and Satellite Industries in Taiwan,” Trend
Micro, September 6, 2024, 
tary-and-satellite-industries-in-taiwan.html.
27 GPS Spoofing WorkGroup, GPS Spoofing: Final Report of the GPS Spoofing WorkGroup (OPSGROUP,
), 
28 Defense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space: Space Reliance in an Era of Competition
and Expansion (Washington, DC: Defense Intelligence Agency, 2022), 
Documents/News/Military_Power_Publications/Challenges_Security_Space_2022.pdf.
29 Andrew Jones, “China reorganizes its military, impacts likely for space operations,” SpaceNews, April
23, 2024, 
and “The Ministry of National Defense held a special press conference on the establishment of the
Information Support Force,” Xinhua Daily Telegraph, April 20, 2024, 
04/20/c_1310771952.htm.
30 Stephen Chen, “China’s energy weapon fires thousands of intense pulses in tests and survives:
study,” South China Morning Post, January 14, 2025, 
article/3294077/chinas-energy-weapon-fires-thousands-nuclear-blasts-tests-and-survives-study;
and Stephen Chen, “China could attack Starlink-like satellites with submarine laser weapon: naval
study,” South China Morning Post, January 14, 2025, 
cle/3294077/chinas-energy-weapon-fires-thousands-nuclear-blasts-tests-and-survives-study/.
31 Clayton Swope et al., Space Threat Assessment 2024 (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 
csis.org/analysis/space-threat-assessment-2024; and “Space Threat Fact Sheet,” Headquarters Space
Force Intelligence, February 21, 2025, 
space-force-intelligence-space-threat-fact-sheet/.
32 Du Yanyun and Zhang Huang, “Starlink Militarization and Its Impact on Global Strategic Stability,”
Interpret: China, CSIS, original work published in Journal of International Security Studies, September
19, 2023, 
tegic-stability/; Yan Jiajie and Yu Nanping, “The U.S. Starlink Project and Its Implications from the
Perspective of International and National Security,” Interpret: China, CSIS, original work published in
Journal of International Security Studies, September 14, 2024, 
the-u-s-starlink-project-and-its-implications-from-the-perspective-of-international-and-national-se-
curity/; and Wang Peiwen, Zhang Huang, and Zhang Kaiyue, “Starlink Militarization: Challenges and
Responses to Space Intelligence and Information Security,” Interpret: China, CSIS, original work pub-
lished in Journal of Intelligence, January 29, 2024, 
tarization-challenges-and-responses-to-space-intelligence-and-information-security/.
33 Brian Weeden, Cassandra Steer, and Fiona Cunningham, “Chinese Assessments of Starlink and
U.S.-China Space Relations,” CSIS, Interpret: China, December 2, 2024, 
nese-assessments-of-starlink-and-u-s-china-space-relations/.
34 “Is China Planning to Target Starlink Satellites Amid Taiwan Tensions?,” Economic Times, January 14,
2025, 
link-satellites-amid-taiwan-tensions/articleshow/117245640.cms.
35 “Chinese scientists simulate ‘hunting’ Starlink satellites in orbit,” South China Morning Post, January
12, 2025, 
late-hunting-starlink-satellites-orbit.
36 “Foreign Universities Sanctioned by the U.S. Government,” Caltech Offices of Research Compliance
and Security, last updated January 16, 2024, 
39 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

port-compliance/restricted-party-screening/foreign-universities-sanctioned-by-the-us-government;
and Rachel Lin and Jonathan Chin, “Seven Chinese universities sanctioned,” Taipei Times, March 1,
2025, 
RUSSIA
1 House Intelligence Committee (@HouseIntel), “Statement from Chairman @RepMikeTurner:”, X, Feb-
ruary 14, 2024, 11:35 a.m., Jacob Parkinson
et al., “GOP warning of ‘national security threat’ is about Russia wanting nuclear weapon in space:
Sources,” ABC News, February 14, 2024, 
lawmakers-house-chairman-warns/story?id=107232293; and Michael Williams and Kevin Liptak,
“White House confirms US has intelligence on Russian anti-satellite capability,” CNN, February 15,
2024, 
2 “Pentagon Press Secretary Air Force Maj. Gen. Pat Ryder Holds a Press Briefing,” U.S. Department of
Defense, May 21, 2024, 
gon-press-secretary-air-force-maj-gen-pat-ryder-holds-a-press-briefing/.
3 Slingshot Aerospace (@Slingshot-Aerospace), “The Slingshot Global Sensor Network is keeping a
close watch on Cosmos 2576,” LinkedIn, , 
space_the-slingshot-global-sensor-network-is-keeping-activity-7199421691846942723-R5Kq/; and
Bill Chappell, “What to know about the ‘space weapon’ the U.S. says Russia recently launched,” NPR,
May 30, 2024, 
weapon-cosmos-2576.
4 Jim Shell (@jim-shell-4539438), “Russian satellite ‘COSMOS 2576’ (59773/2024-092A)- declared
by US as a ‘likely counterspace weapon’ is on the move,” LinkedIn, , https://

ty-7297837323893841920-a85_/.
5 Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces (blog), accessed March 5, 2025, 
6 “The Integrity Flash: Analysis of Developments in the Space Domain, Issue 116,” Integrity ISR, March 9,
2025, 
7 “COSMOS2581 82 83 LoweRes,” Integrity ISR, YouTube video, March 7, 2025, 
com/watch?v=vhMDVW4eRUE.
8 Brett Tingley, “Pentagon space chief condemns ‘irresponsible’ launch of Russian inspector satellite,”
Space.com, August 18, 2022, 
sponsible-behavior/.
9 Sandra Erwin, “Russian spy satellite reportedly continues suspicious maneuvers,” SpaceNews, https://
spacenews.com/russian-spy-satellite-reportedly-continues-suspicious-maneuvers/.
10 “Integrity Flash: Analysis of Developments in the Space Domain: Issue 115,” Integrity ISR, February 24,
2025, 
“Satellite fleet: THOR 7,” Space Norway, accessed April 15, 2024, 
ture/satellite-fleet/thor-7/; and “Intelsat 10-02 at 359° E,” Intelsat, accessed April 15, 2024, https://

11 Kari A. Bingen, Kaitlyn Johnson, and Makena Young, Space Threat Assessment 2023 (Washington, DC:
CSIS, ), 
12 “1+1 media’s response to the enemy’s attempts to jam Ukraine’s satellite broadcasting,” 1+1 Media,
March 28, 2025, 
putnikove-movlennia-ukrayini; “The Final Frontier Flash: Developments and Analysis in the Space
Domain,” Integrity ISR, April 7, 2024, 
2024-Final-Frontier-Flash.pdf; and “Sirius 4,” NASA Space Science Data Coordinated Archive, accessed
April 15, 2025, 
13 “Integrity Flash: Analysis of Developments in the Space Domain, Issue 118,” Integrity ISR, April 8, 2025,

14 Aamer Madhani and Zeke Miller, “Russia has obtained a ‘troubling’ emerging anti-satellite weapon,
the White House says,” AP News, February 15, 2024, 
lite-weapon-threat-technology-2880f9c55122dcafe87188bc92dd6cde.

15 Unshin Lee Harpley, “DOD Official Confirms Russia Is Developing an ‘Indiscriminate’ Space Nuke,’” Air
and Space Forces Magazine, May 2, 2024, 
discriminate-space-nuke/.
16 Jeff Foust, “U.S. Dismisses Space Weapons Treaty Proposal As ‘Fundamentally Flawed,’” SpaceNews,
September 11, 2014, 
al-as-fundamentally-flawed/.
17 “The Nuclear Option: Deciphering Russia’s New Space Threat,” CSIS, May 3, 2024, 
org/analysis/nuclear-option-deciphering-russias-new-space-threat.
18 “Cosmos-2553 – the first Neitron radar satellite,” Russian strategic nuclear forces (blog), February
5, 2022, and Pavel
Podvig (@russianforces), “I think we can tell which satellite is responsible for the ‘Russian nuclear
something in space’ scare. It’s Cosmos-2553. Let’s start with Mallory Stewart’s statement earlier today
at CSIS 1/,” X, May 3, 2024, 6:28 p.m., 
russianforces/status/1786523272072331561.
19 W.J. Hennigan, “The Warning,” New York Times, December 5, 2024, 
tive/2024/12/05/opinion/nuclear-weapons-space.html; General Stephen N. Whiting, Commander, U.S.
Space Command, Fiscal Year 2026 Priorities and Posture of United States Space Command, Testimony
before the U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee, 119th Cong., 1st sess. (March 26, 2025), https://
 and
Dr. John Plumb, U.S. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space Policy, FY25 Budget Request for National
Security Space Programs, Testimony before the U.S. House Armed Services Committee, 118th Cong.,
2nd sess. (May 1, 2024), 
20 Theresa Hitchens, “Is Russia’s Cosmos 2553 satellite a test for a future orbital nuclear weapon?,”
Breaking Defense, May 22, 2024, 
lite-a-test-for-a-future-orbital-nuclear-weapon/.
21 According to information provided to the report authors by LeoLabs on April 15, 2025.
22 Shaun Waterman, “Russian Jamming Is Wreaking Havoc on GPS in Eastern Europe. But Is It Hybrid
Warfare?,” Air and Space Forces Magazine, July 10, 2024, 
gps-jamming-nato-ukraine/.
23 GPS Spoofing WorkGroup, GPS Spoofing.
24 Ryan Browne, “Russia jammed GPS during major NATO military exercise with US troops,” CNN, No-
vember 14, 2018, 
25 AFP, “Finland Developing Device to Counter Alleged Russian Satellite Jamming,” The Defense Post,
April 16, 2025, 
26 “Russia Expands GPS Signal Jamming to 15 Regions,” Moscow Times, May 5, 2023, 
themoscowtimes.com/2023/05/05/russia-expands-gps-signal-jamming-to-15-regions-a81049.
27 “Attempts to Jam Suspilnes’s Satellite Signal from Russian Territory Recorded,” The Institute of Mass
Information, August 25, 2024, 
nal-from-russian-territory-recorded-i47341.
28 “Satellite broadcasting of FREEDOM TV channel was attacked,” FREEDOM, April 18, 2024, 
ua/en/satellite-broadcasting-of-freedom-tv-channel-was-attacked/; and “Cyber attack on TV channel
BabyTV: Toddlers suddenly exposed to Russian propaganda,” NL Times, April 6, 2024, 
nl/2024/04/06/cyber-attack-tv-channel-babytv-toddlers-suddenly-exposed-russian-propaganda.
29 Emma Farge, “UN body condemns Russian satellite interference in Europe,” Reuters, July 1, 2024,

rope-2024-07-01/.
30 Mabel Banfield-Nwachi, “Russia suspected of jamming GPS signal on aircraft carrying Grant Shapps,”
The Guardian, March 14, 2024, 
of-jamming-gps-signal-on-aircraft-carrying-grant-shapps.
31 Maria Mamaeva,” В РФ создали систему мониторинга «Калинка» для пеленгования сигналов
Starlink,” Komsomolskaya Pravda, December 14, 2024, 
32 Guy Faulconbridge and Dmitry Antonov, “Russia responds icily to U.S. hint on arms control talks with
Moscow and Beijing,” Reuters, March 20, 2024, 
41 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

talks-with-us-possible-only-part-broader-debate-2024-03-20/.
33 “Statement by the Representative of the Delegation of the Russian Federation at the Thematic Dis-
cussion on ‘Outer Space (Disarmament Aspects)’ in the First Committee of the 79th session of the UN
General Assembly, New York, October 29, 2024,” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
October 30, 2024, 
OTHERS
1 Brett Tingley, “Iran launches 3 satellites on Simorgh rocket’s 1st successful orbital launch,” Space.
com, January 29, 2024, 
uary-2024; Nasser Karimi and Jon Gambrell, “Iran says it successfully launched a satellite in its
program criticized by West over missile fears,” Associated Press, September 14, 2024, 
com/article/iran-satellite-chamran-space-52022a743be4e3ffca5df9d30de7b04c; and Brett Tingley,
“Iran launches military satellite, sending nation’s largest-ever payload to orbit: reports,” Space.com,
December 6, 2024, 
es-military-satellite-sending-nations-largest-ever-payload-to-orbit-reports.
2 “‘Shorten The Timeline’: Iran Touts Sending Heaviest Payload to Space as Nuclear Watchdogs Send
Enrichment Warnings,” Foundation for Defense of Democracies, Flash Brief, December 6, 2024,

to-space-as-nuclear-watchdogs-send-enrichment-warnings/.
3 “Iran’s Kowsar, Hodhod satellites successfully launched,” Islamic Republic News Agency, November 5,
2024, 
4 Anatoly Zak, “Soyuz launches Russian-built satellite for Iran,” Russian Space Web, last updated July 8,
2024, 
5 Lily Hay Newman, “Notorious Iranian Hackers Have Been Targeting the Space Industry With a New
Backdoor,” Wired, August 28, 2024, 
door/.
6 Tom Fakterman, Daniel Frank, and Jerome Tujague, “Curious Serpens’ FalseFont Backdoor: Tech-
nical Analysis, Detection and Prevention,” Unit42, March 21, 2024, 
com/curious-serpens-falsefont-backdoor/; and Microsoft Threat Intelligence, “Peach Sandstorm
deploys new custom Tickler malware in long-running intelligence gathering operations,” Microsoft,
August 28, 2024, 
ploys-new-custom-tickler-malware-in-long-running-intelligence-gathering-operations/.
7 Microsoft Threat Intelligence, “Peach Sandstorm password spray campaigns enable intelligence
collection at high-value targets,” Microsoft, September 14, 2023, 
security/blog/2023/09/14/peach-sandstorm-password-spray-campaigns-enable-intelligence-collec-
tion-at-high-value-targets/.
8 Ofir Rozmann, Chen Evgi, and Jonathan Leathery, “When Cats Fly: Suspected Iranian Threat Actor
UNC1549 Targets Israeli and Middle East Aerospace and Defense Sectors,” Mandiant, February 27,
2024, 
gets-israel-middle-east/.
9 Associated Press, “North Korean rocket carrying its 2nd spy satellite explodes shortly after launch,”
NBC News, May 27, 2024, 
ing-2nd-spy-satellite-explodes-shortly-launch-rcna154231.
10 “The Final Frontier Flash: Developments and Analysis in the Space Domain, Issue 100,” Integrity ISR,
June 30, 2024, 
tier-Flash.pdf.
11 Helen Regan, Gawon Bae, Brad Lendon, and Yumi Asada, “North Korea says it conducted new
ICBM test, days ahead of US election,” CNN, October 31, 2024, 
asia/north-korea-icbm-test-intl-hnk/index.html; and Kim Tong-Hyung, “North Korea says it tested
hypersonic intermediate range missile designed to strike remote Pacific targets,” PBS, January 7,
2025, 
ate-range-missile-designed-to-strike-remote-pacific-targets.
12 Helen Regan, Alex Stambaugh, Gawon Bae, and Mariya Knight, “Blinken warns Russia is close to

sharing advanced satellite technology with North Korea,” CNN, January 6, 2025, 
com/2025/01/06/asia/blinken-russia-satellite-technology-north-korea-intl-hnk/index.html.
13 “North Korea Cyber Group Conducts Global Espionage Campaign to Advance Regime’s Military and
Nuclear Programs,” National Cyber Security Centre, July 25, 2024, 
ncsc-partners-vigilant-dprk-sponsored-cyber-campaign.
14 Marco Galli et al., “An Offer You Can Refuse: UNC2970 Backdoor Deployment Using Trojanized PDF
Reader,” Mandiant, September 17, 2024, 
unc2970-backdoor-trojanized-pdf-reader.
15 “SpaDeX Mission,” Indian Space Research Organization, December 21, 2024, 
mission_SpaDeX.html; and Geeta Pandey, “India successfully conducts historic space-docking test,”
BBC News, January 16, 2025, 
16 Abhinandan Mishra, “India may acquire advanced Russian radar system,” Sunday Guardian, December
8, 2024, 
17 GPS Spoofing WorkGroup, GPS Spoofing.
18 Rudy Ruitenberg, “France plans low-orbit demonstrator that can target other satellites,” Defense
News, September 17, 2024, 
low-orbit-demonstrator-that-can-target-other-satellites/.
19 Mathieu Gitton (@mathieu-gitton), “France Intensifies Its Space Defense Strategy: New Challenges
and Opportunities,” LinkedIn, October 8, 2024, 
space-defense-strategy-new-mathieu-gitton-bxsce/.
GPS JAMMING AND SPOOFING
1 “UN agencies warn of satellite navigation jamming and spoofing,” International Telecommunication
Union, March 26, 2025, 
tion-jamming-and-spoofing/.
2 Isabelle Khurshudyan and Alex Horton, “Russian jamming leaves some high-tech U.S. weap-
ons ineffective in Ukraine,” Washington Post, May 24, 2024, 
world/2024/05/24/russia-jamming-us-weapons-ukraine/.
3 Linus Höller, “US, allies rush to refit their big guns with GPS protections,” Defense News, March 13,
2025, 
guns-with-gps-protections/.
4 “Report a GPS Anomaly,” Federal Aviation Administration, accessed March 19, 2025, 
gov/air_traffic/nas/gps_reports.
5 Guy Buesnel and Mark Holbrow, “GNSS Threats, Attacks and Simulations,” PNT Advisory Board, , 
6 Gleason Arliss, “What are the consequences of GPS interference?,” Perfect Jammer, September 7,
2022, 
7 Woodrow Bellamy III, “Are GPS Jamming Incidents a Growing Problem for Aviation?,” Avionics Interna-
tional, January 31, 2017, 
growing-problem-for-aviation/.
8 Matt Burgess, “When a tanker vanishes, all the evidence points to Russia,” Wired, September 21, 2017,

9 “2023 – The year of GPS jamming and spoofing,” Resilient Navigation and Timing Foundation, Janu-
ary 27, 2024, 
10 GPS Spoofing WorkGroup, GPS Spoofing.
11 Ibid.
12 Hande Atay Alam et al., “Iran accuses Israel of killing Iranian military commanders and others in
airstrike on consulate in Syria,” CNN, April 1, 2024, 
iran-syrian-consulate-attack-intl/index.html.
13 Laura Gozzi, “Ukraine war: Deepest Ukraine drone attack into Russian territory injures 12,” BBC News,
April 2, 2024, Anna Chernova, Victoria Butenko,
43 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

and Sophie Tanno, “Ukraine claims major drone strike on Russian airfield, killing servicemen and
destroying aircraft,” CNN, April 5, 2024, 
strikes-rostov-region-russia-intl/index.html; and Olga Voitovych and Lauren Said-Moorhouse, “Rusg-
sian oil refineries and military airfield targeted in drone attack, as thermal energy plants are damaged
in Ukraine,” CNN, April 27, 2024, 
ery-drone-attack-intl/index.html.
14 Guy Faulconbridge and Lidia Kelly, “Ukraine attacks Moscow in one of largest ever drone strikes on
Russian capital,” Reuters, August 21, 2024, 
drone-attack-moscow-other-regions-russian-officials-say-2024-08-21/.
15 Maria Varenikova, “Ukraine Sends Volley of Drones at Russia, Hitting Oil Refinery,” New York Times,
January 24, 2025, 
html.
16 Pavel Polityuk and Alex Richardson, “Ukraine says it hit an offshore gas platform used by Russian
forces,” Reuters, August 10, 2024, 
shore-gas-platform-used-by-russian-forces-2024-08-10/.
17 GPS Spoofing WorkGroup, GPS Spoofing.
18 Sribala Subramanian, “GPS Jamming in Myanmar,” The Diplomat, October 18, 2024, 
mat.com/2024/10/gps-jamming-in-myanmar/.
19 Travis Turgeon, “Global GPS Jamming Hotspots: ,” GNSS Jamming, July 1, 2024, https://
 and John Feng, “North Korean Elecg-
tronic Warfare Surges Under Kim: South,” Newsweek, October 4, 2024, 
north-korea-gps-jamming-electronic-warfare-against-south-korea-surges-1963814.
20 GPS Spoofing WorkGroup, GPS Spoofing.
21 “ITU issues warning on interference with radio navigation satellite service,” International Telecom-
munication Union, August 23, 2022, 
ence-rnss/; and Stine Jacobsen and Anne Kauranen, “Estonia says Russia violates international rules
with GPS interference,” Reuters, April 30, 2024, 
olates-international-083726782.html.
22 Kim Seung-yeon, “U.N. aviation agency voices grave concern over N. Korea’s GPS signal jamming,”
Yonhap News Agency, June 24, 2024, 
23 Agnes Helou, “Lebanon files complaint with UN over alleged Israeli GPS jamming,” Breaking Defense,
July 17, 2024, 
israeli-gps-jamming/.
24 Ionut Arghire, “Check Point Responds to Hacking Claims,” Security Week, April 1, 2025, 
securityweek.com/check-point-responds-to-hacking-claims/.
25 Yonatan Keller, “State actor or cybercrime? The story of IntelBroker, the most under-rated threat
actor,” Zafran, April 25, 2024, and Waqas,
“IntelBroker Claims Space-Eyes Breach, Targeting US National Security Data,” HackRead, April 16,
2024, 
26 “European Repository of Cyber Incidents (EuRepoC),” German Institute for International and Secu-
rity Affairs, accessed March 24, 2025, 
swp-projects/european-repository-on-cyber-incidents-eurepoc.
27 Bill Toulas, “US Space Tech Giant Maxar Discloses Employee Data Breach,” BleepingComputer,
November 18, 2024, 
discloses-employee-data-breach.
28 Sandra Erwin, “Space Industry Group Warns of Escalating Cyber Threats, Outmatched Defenses,”
SpaceNews, June 18, 2024, 
ber-threats-outmatched-defenses/; and Space ISAC Newsroom, accessed April 17, 2025, https://
spaceisac.org/newsroom/#.
29 Clemence Poirer, “Hacking the Cosmos: Cyber operations against the space sector. A case study from
the war in Ukraine,” Center for Security Studies, , 
news/2024/10/hacking-the-cosmos-cyber-operations-against-the-space-sector-a-case-study-from-
the-war-in-ukraine.html.

30 Austin Kaiser, “Satellite Hacking,” Black Hills Information Security, October 3, 2024, 
blackhillsinfosec.com/satellite-hacking/.
31 Dale Arney et al., “In-Space Servicing, Assembly, and Manufacturing (ISAM) State of Play - 2024 Edi-
tion,” NASA Technical Reports Server, October 31, 2024, 
32 “Space Symposium 40: Whiting stressed U.S. must prepare for conflict to ensure peace,” U.S.
Space Command, April 8, 2025, 
cle/4149678/space-symposium-40-whiting-stressed-us-must-prepare-for-conflict-to-ensure-peace/;
and Achala Dennison, “Why Orbital Maneuvering Is Top Of Mind At U.S. Space Command,” Space
Systems CyberSecurity, October 7, 2024, 
tionweek-com-space-launch-vehicles-propulsion-why-orbital-maneuvering-top-mind-us-space-com-
mand/.
33 “Geosynchronous Space Situational Awareness Program,” United States Space Force, last updated
, 
nous-space-situational-awareness-program/.
34 Garrett Reim, “SSC Researching Constellation Of Next-Generation GEO Satellite Scouts,” Avia-
tion Week Network, March 11, 2024, 
tion-next-generation-geo-satellite-scouts.
35 Sandra Erwin, “True Anomaly Achieves Milestone with Jackal Satellite Deployment,” SpaceNews,
December 26, 2024, 
lite-deployment/; and “Mission X Continues: Announcing Successful Launch and Control of Jackal,”
True Anomaly, December 21, 2024, 
36 “Identification and Characterisation of Space Objects Through Non-Earth Imaging,” HEO,

jects-through-non-earth-imaging.
37 Tom Temin, “Air Force Research Lab Creates a New Approach to Situational Awareness in Space,” Fed-
eral News Network, January 26, 2024, 
research-lab-creates-a-new-approach-to-situational-awareness-in-space/.
38 Debra Werner, “French Armament Agency Responds to Space Threats,” SpaceNews, September
17, 2024, Rudy
Ruitenberg, “France Plans Low-Orbit Demonstrator That Can Target Other Satellites,” Defense News,
September 17, 2024, 
orbit-demonstrator-that-can-target-other-satellites/; and Nicolas Cailleaud, “Espace: Tout Savoir Sur
Yoda, CET Engin de Guerre Protecteur de Satellites,” CNEWS, April 29, 2021, 
ence/2021-04-29/espace-tout-savoir-sur-yoda-cet-engin-de-guerre-protecteur-de-satellites-1076052.
39 “The Iron Dome for America,” The White House, January 27, 2025, 
dential-actions/2025/01/the-iron-dome-for-america/.
40 “Implementing Competitive Endurance: Space Intelligence,” CSIS, October 10, 2023, 
org/analysis/implementing-competitive-endurance-space-intelligence.
41 Darren McKnight et al., “Rocket Body Tumbling Assessment Through Radar, Optical Telescope, and
Imaging,” 75th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), October 14–18, 2024, 
unibe.ch/publist/data/2024/artproc/SF_IAC2024.pdf.
42 Jim Garamone, “Iran Shoots Down U.S. Global Hawk Operating in International Airspace,” DOD
News, June 20, 2019, 
iran-shoots-down-us-global-hawk-operating-in-international-airspace/; U.S. Air Forces Europe -
Air Forces Africa,“Russian aircraft collides into US unmanned system in international waters,” U.S.
European Command, March 14, 2023, 
craft-collides-into-us-unmanned-system-in-international-waters; Jim Garamone, “Defense Leaders
See Increase in Risky Chinese Intercepts,” DOD News, June 8, 2023, 
News-Stories/Article/Article/3421766/defense-leaders-see-increase-in-risky-chinese-intercepts/; and
John Feng, “U.S. and China Spar Over Military Aircraft Intercept Over South China Sea,” Newsweek,
January 2, 2023, 
tion-army-navy-south-china-sea-1770666.
43 Per discussions in with an individual close to TraCSS implementation efforts.
44 Jim Shell (@jim-shell-4539438), “OUCH! Russia slams the US over the lack of cataloging debris asso-
45 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

ciated with recent US space object breakups!” LinkedIn, , 
posts/jim-shell-4539438_ouch-russia-slams-the-us-over-the-lack-activity-7298535252027748354-
yeAD.
45 The eight incidents selected were based on information discoverable from SSA experts and compa-
nies on social media, cited below.
46 U.S. Space Command, “Break-up of Russian-owned space object,” press release, June 27, 2024,

up-of-russian-owned-space-object/; and Reuters, “Astronauts take cover as defunct Russian satellite
splits into nearly 200 pieces,” The Guardian, June 27, 2024, 
article/2024/jun/27/russian-satellite-debris-international-space-station.
47 LeoLabs (@LeoLabs_Space), “We’re actively monitoring and analyzing the breakup event in #LEO
involving a Chinese rocket body, CZ-6A. Our radar data indicates this event occurred on 6 August at
~20:10 UTC at ~810 km. It resulted in at least 700 debris fragments and potentially more than 900,” X,
August 8, 2024, 6:28 p.m. ET, 
48 Ibid.
49 Jim Shell (@jim-shell-4539438), “YASDE! (Yet Another Space Debris Event),” LinkedIn, , 
mainnormsofbehavior-activity-7237837766460342272-ySgV.
50 S4S_SDA, “S4S has confirmed the breakup of Intelsat 33E (#41748, 2016-053B) ~0430 UTC. Currently
tracking around 20 associated pieces - analysis ongoing,” X, October 19, 2024, 9:56 p.m. ET, 
com/S4S_SDA/status/1847819183272472884.
51 Jason Rainbow, “ExoAnalytic observes 500 pieces of debris from Intelsat 33e breakup,” SpaceNews,
October 28, 2024, 
sat-33e-breakup/.
52 Jeff Foust, “Retired military weather satellite breaks up,” SpaceNews, December 20, 2024, https://
spacenews.com/retired-military-weather-satellite-breaks-up.
53 Slingshot Aerospace, “Slingshot Orbital Alert,” X, December 19, 2024, 4:15 p.m. ET, 
sling_shot_aero/status/1869853991296741726.
54 Jim Shell (@jim-shell-4539438), “YASDE! (Yet Another Space Debris Event),” LinkedIn, ,

wareness-activity-7291070798121836545-b8WA.
55 Ibid.
56 Jim Shell (@jim-shell-4539438), “YASDE! (Yet Another Space Debris Event),” LinkedIn, ,

AS.
57 “Fregat RB/Cluster 2,” NASA, March 26, 2025, 
action?id=2000-015A; and Jim Shell (@jim-shell-4539438), “A LOT of #SpaceDebris with LITTLE
awareness,” LinkedIn, , 
bris-spacesustainability-activity-7241669796587565056-_wYm.
58 Jim Shell, “A LOT of #SpaceDebris with LITTLE awareness,” LinkedIn, .
59 “NATO explores ways to better protect commercial partners in space,” NATO, October 4, 2024, https://

60 “Russia warns United States: use of SpaceX for spying makes its satellites a target,” Reuters, March 20,
2024, 
lites-target-2024-03-20/.
61 Clyde Laheyne, “Forging the space armory,” Dark, January 28, 2025, 
mission-forging-the-space-armory.
62 Aria Alamalhodaei, “Dark is building a rocket-powered boxing glove to push debris out of orbit,” Tech-
Crunch, April 17, 2024, 
boxing-glove-to-push-debris-out-of-orbit/.
63 Tereza Pultarova, “Astroscale, BAE Systems Team On ISAM Demo by 2030,” Payload, March 5, 2025,

64 “RemoveDEBRIS,” Airbus, accessed April 17, 2025, 
space/earth-observation/removedebris.
WHAT TO WATCH
1 “White Paper on Competitive Endurance: A Proposed Theory of Success for the U.S. Space Force,”
United States Space Force, January 11, 2024, 
White_Paper_Summary_of_Competitive_Endurance.pdf.
2 “Tenets of Responsible Behavior in Space,” Secretary of Defense, July 7, 2021, 
mil/Newsroom/Publications/Pub-Display/Article/3318236/tenets-of-responsible-behavior-in-space/.
3 “USSPACECOM Releases Specific Behaviors,” U.S. Space Command, March 3, 2023, 
spacecom.mil/Newsroom/News/Article-Display/Article/3318606/usspacecom-releases-specific-be-
haviors/.
4 Sandra Erwin, “U.S. declares ban on anti-satellite missile tests, calls for other nations to join,” Space-
News, April 18, 2022, 
for-other-nations-to-join/; and Jeff Foust, “United Nations General Assembly approves ASAT test ban
resolution,” SpaceNews, December 13, 2022, 
bly-approves-asat-test-ban-resolution/.
5 Eric Lipton, “Departing Air Force Secretary Will Leave Space Weaponry as a Legacy,” New York Times,
December 29, 2024, 
and Theresa Hitchens, “‘Space fires’ to enable ‘space superiority’ are top SPACECOM priorities for
FY27,” Breaking Defense, August 6, 2024, 
ble-space-superiority-are-top-spacecom-priorities-for-fy27/.
6 “Rules of war (in a nutshell),” International Committee of the Red Cross, August 22, 2014, https://

7 “Agreement Between the Government of The United States of America and the Government of The
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Prevention of Incidents On and Over the High Seas,” U.S.
Department of State, entered into force May 25, 1972, 
8 Space and Missile Systems Center Public Affairs, “Counter Communications System Block 10.2
achieves IOC, ready for the warfighter,” United States Space Force, March 13, 2020, 
spaceforce.mil/News/Article/2113447/counter-communications-system-block-102-achieves-ioc-
ready-for-the-warfighter/; and “STARCOM tests RMT system for Space Rapid Capabilities Office,” Space
Training and Readiness Command (STARCOM), April 18, 2024, 
News/Article-Display/Article/3747374/starcom-tests-rmt-system-for-space-rapid-capabilities-office/.
9 Theresa Hitchens, “Space Force’s FY24 budget includes ‘offensive’ options for space. What does that
mean?” Breaking Defense, March 13, 2023, 
budget-includes-offensive-options-for-space-what-does-that-mean/; and “Remarks by Deputy Secren-
tary of Defense Kathleen H. Hicks at the U.S. Space Command (USSPACECOM) Change of Command
Ceremony (As Delivered),” U.S. Department of Defense, January 10, 2024, 
News/Speeches/Speech/Article/3641746/remarks-by-deputy-secretary-of-defense-kathleen-h-hicks-
at-the-us-space-command/.
10 Britianie Teston, “Innovative Testing and Skilled Personnel Drive Space RCO’s Newest Success,”
Kirtland Air Force Base, October 7, 2024, 
cle/3928036/innovative-testing-and-skilled-personnel-drive-space-rcos-newest-success/; and Chris/-
topher Stone, “Space-to-ground capabilities are the answer to deterring invasion of Taiwan,” Space
Review, January 30, 2023, 
11 European Defense Fund factsheet, “Bodyguard,” European Commission, May 16, 2024, 
fence-industry-space.ec.europa.eu/document/download/dfcec3d7-df67-4fc4-a7ea-0e5362ce204c_
en?filename=EDF-2023-RA-SPACE-PSA%20BODYGUARD.pdf.
12 Angela Webb, “Joint Effort Made Satellite Success Possible,” U.S. Strategic Command, February
25, 2008, 
fort-made-satellite-success-possible/.
13 Jeff Foust, “Majority of tracked Russian ASAT debris has deorbited,” SpaceNews, September 29, 2022,
47 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2025

 and Space-Track
Catalogue, accessed on March 24, 2025, 
14 Space-Track.org, Accessed on April 2, 2025.
15 Andrew Jones, “China’s megaconstellation launches could litter orbit for more than a century,
analysts warn,” SpaceNews, April 7, 2025, 
es-could-litter-orbit-for-more-than-a-century-analysts-warn/.
16 While this development would mark the first reported space-based nuclear ASAT capability believed
to target pLEO constellations, high-altitude nuclear detonations (HANDs) in space are not new. In
fact, any actor with a nuclear warhead and medium-range ballistic missile possesses such a latent
capability. Both the United States and Soviet Union conducted HAND tests in the 1950s and 1960s, in-
cluding the 1962 U.S. Starfish Prime test notable for the damage and destruction it caused to orbiting
satellites at the time through prompt and delayed, or accumulating, radiation. An orbiting nuclear
ASAT would present a challenging warning problem and—depending on the altitude, placement, and
magnitude of the detonation—would create catastrophic devastation in low Earth orbit for months to
years.
17 Kari A. Bingen, Kaitlyn Johnson, and Makena Young, Space Threat Assessment 2023 (Washington, DC:
CSIS, ), 
18 “Russia warns United States: use of SpaceX for spying makes its satellites a target,” Reuters, March 20,
2024, 
lites-target-2024-03-20/; and “Russia warns West: We can target your commercial satellites,” Reuters,
October 27, 2022, 
targets-2022-10-27/.
19 General Stephen N. Whiting, Commander, U.S. Space Command, Fiscal Year 2026 Priorities and Pos-
ture of United States Space Command, Testimony before the U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee,
119th Cong., 1st sess. (March 26, 2025), 
timony_of_general_stephen_nwhiting.pdf.
20 “The Iron Dome for America,” The White House, January 27, 2025, 
dential-actions/2025/01/the-iron-dome-for-america/.
21 D. K. Barton et al, “Report of the American Physical Society Study Group on Boost-Phase Intercept
Systems for National Missile Defense: Scientific and Technical Issues,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, S1 (2004),

22 Jon Jackson, “Russia Rebukes Donald Trump’s Plan for American Iron Dome,” Newsweek, January 31,
2025, 
23 “Space Force announces new mission statement,” Secretary of the Air Force Public Affairs, September
6, 2023, 
new-mission-statement/.
CONCLUSION
1 Greg Hadley, “‘Whatever it Takes’: Saltzman Says ‘Space Superiority’ Is USSF’s Mission,” Air and Space
Forces Magazine, March 3, 2025, 
tion-offensive-space/.
2 “Space Symposium 40: Whiting stressed U.S. must prepare for conflict to ensure peace.”

1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202 887 0200 |