A REPORT OF
THE CSIS
AEROSPACE
SECURITY
PROJECT
S P A C E
T H R E A T
A S S E S S M E N T
2 0 2 3
Authors
KARI A. BINGEN
KAITLYN JOHNSON
MAKENA YOUNG
Foreword
JOHN W. “JAY” RAYMOND

S P A C E
T H R E A T
A S S E S S M E N T
2 0 2 3
Authors
KARI A. BINGEN
KAITLYN JOHNSON
MAKENA YOUNG
Foreword
JOHN W. “JAY” RAYMOND
A REPORT OF THE
CSIS AEROSPACE SECURITY PROJECT

ABOUT CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, non-
profit policy research organization dedicated to advancing practical ideas to
address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in
2015, succeeding former U.S. senator Sam Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962,
CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president and chief executive
officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by
a distinct set of values—nonpartisanship, independent thought, innovative
thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity and professionalism, and
talent development. CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making
real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks
to their research, analysis, and recommendations. We organize conferences,
publish, lecture, and make media appearances that aim to increase the knowl-
edge, awareness, and salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders
and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key
policymakers and the thinking of key influencers. We work toward a vision
of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed
herein should be understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2023 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
All rights reserved.
ABOUT ASP
The Aerospace Security Project (ASP) is the leading source of analysis and
expertise on the policy and technology issues shaping the future of aerospace
security. Part of the International Security Program at CSIS, ASP is led by
Senior Fellow Kari A. Bingen. Learn more at aerospace.csis.org.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Aerospace Security Project would like to thank Slingshot Aerospace, Spire
Global, and COMSPOC for their contribution of data and analysis. Finally, many
thanks to Yash Bajaj, Patrick Fish, Jennifer Jun, Todd Harrison, Jeeah Lee, Phillip
Meylan, Sarah Mineiro, Thomas G. Roberts, Katherine Stark, and William Taylor
for their support in the research and publication process.
This report is made possible by general support to CSIS. No direct sponsorship
contributed to this report.
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
202-887-0200 | 
II SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

CONTENTS
1 FOREWORD
2 INTRODUCTION
3 TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
4 Kinetic Physical
4 Non-kinetic Physical
4 Electronic
5 Cyber
8 CHINA
12 RUSSIA
16 Featured Analysis: Russia’s War on Ukraine
21 INDIA
24 IRAN
27 NORTH KOREA
30 OTHERS
30 Australia
31 France
31 Israel
31 Japan
32 South Korea
32 United Kingdom
32 Non-state Actors
33 WHAT TO WATCH
37 CONCLUSION
38 ABOUT THE AUTHORS
III

FOREWORD
S OME COULD ARGUE THAT TODAY’S STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENT
is the most complex in the history of our nation—with China, our
pacing challenge, and Russia, an acute threat, both challenging
the world order that has been in place and has secured peace since
the end of World War II.
Space is central to this complexity. Not only does space underpin all instru-
ments of our national power, but access to and freedom to maneuver in the
domain are foundational to the United States’ status as a great power. This
sixth edition of the Space Threat Assessment describes a domain undergo-
ing a significant and rapid transformation. The number of objects in space
continues to soar, the value of the global space economy is at an all-time
high, and, unfortunately, the threat to the domain is real and concerning
today. Over the past year and a half, there has been regular testing and use
of reversible non-destructive capabilities as well as a destructive test that
created a debris field, jeopardizing safe operations and indicating that the
domain will continue to become more contested.
Two significant threats face the United States with this rapid change in the
domain. First, China and Russia are developing and integrating space capa-
bilities that will afford them the same advantages the United States currently
enjoy, placing U.S. forces at great risk. Second, they are developing a robust
spectrum of offensive capabilities to deny the United States and its partners,
including commercial space companies, access to the domain.
This edition of the Space Threat Assessment includes a dedicated section on
the Russia-Ukraine war. Commercial space capabilities are making a significant
contribution to the fight and have provided Ukraine access to space that they
do not have organically. Commercial space has served as a great equalizer,
allowing Ukrainian forces to have the necessary intelligence, surveillance,
and reconnaissance and command and control to better understand Russian
force disposition, communicate and stay connected globally, and strike with
precision. Therefore, it is not surprising that Russia has tried to deny access
to these commercial capabilities largely through jamming and cyberattacks.
As some have suggested, the Russia-Ukraine war is “the first commercial
space war,” and it has highlighted areas where the use of commercial space
capabilities has advanced ahead of policy, strategy, and concepts of opera-
tions. This assessment is important to having a better understanding of the
threats faced in, to, and from the domain and should be a valuable source of
information to inform policymakers to be better prepared for future conflicts.
While there are significant challenges, the space domain offers even more
opportunities. The United States remains the world leader in space. U.S.
allies, partners, and the commercial space sector provide great advantage.
With strengthened leadership in the domain, the United States must continue
to define safe and professional behavior in space to its advantage, seek in-
creased transparency, strengthen our partnerships, and develop capabilities
necessary to deter conflict—and if deterrence were to fail, to win.
GENERAL JOHN W. “JAY” RAYMOND
U.S. SPACE FORCE, RETIRED
Former Chief of Space Operations
1 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

INTRODUCTION
W ELCOME TO THE SIXTH EDITION of Space Threat Assessment
by the Aerospace Security Project at the Center for Strategic
and International Studies (CSIS). This resource for policymakers
and the public leverages open-source information to assess
key developments in foreign counterspace weapons. Drawing on six years of
collected data and analyses, this series describes trends in the development,
testing, and use of counterspace weapons and enables readers to develop a
deeper understanding of threats to U.S. national security interests in space.
The past year was dominated by the Russian invasion of Ukraine, where
space capabilities, including commercial satellites, played a highly visible
and compelling role in Ukraine’s resistance to the invasion. Communications
and imagery satellites have been used to connect Ukrainian troops across
the battlefield, track Russian military movements, and map humanitarian
corridors. As space capabilities continue to demonstrate their utility, from
peacetime to conflict, it should come as no surprise that adversaries seek to
block their use. Thus, this year’s featured analysis provides an in-depth look
at Russia’s battlefield employment of counterspace weapons.
Russia, China, Iran, and others continue to pursue a wide range of space and
counterspace activities, enabled by national policies, prioritized resources, and
investments in supporting infrastructure. As General B. Chance Saltzman, the
chief of space operations of the U.S. Space Force, noted in , “We
are seeing a whole mix of weapons being produced by our strategic competi-
tors.”1 Not only are these counterspace weapons in development and testing,
but some have progressed to production and fielding in operational units.
Such weapons could create disastrous effects for an array of national security,
civil, and commercial users, especially if destructive weapons are employed
that create orbital debris and render large swaths of popular orbits unusable.
The impacts of counterspace weapons use are no longer limited to military users
alone. Harm to commercial and international space assets will also reverberate
across the expanding space economy. According to the Space Foundation, 90
countries operate in space.2 The value of the global space economy was $469
billion in 2021, with other analyses projecting it will increase to over $1.25 tril-
lion in annual revenue by 2030.3 While over 5,400 satellites are in-orbit today,
more than 24,500 satellites are anticipated to be launched in the next 10 years
(2022–2031), over 70 percent of which will be commercial.4
TOTAL SATELLITES IN SPACE This iteration of the Space Threat Assessment provides a framework that
5,4655 describes different types of counterspace weapons and a highlight of the
main countries being tracked—China, Russia, India, Iran, North Korea, and
TOTAL LAUNCHES IN 2022 others. The country sections include an overview of military space organi-
1826 zations, launch and satellite capabilities, and a brief review of counterspace
developments. In addition, the report identifies key counterspace events in
2022, analyzes them in more detail, and provides a more comprehensive
TOTAL TRACKED ORBITAL DEBRIS
list of all notable counterspace activities and developments over the past
32,3007
year (–). The conclusion includes an analysis of
notable trends and expectations for the coming year.
For more detail on past counterspace weapons tests, including historical tests
by the United States and the Soviet Union, please review the prior Space Threat
Assessments (editions 2018–2022) or visit the project’s interactive timeline at

COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
TYPES OF
COUNTERSPACE
WEAPONS
S PACE IS AN INCREASINGLY IMPORTANT ENABLER of economic and
military power. The strategic importance of space has led some na-
tions to build arsenals of counterspace weapons to disrupt, degrade,
or destroy space systems and hold at risk the ability of others to
use the space domain. However, the strategic importance of space has also
spurred renewed efforts to deter or mitigate conflict and protect the domain
for peaceful uses. For example, the U.S. Space Force’s capstone publication
on spacepower notes that “military space forces should make every effort
to promote responsible norms of behavior that perpetuate space as a safe
and open environment in accordance with the Laws of Armed Conflict, the
Outer Space Treaty, and international law, as well as U.S. Government and
DoD policy.”8 Similarly, the 2022 North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s (NATO)
Strategic Concept, adopted by NATO heads of state and government in , expresses the alliance’s commitment to upholding international law,
Illustration A ballistic missile
promoting responsible behavior in space, and boosting the resilience of space
can be used as a kinetic physical
capabilities. It further articulates that “secure use of and unfettered access
counterspace weapon.
to space” are key to effective deterrence and defense.9
Counterspace weapons, particularly those that produce orbital debris, pose a
serious risk to the space environment and the ability of all nations to use the
space domain for prosperity and security. This chapter provides an overview
of different types of counterspace weapons, drawing on previous CSIS work
to taxonomize them. Counterspace weapons vary significantly in the types of
effects they create, how they are deployed, their detectability, their ability to
be attributed to a source, and the level of technology and resources needed
for their development and fielding. This report categorizes counterpace
weapons into four broad groups of capabilities: kinetic physical, non-kinetic
physical, electronic, and cyber.
3 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

or ground systems without making physical have limited ability to know if the attack
KINETIC PHYSICAL
contact. Lasers can be used to temporarily was successful because it is not likely to
dazzle or permanently blind the sensors on produce visible indicators.
KINETIC PHYSICAL COUNTERSPACE weap- satellites or cause components to overheat.
The use of a nuclear weapon in space would
ons attempt to strike directly or detonate a High-powered microwave (HPM) weapons
have large-scale, indiscriminate effects that
warhead near a satellite or ground station. The can disrupt a satellite’s electronics or cause
would be attributable and publicly visible. A
three main forms of kinetic physical attack are permanent damage to electrical circuits and
nuclear detonation in space would immedi-
direct-ascent anti-satellite (ASAT) weapons, processors in a satellite. A nuclear device
ately affect satellites within range of its EMP,
co-orbital ASAT weapons, and ground station detonated in space can create a high-radi-
and it would also create a high-radiation
attacks. Direct-ascent ASAT weapons are ation environment and an electromagnetic
environment that would accelerate the
launched from Earth on a suborbital trajectory pulse (EMP) with indiscriminate effects on
degradation of satellite components over
to strike a satellite in orbit, while co-orbital satellites in affected orbits. Non-kinetic
the long term for unshielded satellites in the
ASAT weapons are first placed into orbit and attacks operate at the speed of light and, in
affected orbital regime. The detonation of
then later maneuvered into or near their in- some cases, can be less visible to third-party
nuclear weapons in space is banned under
tended target in orbit. These maneuvers are observers and more difficult to attribute.
the Partial Test Ban Treaty of 1963, which
commonly known as rendezvous and prox-
Satellites can be targeted with lasers and has more than 100 signatories, though this
imity operations (RPOs). Attacks on ground HPM weapons from ground- or ship-based does not include China or North Korea.10
stations are targeted at the terrestrial sites
sites, airborne platforms, or other satel-
responsible for the command and control
lites. A satellite lasing system requires high
of satellites or the relay of satellite mission
beam quality, adaptive optics (if being used ELECTRONIC
data to users. Such a ground station attack
through the atmosphere), and advanced
has the benefit of affecting many satellites in
pointing control to steer the laser beam
ELECTRONIC COUNTERSPACE weapons
a constellation (that communicate with the
precisely—technology that is costly and
target the electromagnetic spectrum through
ground station) rather than requiring multiple
requires a high degree of sophistication. A
which space systems transmit and receive
weapons to target individual satellites.
laser can only be effective against a sensor
data. Jamming devices interfere with com-
Kinetic physical attacks tend to cause irre- on a satellite if it is within the field of view of
munications to or from satellites by gen-
versible damage to the systems affected and the sensor, making it possible to attribute
erating noise in the same radio frequency
demonstrate a strong show of force that would the attack to its approximate geographical
likely be attributable and publicly visible. A origin. An HPM weapon can be used to
successful kinetic physical attack in space will disrupt a satellite’s electronics, corrupt
produce orbital debris, which can indiscrimi- data stored in memory, cause processors to
nately affect other satellites in similar orbits. restart, and, at higher power levels, cause
These types of attacks are one of the only permanent damage to electrical circuits
counterspace actions that carry the potential and processors. HPM attacks can be more
for the direct loss of human life if targeted difficult to attribute because the attack can
at crewed ground stations or at satellites in come from a variety of angles, including from
other satellites passing by in orbit. For both
orbits where humans are present, such as
laser and HPM weapons, the attacker may
the International Space Station (ISS) in low
Earth orbit (LEO). To date, no country has
conducted a kinetic physical attack against
another country’s satellite, but four coun-
tries—the United States, Russia, China, and
India—have successfully tested direct-ascent
ASAT weapons against their own satellites.
The Soviet Union also tested co-orbital kinetic
ASAT weapons as early as the 1960s.
NON-KINETIC
PHYSICAL
Illustration A laser is an
NON-KINETIC PHYSICAL COUNTERSPACE example of a non-kinetic
weapons have physical effects on satellites counterspace weapon.

COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
(RF) band. An uplink jammer interferes with relatively easy to proliferate among state
the signal going from Earth to a satellite, and non-state actors.
such as the command and control uplink.
Downlink jammers target the signal from
a satellite as it propagates down to users CYBER
on Earth. Spoofing is a form of electronic
attack where the attacker tricks a receiver
WHILE ELECTRONIC FORMS OF ATTACK
into believing a fake signal, produced by
attempt to interfere with the transmission
the attacker, is the real signal it is trying to
of RF signals, cyberattacks target the data Illustration
receive. A spoofer can be used to inject false
itself and the systems that use, transmit, Cyberattacks can be used to take control of a
information into a data stream or, in extremis,
and control the flow of data. Cyberattacks satellite and damage or destroy it.
to issue false commands to a satellite to
on satellites can be used to monitor data
disrupt its operations. User terminals with
traffic patterns, intercept data, or insert
omnidirectional antennas, such as many
false or corrupted data or commands in a
GPS receivers and satellite phones, have a systemic effects if used against a system such
system. These attacks can target ground
wider field of view and thus are susceptible as GPS. Cyberattacks could have permanent
stations, end-user equipment, or the sat-
to downlink jamming and spoofing from a effects if, for example, an adversary seizes
ellites themselves. While cyberattacks re-
wider range of angles on the ground.11 control of a satellite through its command
quire a high degree of understanding of
and control system. An attacker could shut
Electronic forms of attack can be difficult to the systems being targeted, they do not
down all communications and permanently
detect or distinguish from accidental inter- necessarily require significant resources to
damage the satellite by issuing commands
ference, making attribution and awareness conduct. The barrier to entry is relatively
that cause it to expend propellant or damage
more difficult. Both jamming and spoofing low, and cyberattacks can be contracted out
its electronics and sensors. Accurate and
are reversible forms of attack because com- to private groups or individuals. Even if a
timely attribution of a cyberattack can be
munications can return to normal once the state or non-state actor lacks internal cyber
difficult because attackers can use a variety
jamming signal is removed. Through a type of capabilities, it may still pose a cyber threat.
of methods to conceal their identity, such
spoofing called “meaconing,” even encrypt-
A cyberattack on space systems can result in
as using hijacked servers, when launching
ed military P(Y) GPS signal can be spoofed. the loss of data or services being provided
an attack.
Meaconing does not require cracking the by a satellite, which could have widespread
encryption because it merely rebroadcasts
a time-delayed copy of the original signal
without decrypting it or altering the data.12
The technology needed to jam and spoof Illustration
many types of satellite signals is commer- Uplink and downlink jamming are two forms
cially available and inexpensive, making it of electronic counterspace attack.
Receiver Truck-Mounted Jammer Receiver Receiver Truck-Mounted Jammer Receiver
UPLINK JAMMER DOWNLINK JAMMER
5 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

Table 1
TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
Kinetic Physical Non-kinetic Physical

kcattA
fo
sepyT
High Altitude High-
Ground Direct-Ascent High- Laser Dazzling
Co-orbital ASAT Nuclear Powered
Station Attack ASAT Powered Laser or Blinding Detonation Microwave
noitubirttA Variable Can be Clear attribution
attribution, Launch site can attributed by Launch site can Limited of the laser’s Limited
depending on be attributed tracking previous- be attributed attribution location at the attribution
mode of attack ly known oribt time of attack
ytilibisreveR Reversible or Reversible or
Irreversible or re- irreversible; irreversible;
Irreversible Irreversible versible depend- Irreversible Irreversible attacker may or attacker may or
ing on capabilities may not be able may not be able
to control to control
ssenerawA May or May or
Publicly known Only satellite Only satellite Only satellite
may not be may not be
depending on Publicly known operator will be operator will be operator will be
publicly publicly
trajectory aware aware aware
known known
egamaD
rekcattA
tnemssessA Limited Limited
Near real-time Near real-time Near real-time Near real-time confirmation of confirmation of
No confirmation
confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of success if satellite success if satellite
of success
success success success success begins to drift begins to drift
uncontrolled uncontrolled
egamaD
laretalloC
Station may
Orbital debris Higher radiation Could leave Could leave target
control multi- May or may not
could affect levels in orbit target satellite satellite disabled
ple satellites; produce orbital None
other satellites in would persist for disabled and and uncontrol-
potential for loss debris
similar orbits months or years uncontrollable lable
of life

Electronic Cyber
7 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023
kcattA
fo
sepyT
Uplink Downlink Data Interccept Data Seizure
Spoofing
Jamming Jamming or Monitoring Corruption of Control
noitubirttA
Modest attribution Modest attribution Modest attribution Limited or Limited or Limited or
depending on mode depending on mode depending on mode uncertain uncertain uncertain
of attack of attack of attack attribution attribution attribution
ytilibisreveR
Irreversible or
Reversible Reversible Reversible Reversible Reversible reversible, depending
on mode of attack
ssenerawA Satellite operator Satellite operator Satellite operator Satellite operator
May or may not be May or may not be
will be aware; may will be aware; may will be aware; may will be aware; may
known to the known to the
or may not be or may not be known or may not be known or may not be known
public public
known to the public to the public to the public to the public
egamaD
rekcattA
tnemssessA
Limited
confirmation of Limited
Near real-time Near real-time Near real-time
No confirmation success if monitoring confirmation of
confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of
of success of the local RF success if effects
success success success
environment is are visible
possible
egamaD
laretalloC
Only dirupts the Only disrupts the
Only corrupts the Could leave target
signals targeted and signals targeted and
specific RF signals None None satellite disabled
possible adjacent possible adjacent
targeted and uncontrollable
frequencies frequencies
csis aerospace security project research and analysis

CHINA
CHINA
C HINA CONTINUES TO MAKE PROGRESS TOWARD ITS GOAL of
becoming the world leader in space. Over the past year, China has
continued to grow its space and counterspace assets, maintaining
its status as the second-most-capable space nation after the United
States. To enable these capabilities, China operates four spaceports and a
family of Long March space launch vehicles (SLVs) that can deliver a wide
range of satellites to different orbital altitudes. In 2022, China conducted 64
space launches, including two space launch failures. The successful launches
resulted in over 150 satellites successfully placed into orbit and the launch
of one orbital and one suborbital spaceplane.13
Civil, intelligence, and military space capabilities are a priority for China as
it continues to invest in and plan for greater use and access to space in the
coming decade. In , China completed the construction of the
Tiangong space station, which is now operational.14 Beijing has released two
white papers on space activities, in 2016 and 2021, which not only outline a
vision for future space activities but also integrate space into other strategic
global initiatives.
8 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

set in 2021.19 The vast majority of these missions were
SPACE ORGANIZATION
launched on the Long March SLV family of rockets. The
Long March-2 (variants C, D, and F), -3B, -4C, -5, -5B,
While China has separate organizations -6, -7, -8, and -11 rockets provide light-, medium-, and
charged with managing its civil and military heavy-lift capability to LEO and geostationary orbit
space activities, much of the technology for (GEO). Some are capable of launching from a sea-based
both civil and military space capabilities is platform, but most launch from traditional ground-
produced by the same state-owned enter- based launch pads. Newer Long March vehicles are
prises. The line between commercial and being developed, including the Long March-9.20
governmental endeavors is often blurred
These SLVs are typically launched from one of four
by Beijing’s military-civilian fusion policy,
sites in China. The Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center,
which encourages such enterprises to ac-
located in Inner Mongolia, was founded in 1958 and
quire and divert cutting-edge technologies,
is the country’s oldest space launch facility. This is the
including space technology, to achieve both
most popular launch site and has been the site of the
economic and military dominance.15
majority of the country’s space tests and launches,
The China National Space Administration including the launch of China’s first satellite in 1970,
(CNSA) leads all civil space missions. The and the first international payload launched from the
CNSA falls within the purview of the State country in 1992.21 The Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center,
Council’s State Administration for Science, located in Wuzhai, Shanxi, is another popular launch
Technology, and Industry for National De- site with a history of space and ballistic missile launches
fense. China’s space program primarily dating back to 1968. The Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center
contracts through the China Aerospace Sci- also has test and assembly capabilities on campus and
ence and Technology Corporation, a state- launches vehicles too large for the Jiuquan Satellite
owned enterprise with many sectors that Launch Center. The other two Chinese launch sites were
researches and develops SLVs, spacecraft, both built to support human, interplanetary, and lunar
missile systems (including intercontinental missions. Located in the Sichuan region, the Xichang
ballistic missiles), and supporting ground Satellite Launch Center (Songlin) was finalized in 1984,
equipment.16 Finally, the China Aerospace but because of its close proximity to populated areas
Science and Industry Corporation is another has now become a backup launch site to China’s most
state-owned enterprise which specializes recent addition, the Wenchang Satellite Launch Center.22
in space technologies.17 The coastal Wenchang Satellite Launch Center, located
on the island province of Hainan in the South China
The military organization for space capa-
Sea, has hosted 16 launches since opening in 2014.
bilities, the Strategic Support Force (SSF),
Officials have announced plans to further develop
sits alongside other information-centric
Wenchang as a commercial spaceport with satellite
domains, such as cyber, within China’s
assembly, testing, and data centers on-site. In addition
People’s Liberation Army (PLA). Founded
to these launch sites, China is capable of launching
in 2015, the SSF manages space warfare,
from mobile platforms in the Yellow Sea.23
space launch, and the acquisition and oper-
ation of satellites. Within the SSF, the Space There has been a shift in the last decade for the Chinese
Systems Department and Network Systems commercial industry. In 2014, the Chinese government
Department divide responsibilities and act lifted a restrictive policy prohibiting the creation of
as co-equal semi-independent branches, commercial space launch companies and commercial
with the former managing space and coun- launch technology, which has resulted in private and
terspace capabilities and the latter leading state investment into the commercial market.24 Today,
the cyber, electronic, and psychological the government may look to the commercial sector as
warfare mission areas.18 an opportunity to replace China’s reliance on interna-
tional companies or suppliers.25 Similar to trends in
other dominant space-faring nations, many commercial
SPACE LAUNCH companies are focusing on launch capabilities. The first
commercial space launch from China is expected in the
CAPABILITIES
first months of 2023 from Beijing Tianbing Technology
Co., Ltd., also known as Space Pioneer, which plans
China broke its launch record in 2022, sur- to launch a Tianlong-2 medium-lift vehicle from the
passing its previous record of 55 launches Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center.26

CHINA
China’s Spaceplane
Program
Spaceplane programs are often extreme-
ly secretive, and the Chinese program is
no exception. Spaceplanes launch from
traditional SLVs, spend their operational
mission continuously orbiting the Earth,
and re-enter the atmosphere and land like a
traditional airplane. The U.S. Space Shuttle
is a famous larger cousin of the spaceplanes
in operation today.
In , China launched two different
spaceplanes, one orbital and one suborbital,
from the Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center.
Image of Chinese spaceplane and object
As is typical with many emerging Chinese SATELLITE
it released in orbit, captured in November
space technologies, few details have surfaced
2022. The spaceplane can be seen circled in CAPABILITIES
about either vehicle.27
blue, and the object is circled in orange.
The first test of a Chinese spaceplane was in
slingshot aerospace China maintains an extensive suite of sat-
 and was launched by a Long
ellite capabilities, including advanced po-
March 2F. That spaceplane traveled in LEO
sitioning, navigation, and timing (PNT);
for two days, released an object capable of
satellite communications; intelligence, sur-
broadcasting transmissions, and concluded
March 2D rocket.34 A statement from the veillance, and reconnaissance (ISR); missile
its test flight by landing in northwest China.28
China Aerospace Science and Technology warning; and space situational awareness.
The second test of this vehicle launched on
Corporation confirmed that this launch ve- According to a 2022 U.S. Defense Intelligence
another Long March 2F on August 4, 2022.29
hicle was re-used, making it the country’s Agency report, China doubled its number of
After a successful launch and almost two
first successful demonstration of a reusable satellites in orbit between 2019 and 2021,
months in LEO, the spaceplane raised its
space launch capability.35 Reporting from from 250 to 499, and surpassed all but the
orbit on October 23 before releasing an ob-
China indicates a large amount of funding to United States in the number of space start-
ject.30 Although it is not clear from publicly
be allocated to a suborbital transport project ups receiving funding, drawing 16 percent of
available data when exactly the spaceplane
capable of carrying passengers.36 Though total global investment in these ventures.38
released its object, the U.S. Space Force
the suborbital spaceplane was confirmed
space tracking database recognized the Notable capabilities include the Beidou
to have landed, reports have not confirmed
object on October 31, 2022.31 There have constellation, made of 35 PNT satellites,
the duration or altitude of its flight. China
been few details released since, and a Google which acts as China’s alternative to GPS.
is also developing a similar launching proj-
translation of reporting from state media Satellite capabilities such as Beidou are
ect, called the Tengyun project, which will
has only indicated that the spaceplane will increasingly used as tools for the Digital
incorporate a horizontal takeoff and landing
remain in orbit for “a period of time.”32 As Silk Road and Belt and Road Initiatives.
capability to increase the ease and speed of
of March 16, 2023, the orbital spaceplane is space launches.37 Similarly, China has released plans for a
still believed to be in LEO. Available images 13,000-satellite constellation in LEO for
There are no indications that a spaceplane
of the Chinese spaceplane show that it bears broadband communications purposes. This
capability would act as a counterspace weap-
a resemblance to the United States’ X-37B would be the country’s answer to SpaceX’s
on, but because of the apparent capacity
spaceplane, which completed a sixth mis- Starlink network and would aim to serve
to release objects while in orbit, this could
sion in , after spending 908 customers across China and underdevel-
progress to a co-orbital ASAT capability.
days in orbit, and shows a Chinese interest oped internet markets across the globe.39 In
in matching U.S. capabilities.33 2019, China introduced the Belt and Road
China launched its suborbital spaceplane for Space Information Corridor to build out
a second time on August 26, 2022, following Chinese space applications and services
an initial test in on a Long in other nations. Just two years later, in its
10 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

2021 space white paper, Beijing commended a solid foundation for potential cyber
Rendezvous and
the successes of the corridor, highlighting counterspace capabilities.45
expanding satellite research and develop- Proximity Operations
China also maintains significant space sur-
ment infrastructure in Egypt, Pakistan, and
veillance capabilities, which are required to
Nigeria as examples.40 Chinese commercial China has a long history of satellites capable
effectively target and employ their counter-
companies continue to develop capabilities of performing on-orbit RPOs, commonly in
space weapons. The country has maintained
as well; in 2021, space-mining start-up Ori- GEO. As reported in last year’s assessment,
a fleet of space-tracking ships for years,
the Shijian 21 (SJ-21) was launched in Oc-
gin Space launched a space debris cleanup
which set sail for months-long space-track-
prototype into LEO.41 The company claims tober 2021 as an experimental space debris
ing and monitoring missions. The ships are
mitigation satellite, which separated from
this capability will be able to remove space
reportedly capable of monitoring missions
its upper stage apogee kick motor (AKM).
debris, potentially with a net, though there including Beidou satellites and the Chang’e
SJ-21 performed RPO maneuvers around
are no reports of the satellite’s on-orbit tests lunar missions.46 In , China
the AKM before moving to rendezvous with a
or RPO activities.42 unveiled the SLC-18 radar, which is report-
defunct Beidou satellite, Compass G2. AKMs
edly designed to “search, detect, and track
are additional power sources that help place
objects such as ballistic missiles and LEO
a satellite into a specific orbit. Since GEO is
COUNTERSPACE satellites.”47 This may be an updated design
a highly valued orbit, most AKMs in GEO are
to the previous JY-26 “Skywatch” long-range
ASSESSMENT released in a manner such that they separate
air surveillance system debuted in 2014.48
and put significant distance between the
OVERVIEW Global space surveillance capabilities are an
payload and the AKM, so as not to interfere
additional component of the country’s Belt
with satellite operations in GEO. Previous
and Road Initiative. China has had success
As China continues to develop and deploy reporting suggests that SJ-21 performed
building space surveillance infrastructure,
a robust arsenal of space and counterspace several RPOs around Compass G2 before
particularly ground stations, in countries
capabilities, U.S. officials continue to view docking and moving the defunct satellite
around the world, including as far away
the country as a significant counterspace into a GEO graveyard orbit, hundreds of
as South America.49
threat. China maintains a substantial kinet- kilometers above the traditional GEO belt.50
ic ASAT capability, most notably demon- Updated information showcases that SJ-21
strated by a debris-creating 2007 test, as took Compass G2 significantly higher than
well as numerous subsequent non-inter- a typical graveyard orbit, which is highly
cept tests in the years since. Co-orbital unusual for a debris removal mission.51
technology demonstrations prove China’s
Two additional Chinese rendezvous tech-
ability to rendezvous with other satellites
nology research satellites, SJ-12-01 and -02
in GEO. While these are not counterspace
were launched into GEO in early 2022. Soon
weapons tests, they demonstrate capability
after, the satellites engaged with a U.S. Geo-
that is necessary for a co-orbital counter-
synchronous Space Situational Awareness
space attack. Non-kinetic counterspace
Program space surveillance satellite in a “cat-
weapons, such as high-powered lasers
and-mouse game” spanning several days.52
or microwaves, remain largely classified
Each time the U.S. satellite would approach
or are not publicly known to have been
either SJ-12 satellite, the Chinese satellites
CHINA
tested. However, in a 2021 threat report,
would quickly maneuver away. These activ-
the U.S. Office of the Director of Nation-
ities have been corroborated by commercial
DOUBLED ITS
al Intelligence indicated that China has
company COMSPOC and highlight the RPO
ground-based lasers capable of blinding or NUMBER OF capabilities China has successfully developed
damaging optical sensors on low-altitude and maintained in orbit.53
satellites.43 Reporting from 2022 indicated SATELLITES
China’s first successful orbital launch of
that Chinese universities are also working
2023 was on January 6. Shijian 23 (SJ-23)
on small laser devices capable of being IN ORBIT
launched on a Long March 7 from the Wen-
mounted on a satellite, though this is not a
chang Satellite Launching Center.54 SJ-23
current capability.44 China’s jamming and BETWEEN 2019
reached its GEO orbit on January 15 and
spoofing electronic warfare capabilities
AND 2021, one day later a second object appeared to
have been verified in use against space
be tracked—another suspected AKM.55
and non-space signals alike. Few Chinese
FROM 250 TO
cyberattacks on space systems have been
recorded in the last five years, but China’s
499.
cyber capabilities in other domains form

RUSSIA
RUSSIA
A S ONE OF THE THREE DOMINANT NATIONAL SPACE ACTORS,
Russia retains substantial space capabilities and forces, many
dating back to the Soviet Union. However, Moscow finds itself at
an inflection point. Over the past year, Russia has continued to
display less advanced space and counterspace capabilities than originally
anticipated. Advanced counterspace weapons that were promised, such as
the Peresvet and Sokol-Eshelon ground-based lasers, are nowhere to be seen
on the battlefield despite Russian claims of their success.56 Furthermore,
reports have surfaced that the Russian space industrial base is suffering from
sanctions, an aging population, corruption, and bloat.57
Nevertheless, in 2022, Russia used space capabilities and counterspace
weapons more than ever before. Widespread reports of jamming throughout
Eastern Europe have been attributed to Russia, as have several distinct attacks
on commercial space architectures, such as Viasat and SpaceX’s Starlink
system.58 Moreover, Moscow continues to play a “cat-and-mouse” game in
orbit, using its satellites to shadow other nations’ satellites and creating
confusion and concern about the intent of these actions.59
12 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

Russia successfully launched 22 times in
SPACE ORGANIZATION
2022.63 This pace is slightly behind 2021
and pre-pandemic years. Notably, Russia
MOSCOW
Military and civil space organizations remain mostly lost significant international launch cus-
separate in Russia, with the Russian Aerospace Forces FINDS tomers after its invasion of Ukraine in early
(VKS) leading military efforts and Roscosmos leading 2022. For example, just before a scheduled
those on the civil side. Within the VKS, military space ITSELF launch in early 2022, Roscosmos demanded
and counterspace capabilities fall within the Russian that OneWeb not use any of its satellites to
Space Forces, established in 2015. The Russian Space AT AN support military activities. After receiving
Forces’ mission includes space situational awareness, no such reassurances, Roscosmos took a
INFLECTION
missile warning, space launch, satellite operations, Soyuz launch vehicle containing 36 OneWeb
and counterspace operations.60 Roscosmos leads on satellites off the launch pad on March 4,
POINT.
human spaceflight, the GLONASS PNT system, and 2022.64 The 36 satellites remain in storage in
international space partnerships. Russia. Due to the seizure of their satellites
and the invasion of Ukraine, OneWeb can-
celed all future launches through Russia.65
SPACE LAUNCH After a partial failure of Russia’s heavy-
launch Angara 5 in , Russia’s
CAPABILITIES
lighter launch vehicle, the Angara 1.2, suc-
New Direction
cessfully launched twice in 2022, carrying
Space launch capabilities are a cornerstone for Rus- two undisclosed military satellites into LEO.66
for Roscosmos
sia’s military and civilian space programs. Providing
However, both satellites de-orbited and
space launch via the Soyuz rocket—which has been
Of note, in , Dimitry burned up in the Earth’s atmosphere within
in operation for over 50 years—has brought in signif-
Rogozin was replaced by Yuri two months.67 Angara 1.2 is expected to
icant revenue for Russia over the years through the
Borisov, a former deputy defense conduct an additional launch in late 2023.68
sale of payload space or seats for astronauts. In fact,
minister, as the head of Roscos-
to maintain U.S. presence on the ISS between the Russia maintains three main launch sites:
mos. This leadership change was
Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, Ple-
2011 decommissioning of the U.S. Space Shuttle and
possibly a demotion for both
setsk Cosmodrome in the northwest of the
the 2020 launch of SpaceX’s Dragon capsule to the men: Rogozin for his erratic Twit-
country, and the Vostochny Cosmodrome in
ISS with two U.S. astronauts, Moscow carried 71 U.S. ter posts and bluster surrounding
the east. Baikonur is typically used for cos-
astronauts to the station at a cost of approximately Russia’s decoupling from the ISS,
monaut launches to the ISS, while Plesetsk
$56 million per seat. In total, these launches cost the and Borisov for his poor military
is used for many military space launches,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) leadership in Russia’s war on
including a direct-ascent
approximately $4 billion.61 Ukraine.62
ASAT test. President Vladimir Putin visited
the Vostochny Cosmodrome in 
to celebrate Cosmonautics Day, a holiday
commemorating Yuri Gargarin’s successful
NUMBER OF LAUNCHES
mission as the first human in space.69 Putin
120 was accompanied by Belarusian president
Alexander Lukashenko for bilateral meetings

and a tour of the site.70 Once fully operation-
al, Vostochny is expected to host 45 percent

of all Russian launches, shifting significant
60 work from Baikonur to the new domestic
launch site.71 The 2023 Angara 1.2 launch
40 is planned for Vostochny Cosmodrome.72

0 SATELLITE
1957 1963 1969 1975 1981 1987 1993 1999 2005 2011 2017 2022
CAPABILITIES
Figure 1 Soviet Union and Russian Space Launches, 1957–2022
“orbital launches of 2023,” gunter’s space page, n.d., Russia maintains a fleet of highly capable
 satellites providing support to a variety of

RUSSIA
civil and military missions, including human spaceflight, Nudol (PL-19) missile interceptor. Russia
Cosmos 2558’s
deep space exploration, missile warning, communica- has tested the Nudol system almost yearly
tions, command and control, ISR, and weather. While since 2014, but this was the first intercept Early Mission
many of these capabilities were developed in the 1990s on orbit that created space debris. Of the
or early 2000s, some are being revitalized. A national 1,783 pieces of orbital debris tracked from In early , it was
PNT system called GLONASS has been operational since the test, only 661 were still in orbit as of reported that Russian satellite
1993 and provides navigation capabilities to the Russian . However, the remaining Cosmos 2558 performed a close
military and civilians, much like the United States’ own pieces are at a higher altitude, which mean approach with USA 326, a U.S.
GPS. Updates to GLONASS are ongoing, and three new the debris will remain in orbit longer, until National Reconnaissance Office
GLONASS satellites were launched in 2022.73 Several ISR around 2033.78 Some of this debris is in a (NRO) satellite, in LEO. Cosmos
and communications satellites were also launched in similar orbit to the ISS, which had to move 2558 was likely close enough to
2022 to complement or restore existing constellations.74 three times in 2022 to avoid the debris.79 image or collect signals intelli-
gence from USA 326, but current
Russia’s Federal Space Program 2016-2025, a policy In , a modified Russian MiG-
reporting suggests it did not in-
and budgetary plan for its space projects, set ambitious 31 fighter jet was photographed carrying an
terfere with, deny, or degrade
goals, including increased bandwidth for communica- unidentified missile that was reportedly a
operations of the NRO satellite.
tions satellites, additional remote sensing satellites, “mock-up” of an air-launched ASAT weapon.80
With the speed at which satellites
upgrades to the Russian segment of the ISS, and the Reports now suggest that this missile system
travel in LEO, the flyby of Cosmos
completion of the Vostochny Cosmodrome.75 However, is the Burevestnik.81 Little to no details are
2558 would have happened rela-
since enacting this policy, Moscow’s space budgets have confirmed about the ASAT capability, but
tively quickly and possibly with-
continued to shrink.76 Sanctions enacted after the 2014 the capability is not new.82
in a couple of hours.84 General
invasion of Crimea have significantly hampered the
Co-orbital weapons are hard to identify James H. Dickinson, commander
Russian space industry. Furthermore, after Russia’s 2022
and track in orbit. However, unusual or of U.S. Space Command, spoke
invasion of Ukraine, additional sanctions were imposed
threatening behavior can provide insight about this dangerously close
on the aerospace industry by the United States and its
into capabilities and intent. Russia has a approach to NBC News on August
allies, and joint projects were suspended by Russia’s
long history of unusual and threatening 9, 2022.85 A unique aspect of this
international partners, such as the ExoMars rover mis-
behavior in both LEO and GEO and con- mission was how early it occurred
sion with the European Space Agency.77 With shrinking
ducted similar activities in 2022. in the satellite’s lifetime. Cosmos
budgets, expanding sanctions, and continued economic
Luch, Russia’s well-known GEO inspector 2558 was launched into space on
stagnation, Russia has focused its efforts on streamlin-
satellite, maneuvered several times in 2022 August 1, 2022, and the close ap-
ing current space capabilities, specifically revitalizing
to closely approach and loiter near three proach happened only three days
Soviet-era programs and investing in dual-use space
different Intelsat communications satel- later, on August 4.86 Following the
technologies—those with both military and civil uses.
lites. For more information on Luch and its approach, Cosmos 2558 adjusted
This strategy is a clear response to Russia’s burgeoning
activities during Russia’s war on Ukraine, its position in early September
challenges in its national space enterprise. Many of these
see . 2022 to stay within the same
dual-use capabilities are discussed in the following
orbital plane as USA 326.87
section on Russian counterspace threats.
Non-kinetic Physical
It is possible that Russia has developed
a new ground-based ASAT laser system,
COUNTERSPACE
dubbed Kalina. Part of Russia’s Krona space
ASSESSMENT OVERVIEW
surveillance station located in southwest
Russia near the Black Sea, Kalina may be
Russia has a proven, well-rounded suite of counter- capable of dazzling or blinding satellites.
space weapons. Many of this year’s updates to Russia’s It is unclear if this system is operational or
counterspace capabilities are found in the “Featured capable of counterspace attacks, but it is a
Analysis” section on . notable development for experts to monitor
as progress on the facilities continue.83
Kinetic Physical
Electronic
In , Russia successfully tested a di-
rect-ascent ASAT in LEO. The test partially destroyed Available open-source reporting indicates
a defunct Soviet-era satellite, Cosmos 1408, via a that GPS jamming is occurring around Mos-
14 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

cow, and observers speculate that it is to protect the
Possible SAR Jamming
capital city from being targeted by Ukrainian drones.88
Russia has been installing jammers capable of denying
In June and , a defense blog report-
GPS on domestic infrastructure, such as cell towers.89
ed on a potential electronic warfare attack
The 2020 edition of this report highlighted how mobile
on the European Space Agency’s Sentinel-1B
GPS jamming vehicles accompany President Putin to
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imagery sat-
ensure the leader’s personal safety and how GPS jam-
ellite. As of , this attack remains
ming may be used near the Kremlin.90 More information
unconfirmed, but it is suspected that Russian
on how jamming has been used in Russia’s invasion
forces were able to affect the European SAR
of Ukraine can be found on .
satellite as it imaged Russian territory near
the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea. After this
Cyber
report, the findings were highly questioned
Russia has demonstrated significant cyber capabilities, on Twitter, leaving it unclear if the satellite
as showcased with its Viasat hack. For itself experienced SAR jamming or radar
more on this attack, please see “Featured Analysis” interference in the region.93 However, Mos-
on . Recent reports have emerged on another cow is reported to possess SAR-jamming
successful cyber intrusion against a U.S. commercial capability, specifically its Krasukha-2/-4
satellite communications provider. In , mobile electronic warfare systems, which
an analyst from the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure can jam both airborne and space-based ra-
Security Agency (CISA) within the U.S. Department of dar systems.94 Possibly unrelated but worth
Homeland Security stated at a conference that the Rus- mentioning is that Sentinel-1B suffered an
sian hacking group Fancy Bear successfully infiltrated anomaly in that affected
a satellite communications network. The intruders the satellite’s SAR antenna power system,
were supposedly in the network for months before leaving the satellite unable to collect SAR
detection.91 Fancy Bear is a Russian state-sponsored data. The European Space Agency declared
advanced persistent threat group tracked by the U.S. “the capability of Sentinel-1B to support the
government and confirmed to be part of the Russian mission is therefore considered lost,” and
General Staff Main Intelligence Directorate’s 85th Main surmised that the probable cause of failure
Special Service Center.92 was the soldering processed used to repair a
ceramic capacitor during the assembly and
manufacturing of the satellite.95

RUSSIA
FEATURED ANALYSIS
RUSSIA’S WAR
ON UKRAINE
T HE MOST SIGNIFICANT SPACE-RELATED DEVELOPMENTS IN 2022
center on Russia and its war on Ukraine. This edition of the Space
Threat Assessment takes an in-depth look at Russian counterspace
activities in this context. There has been an unparalleled level of
transparency on the battlefield in Ukraine: sensitive intelligence was declas-
sified to reveal Moscow’s plans and intentions, imagery showed the massing
of Russian forces, and social media posts conveyed the war’s horrors up close.
Space capabilities are aiding in this transparency and making an impactful
contribution to this fight. Communications satellites are empowering Ukrainian
forces and connecting the Ukrainian people with the outside world. Imagery
satellites, some able to penetrate clouds and collect pictures at night, are
watching the movement of Russian forces, mapping humanitarian evacuation
routes, and collecting evidence of war crimes. Other satellites can detect and
locate the sources of GPS interference, which is causing Ukrainian unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) to alter course. Some observers have described this
war as the “first commercial space war” due to the prominence of Western
space industry capabilities enabling Ukraine’s resistance.96
However, as with any advantage on the battlefield, adversaries quickly look
for ways to erode that edge, and the same is true for space. This featured
analysis details Russian employment of electronic warfare and cyberattacks
against space systems, uncertainty on Russian use of laser weapons, and
unusual behavior by a Russian inspector satellite in GEO. While the space
lessons learned in Ukraine are still to be written, there may be insights to
glean on Moscow’s space strategy and doctrine, and lessons for the United
States to apply to threats in the Indo-Pacific.
16 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

MARCH 1, 2021
Kinetic Physical Jamming
Non-kinetic Physical Russian GPS jamming affects OSCE UAV in flight monitoring the
Electronic Russia-Ukraine border.
Cyber
Other OCTOBER 4, 2021
Co-orbital
Russian inspector satellite Luch maneuvers and lingers near Intelsat
33e for over 100 days.
NOVEMBER 15, 2021
Direct-Ascent
Russia conducts a direct-ascent ASAT test in LEO and destroys a
defunct Soviet satellite.
JANUARY 23, 2022
Co-orbital
Luch maneuvers and lingers near Intelsat 39 for over 170 days.
FEBRUARY 24, 2022
Cyber
Russia successfully conducts a cyberattack against Viasat ground stations,
cutting off satellite communications for the Ukrainian government.
MARCH 9, 2022
Jamming
Finnair reports several occurrences of GPS jamming when its
commercial airliners near Kaliningrad.
MARCH 25, 2022
Jamming
Starlink engineers successfully resist Russian satellite communications
jamming attempts by updating the system’s software.
SEPTEMBER 1, 2022
Co-orbital
Luch maneuvers and lingers near Intelsat 37 for about 145 days.
OCTOBER 27, 2022
Diplomatic
For a complete timeline of
Konstaintin Vorontsov, deputy director of Russian Foreign Ministry’s
counterspace activities from
department of nonproliferation and arms, warns that “quasi-civilian
1959 to 2022, visit aerospace.
infrastructure may become a legitimate target for retaliation.”
csis.org/counterspacetimeline/.

RUSSIA
Russia’s attacks against space capabilities used by Ukraine Following the successful cyberattack on Viasat, the
are an example of how counterspace weapons can and Ukrainian government sought help from Elon Musk and
will likely be used prior to and during future conflict. SpaceX to help the country restore connectivity through
commercial LEO broadband. Only four days after the
initial invasion, thousands of Starlink terminals were
JAMMING AND successfully delivered to Ukraine and reconnected the
Ukrainian government and civilians to the internet.104
CYBERATTACKS
Russia attempted to jam SpaceX’s Starlink ground
terminals to break Ukrainian communications once
Months before the invasion, the Organization for Secu-
again. However, SpaceX was able to quickly counter the
rity and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) was monitoring
attack, and services have not been seriously disrupted
the Ukraine-Russia border using UAVs to perform over-
since this first attempt in . According to U.S.
flight missions. The fleet of UAVs operated by the OSCE
Department of Defense leadership, Starlink was able
uses the unprotected civilian GPS signal to aid in their
to combat jamming by fixing lines of code, making
navigation.97 Throughout March and , over
the Russian attack ineffective.105 Starlink continues
60 percent of the OSCE’s UAV flights encountered GPS
to face attempted jamming by Russian systems, but
signal interference, including in areas near the OSCE
“their success has been limited.”106
base (approximately 25 kilometers from the contact
line).98 These events were corroborated through RF signal Additional jamming has been observed throughout
sensing from a commercial space company which con- the conflict and in various locations. In ,
firmed detection of GPS interference in the areas where the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA)
OSCE UAVs were attempting to carry out the monitoring released the following:
mission.99 The day before the invasion, on February 23,
In the current context of the Russian invasion of
2022, Ukrainian government sources stated that a long-
Ukraine, the issue of Global Navigation Satellite
range UAV experienced significant GPS interference,
which caused a temporary loss of control of the aircraft.
Open-source defense analysts from Janes assess that
the long-range UAV was a Turkish Bayraktar (TB-2) drone
operated by Ukraine and that the counter-UAV electronic
warfare system was the Russian Krasukha-4.100 Russian
employment of GPS-jamming devices has continued
throughout the conflict.
Beyond electronic warfare against GPS systems, Russia
moved to deny Ukrainian command and control systems
enabled by commercial communications satellites. An
hour before Russian troops invaded on February 24, 2022,
Russia conducted a cyberattack to deny connectivity
between the Viasat communications KA-SAT network
and its thousands of ground terminals.101 The attack
entered through a virtual private network and deployed
wiper malware that crashed terrestrial modems via the
satellite downlink. One of Viasat’s customers was the
target: the Ukrainian government and military. However,
the attack indiscriminately affected other Viasat users
in Europe, including disabling about one-fifth of wind
turbines and internet users across Central Europe.102 In OBSERVED INTERMEDIATE FREQUENCY (MHZ)
light of the attack against Viasat, the U.S. Federal Bureau
of Investigation and CISA released a joint statement to
commercial satellite communications providers urging
companies to reinforce the cybersecurity and resilience
of their networks.103
18 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023
)YTISNED
LARTCEPS
REWOP(
01GOL
Spikes indicate unusual GNSS interference in the Eastern
Mediterranean. Higher frequency signals have been converted
into lower frequency signals to expedite processing.
spire global: reprinted with permission.

Systems (GNSS) jamming and/or possible spoofing and damaging than its predecessor, the
has intensified in geographical areas surrounding Peresvet. Borisov stated in a TV interview
the conflict zone and other areas. that “if Peresvet blinds an object, the new
generation of laser weapons physically de-
Eurocontrol, Network of Analysts and open-source
stroys the target. It is burned up.” Officials
data reports analyzed by EASA indicate that since
from both the United States and Ukraine
February 24, 2022, there are four key geograph-
commented that these reports have not
ical areas where GNSS interference (spoofing or
been substantiated, and there is little ev-
jamming) has intensified, namely:
idence to prove that the attack occurred.111
▪ Kaliningrad region, surrounding Baltic sea
Despite much boasting of capability, there
and neighboring States;
are no independently verified reports of
▪ Eastern Finland;
Russia deploying directed-energy capabili-
▪ The Black Sea; and ties against satellites in its war on Ukraine.
Russian officials have showcased the Peres-
▪ The Eastern Mediterranean area near Cyprus,
vet in recent years, a ground-based satellite
Turkey, Lebanon, Syria and Israel, as well as
laser. In 2021, President Putin announced
Northern Iraq.107
that this laser would be adapted for an
These locations have all experienced significant in-
airborne platform.112 Another touted ca-
terference with PNT systems such as GPS and Galileo.
pability is the Sokol-Eshelon, an airborne
Data from commercial RF data analytics company,
laser system that is a revival of a Soviet-era
Spire Global, corroborated GNSS interference over
program, which has the stated capability
the Eastern Mediterranean in the time
to attack satellites in LEO.113 Neither of
frame, as shown on . Additionally, reports of
these capabilities have been employed
GPS jamming emerged just after Finnish president
in the Ukrainian conflict despite the high
Sauli Niinistö met with U.S. president Joe Biden in
volume of remote sensing satellites and
Washington, D.C. Finnair also reported several occur-
other platforms that are providing data and
rences of GPS jamming when its commercial airliners
intelligence on Russian troop positions to
flew near Kaliningrad.108
the Ukrainian military.
There are several reports of ground-based electronic
On October 26, 2022, at the United Nations
warfare devices being used in Ukraine, possibly in-
General Assembly, Konstantin Vorontsov,
cluding the Krasukha-4, RB-109A “Bylina,” R-330ZH
the deputy director of the Russian foreign
Zhitel, Borisoglebsk-2, and Tirada-2, which all have
ministry’s department of nonproliferation
the capability to deny or disrupt GPS or satellite com-
and arms, warned that “quasi-civilian infra-
munications through uplink and downlink jamming.109
structure may become a legitimate target for
Many of these come from reported captures of Russian
retaliation.”114 This indicates that Moscow
vehicles and systems during the war—often from
considers commercial companies providing
videos or images posted on social media.110 However,
services to governments and militaries as
there is little concrete confirmation on which of these
legitimate targets in times of conflict.115
jamming devices have been used. While it is unclear
which systems are deployed by Russia, it is clear that
jamming has been widespread and frequent.
CO-ORBITAL
RENDEZVOUS
LASING AND DAZZLING
AND PROXIMITY
OPERATIONS
The use of ISR satellites to enable Ukraine’s tactical
operations has been astounding. Given the advantage
commercial ISR satellites has provided to Ukraine, it Finally, the Russian inspector satellite Luch
is surprising that Russia has failed to employ more may also be supporting Russia’s war on
counterspace weapons to erode this advantage. In Ukraine through signals intelligence gath-
, Russian deputy prime minister Yuri Borisov ering in GEO. At the beginning of 2020, Luch
claimed that the country had successfully destroyed a made a significant maneuver westward,
Ukrainian UAV using its Zadira laser weapon. Accord- covering about 60 degrees in longitude.
ing to Borisov, the Zadira weapon is more powerful As it moved, Luch had the opportunity to

RUSSIA
conduct multiple close approaches with other satel- LONGITUDE (˚) Luch Loitering Luch Transiting
lites. However, a year later, in —just months 100˚E
after Russia began its initial military buildup near the
Ukrainian border—Luch made a significant maneuver
Luch passes numerous
back eastward to visit another Russian satellite in GEO, 80˚E satellites without stopping.
Cosmos 2520, and an Azerbaijani satellite, Azerspace-2/
France
Intelsat 38.116 Luch then maneuvered and loitered near
United States
Intelsat 33e from through . United States
60˚E Luxembourg
As corroborated by data and analysis from commer-
Russia
cial space domain awareness company Slingshot
Aerospace, Luch moved to rendezvous with Intelsat 40˚E
39, a high-throughput communications satellite
with European coverage, one month before Russia
France
invaded Ukraine.117 Since the war began, Luch has 20˚E
been performing proximity operations near Intelsat
satellites and loitering nearby for about 150 days at
United States
& Norway
each satellite—a significant departure from Luch’s 0˚ United States
nominal operations since typical loiter times are much France
France
less. Notably, these Intelsat satellites are transmitting
United States
Ku- and C-band frequencies (which are often used –20˚W As of , Luch positioned near
for secure military communications) over Ukraine, a United States communications satellite.
although it is unclear if they are supporting any mil-
2020 2021 2022 2023
itary operations in the region.118
Figure 2 Luch Transit before and
during Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine
satellite dashboard,

slingshot aerospace,

20 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

INDIA
INDIA
I NDIA CATAPULTED ONTO THE GLOBAL COUNTERSPACE STAGE IN 2019
when it launched its first (and only) ASAT test, becoming only the fourth
country to successfully demonstrate a direct-ascent ASAT capability. The
Indian space sector continued to grow throughout 2022, with a particular
focus on military and private satellite imagery. In , Prime Minister
Narendra Modi announced a new Mission Defense Space Program, where
New Delhi highlighted 75 defense space mission areas for private companies
to focus on. These 75 missions were separated into five broad categories of
space technology for both civilian and military operations: satellite, launch,
software, ground systems, and communications and payload.119
SPACE ORGANIZATION
India’s space program has historically focused on civil and scientific missions,
though the past five years have seen expanded military activity. The Indian
Space Research Organization (ISRO) is the civilian branch of India’s national
space program and has evolved into the sixth-largest space agency in the
world.120 The ISRO operates under the Department of Space, which is head-
ed by the prime minister. Founded in , the Defence Space Agency
(DSA) is charged with upholding India’s national security concerns in space
and operates under the Ministry of Defence.121 The DSA—a collaborative
effort between India’s air force, army, and navy—is led by an air force vice
marshal and is responsible for the country’s direct-ascent ASAT capability.122
21 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

Its subsidiary, the Defence Space Research Centre. It placed an ISRO Earth observation
Organisation (DSRO), also established in satellite into orbit along with two private
2019, absorbed the country’s previous mil- sector satellites—one commercial and one
itary space agencies, including the Defence academic.129 This SSLV-D2 was developed
Satellite Control Centre and the Defence to offer a more available and affordable
Imagery Processing and Analysis Centre.123 launch service to the private sector, fo-
The DSRO is led by a senior defense scientist cusing on small satellite launches.130 Two
and is responsible for the development of other launch vehicles are in development,
“space warfare systems and associated the Human Rated Launch Vehicle (HRLV),
technology.”124 There is little documen- a follow-on to the LVM3, and the Reusable
tation on either organization to further Launch Vehicle-Technology Demonstrator
describe mandates, goals, or direction.125 (RLV-TD).131 In total, the ISRO has launched
India’s Defence Research and Development 381 foreign satellites from 1999 to 2022.132
Organisation (DRDO) was founded in 1958
The country had four successful launches
as the primary research and development
and one failure in 2022: three PSLV launch-
wing of the Ministry of Defence.126 The DRDO INDIA’S SPACE es that placed 15 satellites into orbit, one
leads the development of electronic war-
GSLV launch that delivered 36 OneWeb
fare systems, missiles, and radars, among PROGRAM HAS satellites into orbit, and one failure of the
other systems. SSLV launcher.133 With support from the
HISTORICALLY
ISRO, Indian start-up Skyroot Aerospace
successfully tested the country’s first private
FOCUSED ON
SPACE LAUNCH industry launch vehicle, the Vikram-S, in
CIVIL AND in hopes of an operational
CAPABILITIES
launch sometime in 2023.134
SCIENTIFIC
India has three major launch sites in the
country: the Vikram Sarabhai Space Cen- MISSIONS,
SATELLITE
tre, the oldest ISRO launch facility in India,
which houses the design and development THOUGH CAPABILITIES
of SLVs; the Satish Dhawan Space Centre,
THE PAST
the most popular ISRO launch site due to India has over 60 satellites on orbit, the
its geographic superiority; and the Abdul majority of which serve civilian or research
FIVE YEARS
Kalam Island site, which is operated by the purposes, and boasts “the largest civilian
DRDO and hosts the Integrated Test Range HAVE SEEN remote sensing satellite constellation.”135
missile testing facility.127 Additionally, India has successfully launched
India currently has four active SLVs that are EXPANDED two missions to the Moon. Chandrayaan-1
capable of successfully delivering spacecraft was an orbiter launched in 2008 with a
MILITARY mission life of two years.136 A decade later,
to orbit, with at least one new launch vehicle
Chandrayaan-2 was launched, a complex
in the testing stage of development. The Po-
ACTIVITY.
mission that consisted of an orbiter, land-
lar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) has been
er, and rover to further explore the south
India’s most successful and versatile vehicle,
pole of the Moon. The orbiter was able to
capable of successfully delivering a variety
maneuver to successfully reach its intended
of payloads to orbit. The Geosynchronous
orbit and has an estimated mission life of
Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) focuses
seven years.137
on delivering communication satellites to
GEO. The Geosynchronous Satellite Launch The country has a small number of satellites
Vehicle Mark-III (LVM3) is a next-generation that have been used for military purposes.
versatile vehicle, which can launch commu- A large portion of the country’s Geosyn-
nication satellites twice the size of its GSLV chronous Satellite (GSAT) communications
predecessor as well as deliver payloads constellation is used for military communi-
of up to 10 tons to LEO.128 The ISRO’s first cations. GSAT-7 was the first ISRO satellite
launch in 2023 debuted the agency’s new to provide services to the Indian military,
Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV-D2), largely to the Indian navy to enable com-
launched from the Satish Dhawan Space munications between air, land, submarine,

INDIA
and warship systems.138 Similarly, GSAT-7A
provides communication services to the
Indian air force and army.139 The country’s
first electronic intelligence satellite, EMISAT,
is in orbit and is operated by the DRDO.140
India’s first all-weather radar-imaging satel-
lite, Risat-2, successfully monitored border
and maritime activity for the government
and re-entered Earth’s atmosphere in 2022
after a 13-year mission.141 One of India’s most
notable satellites, Microsat-R, was operated
by the DRDO as an imaging satellite and
used as a target for the 2019 destructive
ASAT test.142 Additional reports indicate
that India has been investing in the devel-
opment of military intelligence satellites,
specifically focusing on the contested Chi-
na-India border.143
COUNTERSPACE
ASSESSMENT
OVERVIEW
India’s rise in the space domain is largely
due to its demonstrated kinetic direct-ascent
ASAT capability launched in 2019. Soon after
the test, DRDO officials did not announce
specific plans for another ASAT test in LEO
but did indicate a possibility of testing in
a higher orbit.144 The possibility of another
ASAT test can be seen in research debates
across the country.145 Despite continuing to
invest in government and private industry
capabilities, there were few public reports
of counterspace developments in 2022. The
DRDO has sectors focused on the develop-
ment and design of “electronic, electro-op-
tical and laser based sensors and systems,”
though there are no public reports that
non-kinetic counterspace capabilities have
been developed.146 It does not appear that
India targets space systems in its electronic
or cyber systems. India continues to place
an emphasis on encouraging developments
in the commercial sector to increase its
share of the global space economy, boost its
domestic technology and industrial sectors,
and increase its international standing.147
23 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

IRAN
IRAN
I N 2008, IRAN BECAME THE NINTH COUNTRY TO SUCCESSFULLY place
a satellite into orbit using indigenous technologies.148 Since then, Iran’s
space program has become one of the largest in the Middle East, and the
country’s leaders regularly invoke the program as a symbol of national
strength and progress.149 However, other countries insist that Iran’s civil and
military space programs are cover for Tehran to circumvent international
sanctions and develop an offensive ballistic missile and nuclear program. Iran
publicly denies any interest in pursuing a nuclear ballistic missile program,
claiming its right to pursue a peaceful space program under state sovereignty.150
SPACE ORGANIZATION
Iran’s space sector primarily falls under two primary organizations, the civilian
Iranian Space Agency (ISA), founded in 2003, and the military Islamic Revo-
lutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) Aerospace Force. While the two are technically
separate, they share significant overlap in terms of authority and agenda.151
The ISA falls under the Ministry of Communications and Information Tech-
nology and operates with a Supreme Space Council, which sets policy and is
chaired by the Iranian president. The Ministry of Defense is also involved in ISA
operations, as its subsidiary groups develop the majority of SLV components
and build the satellites. The IRGC is not subject to the policy of the Supreme
Space Council and has traditionally focused on developing solid-fuel rock-
ets—not typically used for modern SLVs but well suited for missiles—which
24 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

has only increased suspicions about the intent of the to launch Iran’s first military satellite, Noor-1. It was
IRGC’s space program.152 Due to international sanctions subsequently used to launch the Noor-2 in March
against supplying ballistic missile technology to the 2022.162 In , the IRGC also tested a new
Iranian government, Iran’s private sector has been three-stage solid-fuel launch vehicle, the Ghaem 100,
used as a front to circumvent sanctions and acquire which is designed to reach orbits of 500 kilometers and
space launch technology. These companies, like the borrows heavily from the Qased.163 The Ghaem 100
Iranian government, often lack transparency and vehicle is contracted to launch Nahid communication
accountability, and many could likely be considered satellites into LEO, potentially in the first six months
state-owned enterprises rather than independent of 2023.164 Iran’s SLV and ballistic missile technology is
businesses contracted by the government.153 heavily influenced by or acquired from other nations,
particularly Russia and North Korea.165
The early months of 2023 have also seen an uptick of
discussion about space in Tehran, with the announce- Additionally, in , a third-stage capability,
ment of a 10-year strategic plan for space released by called Saman-1, was tested, which would allow a sat-
the ISA in collaboration with the Secretariat of the ellite to change orbits more quickly.166 This was tested
Supreme Space Council. This document outlines a by the Space Research Center and launched by Iran’s
future where Iran is a regional leader in space tech- defense ministry, with additional interest from the ISA,
nologies and space launch services by 2033.154 The which indicates that the technology is likely to be used
plan has been applauded by the Iranian president, by both the IRGC and the ISA when fully developed.167
who added a goal for Iranian-built satellites to orbit in
Iran operates two primary launch sites: the Shahrud
GEO and for independent broadcasting capabilities to
Missile Test Site and the Imam Khomeini Space Cen-
be secured.155 This continues previously stated goals
ter. The Shahrud Missile Test Site is located over 400
for the burgeoning space program, which included
kilometers east of Tehran and is the predominant
routinely launching satellites into LEO, attaining access
launch site of the ISA. The site was built in the 1980s
to GEO by 2026, and sending an Iranian astronaut to
with both Chinese and North Korean assistance.168
space aboard an Iranian SLV by 2032.156
Construction of the Imam Khomeini Space Center,
50 kilometers southeast of Semnan, was completed
in 2008 and inaugurated with the launch of a Shahab
SPACE LAUNCH
rocket. Following a destructive rocket launch failure in
CAPABILITIES 2012 and significant construction, the center reopened
its doors on July 27, 2017, with the successful launch
of a Simorgh SLV. 169
In 2022, Iran launched two satellites into orbit and
had multiple successful tests of new SLVs. This brings Additionally, Iran continues to launch satellites from
the total of Iranian SLVs to five, to include the Safir, the Russian-leased Baikonur Cosmodrome in Ka-
Simorgh, Qased, Zuljanah, and Ghaem. Of the five, zakhstan. In , a Russian rocket launched
three are operated by the ISA and two by the IRGC. a remote-sensing Khayyam satellite, which, according
to Iran’s information and communications technology
The ISA operates the Safir, Simorgh, and Zuljanah. On
minister, Issa Zarepour, was the beginning “of a strate-
February 9, 2009, the Safir became Iran’s first SLV to
gic cooperation between Iran and Russia in the space
place objects into LEO, featuring a launch range of
industry.”170 The ISA claims that the satellite will send
300 to 350 kilometers.157 This success was followed
encrypted data to Iranian operators and that Russia
by the Simorgh, with an extended launch range of up
will not have access to its data.171
to 500 kilometers. After several failed attempts, the
Simorgh was successful at placing objects in orbit in
2021.158 Among other similarities, both SLVs use liq-
uid-fueled engines from the Shahab-3 medium-range SATELLITE CAPABILITIES
ballistic missile.159 The Zuljanah, which has a hybrid
design incorporating solid- and liquid-fuel stages and
Iran currently has three satellites in orbit: the country’s
aims to deliver payloads of 220 kilogram to a 500 km
first military satellite, Noor, launched in 2020; Noor-2, a
orbit, was successfully tested for a second time in the
military reconnaissance satellite launched into LEO in
summer of 2022.160 However, Iranian SLV progress
; and the Khayyam Earth-imaging satellite,
also saw setbacks, such as the reported explosion of
built and launched by Russia in .172 Both
an unspecified SLV on a launchpad in .161
Noor satellites collect ISR data, and Iranian officials have
The Qased rocket was the first SLV operated solely by released color photographs that the Noor-2 satellite
the IRGC and had a successful maiden flight in 2020 took of U.S. military bases in Bahrain.173

IRAN
In , the ISA head announced a new tele-
communication satellite system, named after former
IRGC commander Qassem Soleimani, which is cited as
THERE SEEMS
a fundamental element of the 10-year plan for space.174
Additionally, an Iranian state-run news agency has TO HAVE BEEN
reported that Iran is capable of building indigenous
remote-sensing satellites able to capture images with A SIGNIFICANT
a resolution of 5 to 10 meters.175 This capability has
not been verified. SHIFT IN
Iran is developing other space capabilities as well and
MISSION
is strengthening relationships with other space-faring
nations, particularly Russia. The Russian invasion of SUCCESS AND
Ukraine in solidified a military alliance
between Iran and Russia, and there are reports that OVERALL
Iran is now Russia’s top military supplier. In exchange
for Iran’s support, particularly through the supply of GOVERNMENT
UAVs, Russia is likely returning the favor with military
SUPPORT
and technical support to Iran.176 Further, in , the ISA and Roscosmos signed an agreement
OF SPACE
to design and build remote sensing and communica-
tion satellites, develop infrastructure, and hold joint
CAPABILITIES.
training, which may bolster Iran’s space capabilities
in the future.177
COUNTERSPACE
ASSESSMENT OVERVIEW
After a series of launch failures in recent years, Iran
showed signs of progress in 2022. Though Tehran’s
launch and satellite capabilities are nowhere near
robust, there seems to have been a significant shift
in mission success and overall government support
of space capabilities. However, Iran appears far from
developing kinetic ASAT weapons or non-kinetic phys-
ical counterspace weapons. The country continues to
develop electronic and cyber capabilities, where Iran
has shown success in jamming and hacking against
foreign government and commercial satellite com-
munications and the GPS network for years.178 During
periods of civil unrest in the country in 2022, the Iranian
government blocked access in Iran to a wide variety
of cellular and internet networks, including SpaceX’s
Starlink website homepage.179 Most notably in the
last year, French satellite operator Eutelsat revealed
details of signals jamming originating in Iran on two
of its satellites in the fall of 2022, affecting Persian TV
and radio transmissions. The operator notified relevant
authorities in Iran.180
26 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

NORTH KOREA
NORTH
KOREA
N ORTH KOREA’S SPACE CAPABILITIES ARE SHROUDED in uncertainty.
It has been just over a decade since the first successful launch of a
North Korean satellite in , and the country’s space
program has since experienced only limited progress. However,
2022 saw an uptick in space activity, including two potential technology tests
of components for a future national reconnaissance satellite and upgrades
to a space launch facility.
SPACE ORGANIZATION
North Korea’s space activities are centralized under the National Aerospace
Development Administration (NADA), which has the stated mission of space
development for peaceful purposes, though these claims are often refuted.181
NADA’s acronym and the organization’s logo resemble the U.S. civil space
organization, NASA. NADA was established after the 2013 meeting of the
Central Committee of the Workers’ Party of Korea, which adopted a law on
space development. This law was revised at a 2022 meeting of the Standing
Committee of the 14th Supreme People’s Assembly. State media described
the revision as creating basic principles and norms “to ensure space devel-
opment activities legally and more firmly (sic).”182 Further details have not
been released.
27 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

launch site, the Tonghae Satellite Launching Ground,
SPACE LAUNCH
has seen routine maintenance in the last decade but
CAPABILITIES
is possibly inactive.189
North Korea’s most consistent SLV is the Unha, which
In 2022, North Korea tested more missiles has four variants and borrows engine designs from
than any year previously.183 The country the country’s Nodong medium-range ballistic missile.190
launched over 90 missiles in 2022, including
23 on a single day, November 2, 2022, some
within 60 kilometers of the coast of South
SATELLITE CAPABILITIES
Korea.184 Historically, the country’s missile
activity has not translated to success for its
space program. North Korea has successfully launched only two Earth
observation satellites into orbit, the first in 2012 and
North Korea reported a space launch test on
another in 2016.191 After years of failed tests and launch-
February 26, 2022, for a spy satellite, a state-
es, NADA completed a successful on-orbit “final-stage
ment the U.S. Department of Defense has
test” of a military reconnaissance test satellite on
refuted as a disguise for an intercontinental
December 18, 2022.192 Ahead of North Korea’s planned
ballistic missile system.185 However, the
first launch of an operational military reconnaissance
claim remains consistent with a confirmed
satellite in , this technology demonstrator
“test-piece satellite” launched in Decem-
satellite proved camera operability, communication
ber 2022 at the Sohae Satellite Launching
Station.186 Supreme Leader Kim Jong-un transmission capabilities, and the accuracy of track-
visited the Sohae Satellite Launching Sta- ing from a ground control system.193 The test satellite
tion in to inspect the spaceport reportedly reached a 500 km orbit with a camera that
and NADA’s upcoming projects, as well as captured images at 20 m resolution as well as video.
oversee plans for significant upgrades to Black and white images of Seoul were released by
the launch site.187 In , a new North Korea’s official newspaper, Rodong Sinmum, that Satellite Imagery of the Sohae
horizontal engine test stand was built and were reportedly taken by the test satellite.194 While not Satellite Launching Station on
October 4, 2022.
used to conduct its first test, with Kim Jong- an exquisite system, this rudimentary system would
un in attendance.188 North Korea’s second improve North Korea’s limited space capabilities. airbus ds/beyond parallel
New rail-served warehouse Entrance and checkpoint
Sohae Satellite Launch Station
Administration and security headquarters
October 4, 2022
Rail activity
Covered rail terminal
Livestock facility
Horizontal processing building
Warehouse area NADA buildings and Building razed and new construction
helicopter pad
VIP housing area
Changya-dong
Security barracks
New worker housing, workshops, and warehouses
Tunnel or UGF under construction
Fuel/oxidizer storage buildings being enlarged Construction support facility
Two new water tanks Road under
construction since July
VIP observation buildings Security barracks
and new structure
Yunsong vertical engine test stand
Copyright © Airbus DS 2022

NORTH KOREA
COUNTERSPACE
ASSESSMENT NORTH KOREA HAS
OVERVIEW DEMONSTRATED
SMALL SUCCESSES
North Korea has demonstrated small suc-
cesses in its space program over the past
IN ITS SPACE
year, most notably receiving imagery from
a test reconnaissance satellite, but this
PROGRAM OVER
has been overshadowed by the immense
number of missile launches conducted THE PAST YEAR . . .
in 2022. While a robust missile launching
capability may benefit Pyongyang’s space BUT THIS HAS BEEN
launch programs, North Korea has yet to
exhibit the necessary sensing and altitude OVERSHADOWED
control capabilities for a direct-ascent ASAT
BY THE IMMENSE
weapon. It also remains unlikely that North
Korea is actively pursuing any non-kinetic
NUMBER OF
physical capabilities. The country has, how-
ever, demonstrated successful electronic
MISSILE LAUNCHES
warfare through GPS and other jamming.
North Korea’s cyberattack threat is active CONDUCTED IN
and viable, though it is most often used
for economic or political messaging rather 2022.
than aimed at space assets. As the country
acquires more advanced technologies, likely
through illicit means, and gains operating
experience, threats to space systems and
ground stations may grow more credible.195
29 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

OTHERS
OTHERS
W HILE THE PREVIOUS CHAPTERS HAVE BEEN DEDICATED to an-
alyzing the countries making the largest strides in counterspace
capabilities, they are not the only ones thinking strategically
about the changing space environment. This chapter includes
discussion and developments related to counterspace capabilities by other
countries and non-state actors.
AUSTRALIA
The Defence Space Command of the Royal Australian Air Force was formally
established on January 18, 2022, bringing the space elements across the
Australian military services into one integrated headquarters organization
(similar to the U.S. Space Force).196 Shortly after, the Australian government
released a Defence Space Strategy to build upon the 2020 Defence Strategic
Update, declaring the mission is “to prepare space power to secure Australia’s
interests in peace and war.”197 Additionally, the Space Surveillance Telescope
(SST), built by the United States and jointly operated with Australia, became
operational in . The SST will provide more accurate space
domain awareness by providing tracking and detection of even “faint objects
in deep space.”198 These space domain awareness capabilities are critical to
observing and clarifying many space and counterspace activities outlined in
this report, including space launch, RPOs, and ASAT missions.
30 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

Rafael relayed that the project received renewed funding
FRANCE
from the Israeli Defense Forces after successful live-fire
tests.203 Israeli representatives indicated that the Iron
French officials have continued to be out- Beam could be operational in as few as two to three
spoken about investing in counterspace years. This will be a permanent ground-based system
technologies. To spur greater space ad- capable of destroying or disabling targets several
vancements, Prime Minister Élisabeth Borne kilometers away. 204
announced in that the
country would be injecting €9.0 billion
($9.6 billion) into the space sector in the
JAPAN
next three years. This includes at least €1.5
billion ($1.6 billion) to the country’s civil
space agency, the National Centre for Space In , Japan released a new national
Studies (CNES). In the same speech, Prime security strategy, national defense strategy, and na-
Minister Borne reiterated France’s military tional defense buildup program, which all emphasize
space ambitions, largely concentrated on the importance of capabilities in the space domain.205
maintaining strategic autonomy in the space These documents add policy positions to an approved
domain, including the development of active 2022 defense budget which dedicated ¥79 billion ($588
defenses for space objects.199 In February million) to capabilities in the space domain, excluding
2022, France held its annual space wargame, funds tied to ballistic missile defenses.206 Enhancement
AsterX, to put elements of the French space of space situational awareness (SSA) capabilities is
defense strategy into practice. Participants high on the defense spending list, including develop-
from nearly 30 countries were in attendance, ment of an on-orbit optical telescope capability, the
spanning military and industry partners.200 “procurement of SSA laser ranging equipment” to
The growth of AsterX emphasizes France’s monitor objects in LEO, interoperability with domes-
ambitions as a leader in the military space tic organizations and the U.S. military, and enhanced
domain and its intention to grow its defen- satellite communications systems.207 The 2022 bud-
sive counterspace capabilities. get document also outlines a reorganization of the
Space Operations Squadron, to be broken up into a
After initially publicly discussing the idea of
first squadron to focus on SSA monitoring, a second
bodyguard satellites in 2019, France is well
squadron to focus on the detection of jamming against
underway to achieving this capability to
Japanese satellites, and a third squadron designated
protect assets in GEO with a satellite named
as a Space System Management Squadron to manage
YODA.201 Publicly available information
and maintain space equipment.208
states that YODA will have an ISR capability
to detect incoming threats to GEO satellites. In , Japan launched another satellite for its
The first contract for YODA was awarded to Intelligence Gathering Satellite (IGS) constellation. The
Hemeria, a French space start-up.202 IGS-Radar 7 launched from Japan’s Tanegashima Space
Center, located on the island of Tanegashima about 40
kilometers south of Kyushu.209 IGS-Radar satellites are
ISRAEL operated by the Cabinet Satellite Information Center,
and data is utilized both for national security purposes
and civil natural disaster monitoring.210 This followed
As reported in previous years, Israel con-
a disappointing launch year for the country, in which
tinues to make progress in testing its Iron
its only orbital launch attempt in failed
Beam capability, a directed-energy system
to reach orbit.211
that will complement the Iron Dome missile
defense system. This electronic warfare
weapon is currently being designed for
SOUTH KOREA
UAVs and missiles, but with technological
changes such as increased power and tar-
geting, it could evolve into a counterspace South Korea’s space program reached a major milestone
capability. However, there are no current in when the country had its first successful
reports of Israeli leadership steering tech- satellite launch using an indigenous liquid-fueled rocket
nology development for Iron Beam in that called Nuri. Nuri launched four small satellites to be
direction. In , defense contractor used for several missions, including Earth observa-

OTHERS
tion. This makes South Korea only the tenth nation to
successfully build and launch a rocket.212 In late 2022,
the country’s defense ministry tested a solid-fueled
rocket as part of efforts to bolster its defense posture
and to launch space-based reconnaissance satellites.213
Officials, including the newly elected president and
science minister, have spoken about commitments
to increase the country’s space capabilities, including
establishing a state aerospace agency in the future.214
UNITED KINGDOM
Following the 2021 establishment of UK Space Com-
mand, the United Kingdom’s Ministry of Defence released
a Defence Space Strategy in focused on
operationalizing the space domain. This document
serves as a follow-on to the 2021 National Space Strat-
egy and outlines an increase in investment for the UK
space sector, injecting an additional £1.4 billion ($1.7
billion) into space systems. This is in addition to £5.0
billion ($6.0 billion) committed to a next-generation
military satellite communications constellation.215
NON-STATE ACTORS
On March 1, 2022, unconfirmed reports surfaced that
non-state actors affiliated with Anonymous—a de-
centralized international activist and “hacktivist”
collective—hacked their way into Roscosmos’ satel-
lite control center.216 This instance was one of many
“hacktivist” activities against Russia after Moscow’s
invasion of Ukraine. Dmitry Rogozin, head of Roscos-
mos at the time, announced that all Roscosmos control
centers were operational and that these claims were
false.217 Another hacktivist targeted the Russian Space
Research Institute website, leaving crude comments
on webpages and threatening further action if Russia
did not leave Ukraine. This hacktivist also claimed to
be part of Anonymous.218
32 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

WHAT TO WATCH
WHAT TO WATCH
A NOTHER YEAR HAS PASSED WHERE PREDICTIONS from previous
Space Threat Assessments have been realized. The 2022 report
predicted the trend in electronic warfare that “the denial of GPS
or satellite communications can have a great effect.”219 This year,
while electronic warfare weapons were used on the battlefield in Ukraine,
employed early and throughout the war by Russia, the “great effects” that
may have been envisioned prior have not been realized. Notably, jamming
of GPS and satellite communications did not directly trigger an escalation
of the conflict. Past iterations of the report also detailed extensive Chi-
nese counterspace developments. Despite the U.S. Department of Defense
characterizing China as the “pacing threat,” Beijing was relatively quiet on
the counterspace front this year. This could be for a variety of reasons, but
China’s lack of visible activity should not be construed as a decrease in the
threat assessment.
The 2022 edition noted a growing number of countries expanding their focus
on military operations in the space domain, reorganizing their national secu-
rity space enterprises, and discussing how to defend space assets, including
in cooperation with allies and partners. This trend continues, with examples
such as Australia establishing a Defence Space Command in and
Japan and the United States affirming that attacks “to, from or within space
present a clear challenge to the security of the Alliance” and “could lead to
the invocation of Article V of the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty.”220
33 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

and electronic intelligence capabilities.225
CHINA
Coupling its growth in space-based ISR
with advancements in artificial intelligence,
While it has been a busy year tracking Rus- machine learning, and automation, Beijing
sian counterspace activities, China has is developing, across multiple modalities,
been relatively quiet. This is in contrast an ability to rapidly detect targets and relay
to previous years when Beijing conducted those target coordinates to its precision
provocative, and detectable, space demon- weapon systems to close its own kill chains.
strations such as the hypersonic fractional The authors anticipate greater public dis-
orbital bombardment system test and SJ-21 cussions, especially by U.S. national security
RPOs, as highlighted in last year’s report.221 space leaders, on the policy, capability
What explains this decrease in activity? The investments, and operational concepts
authors acknowledge that, as open-source needed to deny others the use of space
researchers, they are limited to public- against U.S. forces and interests (i.e., U.S.
ly available information. However, more counterspace weapons).
commercial and publicly available sources
of relevant information, such as satellite
telemetry data, jamming detection, satellite LESSONS FROM
imagery, and translated Chinese documents,
RUSSIA’S INVASION
are aiding in such independent analysis. It
may be that certain counterspace weapons OF UKRAINE
programs have achieved their testing ob-
jectives with no need for further testing at
Previous iterations of this report highlighted
this time; that these systems have shifted
Russia’s advanced jamming, dazzling, and
from development and test to production
cyber capabilities. However, few of these
and fielding; or that they continue to be
more advanced non-kinetic weapons have
tested but in an undetectable manner or
been seen in Ukraine, despite social media
only detectable with classified U.S. sen-
videos and tweets purporting to show such
sors. It may also be the case that Beijing
systems in operation, such as the Krasukha-4
is focusing its resources on other parts of
electronic warfare counterspace weapon.
its national security space enterprise or
Nevertheless, many experts have been
military modernization efforts “to become
surprised at Russia’s lack of success with its
the world’s leading power.”222 This lack of
electronic warfare systems.226 Also absent
activity does not put the authors at ease,
from the war are laser systems, such as
who will be closely watching Beijing actions,
the Peresvet and Sokol-Eshelon, and SAR
nor U.S. senior officials, who continue to
jamming systems to counter ISR satellites
emphasize that China remains the “most
despite the heavy and public use of imagery
challenging threat,” followed by Russia.223
satellites to track Russian forces. There are
This report traditionally describes weapons several reasons why Russia has not em-
that pose threats to U.S. space assets. How- ployed such counterspace systems, to the
ever, U.S. policymakers and military leaders extent such employment would be covered
are increasingly being confronted with the in open-source reporting. It may be that if
threat of how adversary space capabilities any attacks were occurring, commercial
(e.g., ISR, communications, and PNT) can be space companies and Western governments
used to target joint and coalition forces on may not want the success of such attacks
the ground, in air, and at sea. For example, publicly disclosed. This could be to avoid giv-
China’s fleet of ISR satellites is “more than ing Russia a battle damage assessment and
250 systems—a quantity second only to the encouragement to use such counterspace
United States.”224 Last year, Beijing appears weapons against other targets, or to avoid
to have launched four sets each of Yaogan-35 rattling other customers or investors and
and Yaogan-36 “triplet satellites” (24 total eroding any competitive advantages. Anoth-
satellites), which are believed to comprise a er possibility is that these Russian systems
military surveillance system incorporating are not as effective as Western researchers
Earth observation, synthetic aperture radar, predicted pre-invasion, whether because

WHAT TO WATCH
the attacks are not as damaging as assumed military power. Should Taiwan pursue pro-
or that companies, as with SpaceX, have liferated LEO communications and greater
found effective work-arounds to continue use of commercial ISR data? Conversely, UKRAINE’S
operations. It is possible that these systems the benefit that space capabilities provide
are inoperable or not as widely deployed as in modern warfare may also provide the RESISTANCE
previously assumed. Finally, it could also justification for adversaries to increase
be that these systems are held in reserve, their counterspace weapons development HAS
perhaps viewed as more escalatory or to and deny their opponents access to space
DEMONSTRATED
be used for more strategic purposes. Such during a conflict.
use and non-use of different counterspace
Finally, Starlink’s effectiveness in Ukraine THAT SPACE
weapons in Ukraine may be instructive as
has showcased the advantages of prolifer-
analysts seek to better understand Moscow’s
ated LEO (pLEO) constellations. As more CAPABILITIES
space strategy and doctrine.
commercial companies and militaries
CAN CREATE
As discussed throughout this report, com- develop pLEO systems, adversaries will
mercial data and communications services seek to counter them. Constellations with
AN ADVANTAGE
have been integral to Ukraine’s resistance. satellites in the hundreds and thousands
The former chairman of the State Space may necessitate a shift in an adversary’s
OVER A MORE
Agency of Ukraine, Volodymyr Usov, stated at targeting calculus. Kinetic direct-ascent
a conference that almost 50 ASATs or kinetic co-orbital weapons that CAPABLE
percent of intelligence supplied to Ukraine are designed to attack single satellites are
came from the commercial space indus- less effective unless employed en masse. MILITARY
try.227 Starlink has been called a “lifeline” Moreover, kinetic attacks run the risk of
for Ukrainian forces and civilians alike.228 generating a cascading debris field that POWER.
Therefore, it is not surprising that Russia would make orbits unusable, including
targeted and attacked commercial space for an adversary’s own constellations.
systems—first Viasat and then SpaceX’s An adversary’s options are likely to shift
Starlink. As the commercial space sector toward cyberattacks, debris-generating
continues to show its utility in peacetime attacks to collapse an entire orbital plane,
and conflict for governments and their mil- high-altitude nuclear detonations (HANDs), Satellite training in Ukraine.
itaries, the United States’ role in protecting or attacks on physical infrastructure like photo by staff sgt. eric mcdonough,
commercial capabilities and strategies for ground stations. Indicators for such a shift 45th infantry brigade combat team
how to do so will be key policy issues for the
U.S. government. For starters, commercial
operators will increasingly seek threat in-
formation from the government that would
allow them to make informed decisions
on how to better protect constellations or
prepare procedures to respond to attacks.
Ukraine’s resistance against Russia is nothing
short of remarkable. As researchers who
specifically focus on contributions from
the space domain to Ukraine’s resistance,
the authors ponder how space capabili-
ties can enable David to beat Goliath. Will
smaller nations invest in space capabilities
to bolster their national security and re-
silience if attacked, especially by a more
powerful nation? Ukraine’s resistance has
demonstrated that space capabilities can
create an advantage over a more capable
35 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

could include research to understand the
effects of HANDs on satellites, for example,
as Chinese scientists are reportedly doing
at a PLA research institute.229 Each of these
variants of counterspace weapons has pol-
icy, operational, and technical trade-offs,
and some would be highly escalatory.
SPACE SITUATIONAL
AWARENESS
An indicator not addressed in detail in this
report is the need for robust space situa-
tional awareness (SSA) to enable counter-
space weapons targeting. SSA refers to the
ability to identify, characterize, and track
space objects, where collecting accurate and
actionable data is incredibly challenging.230
then, nine other countries have committed U.S. vice president Kamala Harris
Exquisite SSA data is not only advantageous
not to conduct destructive direct-ascent announcing the ASAT test ban in 2022.
for on-orbit operations of national and
ASAT tests, including Australia, Canada,
commercial satellites but also to provide michael peterson/u.s. space force
France, Germany, Japan, New Zealand,
accurate targeting for counterspace weap-
South Korea, Switzerland, and the United
ons. In order to attack a satellite on-orbit, an
Kingdom. Furthermore, a resolution in the
aggressor would need to know its precise
United Nations was adopted on December
location and where it is moving. The aggres-
7, 2022, that “calls upon all States to com-
sor will also want accurate battle damage
mit not to conduct destructive direct-as-
assessments. For example, if a satellite is
cent anti-satellite missile tests.”232 This
targeted through a cyberattack that allows
resolution was passed, with 155 countries
the attacker to disable its controls, SSA will
voting in support, 9 voting against, and 9
be necessary to determine if the attack was
abstaining. Notably, China, Russia, Iran,
successful by monitoring the satellite and
North Korea, and India did not vote in favor
any controlled movements. Although this
of the resolution.233 This response to the
report tracks counterspace weapons devel-
United States’ unilateral commitment may
opments, it is important to acknowledge
indicate greater international motivation
the critical data needed to deploy many
to develop sustainable norms, behaviors,
of these counterspace weapons against
and agreements to limit the use or testing
targets. Countries that are investing in SSA
of counterspace weapons, especially those
are not necessarily also developing coun-
that create long-lasting orbital debris.
terspace weapons; however, countries that
are both investing in SSA capabilities and
developing counterspace weapons should
be watched carefully.
DIRECT-ASCENT
ASAT TEST BAN
On April 18, 2022, U.S. vice president Kamala
Harris announced a U.S. commitment to
stopping destructive direct-ascent ASAT
missile testing, an important step forward for
sustainability and stability in space.231 Since

CONCLUSION
CONCLUSION
T HE PAST YEAR OFFERED A TANGIBLE REMINDER of how import-
ant and integral space capabilities have become to citizens across
the globe, not only in peacetime but through crisis and conflict.
In Ukraine, space capabilities offered: (1) transparency on military
aggression by showing the world the buildup and movement of Russian
forces; (2) connectivity by enabling Ukrainian forces to transmit information
across the battlefield; and (3) a lifeline to the outside world by allowing the
Ukrainian people to connect with the world and expose the horrors of war.
But the advantages that space capabilities provide make them a target.
The past year showed unusual and threatening behaviors from LEO to
GEO, demonstrating that no orbital regime is out of reach of counterspace
weapons. It also showed how counterspace weapons have become part of
a broader tool kit and military campaign to disrupt command, control, com-
munications, and intelligence gathering and to degrade the effectiveness of
UAVs and precision munitions. As China and Russia put more counterspace
weapons into operational units, such integration of counterspace weapons
and tactics with broader military plans will only increase.
China’s rapid growth in its space capabilities across the PLA’s Strategic Sup-
port Force, state-owned enterprises, and burgeoning commercial sector
means that it now has a lot to lose. It has quickly become the number two
space power, displacing Russia, whose space program is atrophying.234 CSIS
has previously written that “deterrence succeeds by altering the cost-benefit
calculus of a potential aggressor.”235 Beijing’s calculus now involves a high
cost, which may give it pause. Moscow’s does not. Notably, no ASAT tests
occurred in the past year. Perhaps this is a result of the greater recognition
of the destructive potential of debris-generating activity in space, which
can ruin orbits for oneself and all others dependent on space, or perhaps it
is a result of international efforts in 2022 on norms of behavior and safety
and sustainability in space, or it may just be a matter of time before the
technology is tested once again. In 2023, it will be important to monitor if
this consequential trend is sustained.
37 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
KARI A. BINGEN is the director of the Aerospace Security Project and a senior
fellow in the International Security Program at the Center for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS). She joined CSIS from HawkEye 360, an innovative
space technology company creating a new class of radio frequency (RF) data
and analytics, where she was the chief strategy officer. Prior to the private
sector, Kari served as the deputy undersecretary of defense for intelligence
and security, overseeing the defense intelligence and security enterprises,
comprising more than 120,000 personnel and an annual budget of over $54
billion. Before that, Kari served as the policy director on the House Armed
Services Committee and staff lead for its Strategic Forces Subcommittee,
advising members of Congress on defense policy, program, and budget mat-
ters. Prior to entering government, Kari specialized in national security space
issues, working with U.S. defense and intelligence community clients, first as
a space systems analyst at SRA International’s Adroit C4ISR Center, and then
as a senior space policy analyst at the Aerospace Corporation. In addition to
her work at CSIS, Kari is an adjunct assistant professor at Georgetown Uni-
versity, was a commissioner on the CSIS Technology and Intelligence Task
Force, and serves on a number of corporate and nonprofit advisory boards.
She graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with a degree
in aeronautics and astronautics.
KAITLYN JOHNSON is deputy director and fellow of the Aerospace Security
Project at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. Ms. Johnson
supports the team’s strategic planning and research agenda. Her research
specializes in topics such as space security, military space systems, and com-
mercial and civil space policy. Ms. Johnson has written on national security
space reorganization, threats against space assets, the commercialization of
space, escalation and deterrence dynamics, and defense acquisition trends.
She is also a cohost of the CSIS podcast Tech Unmanned, which features
guests with both policy expertise and technical expertise in order to break
through the national security jargon and technology hand-waving to get to
the core of the technical realities of these emerging capabilities, benefits to
development, and the barriers to success. Ms. Johnson holds an MA from
American University in U.S. foreign policy and national security studies, with
a concentration in defense and space security, and a BS from the Georgia
Institute of Technology in international affairs.
MAKENA YOUNG is an associate fellow with the Aerospace Security Project at
the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). Her research interests
include international collaboration, space security, and orbital debris. Prior to
joining CSIS, Ms. Young worked for the Federal Aviation Administration as an
aerospace engineer, focusing on automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast
certification and integration in small aircraft. She holds a BS in aeronautical
and astronautical engineering from Purdue University with minors in inter-
national relations and environmental engineering.

ENDNOTES
INTRODUCTION
1 “US General Warns China Biggest Threat in Space,” Voice of America, February 19, 2023, 
voanews.com/a/us-general-warns-china-biggest-threat-in-space/6969831.html.
2 “State of Space 2022,” Space Foundation, n.d., 
of-space-2022-industry-enters-era-of-access-and-opportunity/.
3 Space Foundation Editorial Team, “Space Foundation Releases the Space Report 2022 Q2 Showing
Growth of Global Space Economy,” Space Foundation, July 27, 2022, 
org/2022/07/27/the-space-report-2022-q2/; and “NSR’s Global Space Economy Report Projects $1.25
Trillion in Revenue by 2030,” Northern Sky Research, January 27, 2022, 
global-space-economy-report-projects-1-25-trillion-in-revenue-by-2030/.
4 “Satellite Demand to Quadruple over the Next Decade,” Euroconsult, December 12, 2022, https://

5 “UCS Satellite Database,” Union of Concerned Scientists, December 8, 2005, last updated May 1, 2022,

6 “Space Environment: Total Launches by Country,” CSIS, Aerospace Security, last updated February 16,
2023, 
7 “Space Environment Statistics,” Space Debris User Portal, European Space Agency, last updated De-
cember 22, 2022, 
TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
8 U.S. Space Force, Spacepower: Doctrine for Space Forces (Washington, DC: ), 34, https://

9 “NATO 2022 Strategic Concept,” NATO, June 29, 2022, 
pdf/2022/6/pdf/290622-strategic-concept.pdf.
10 “Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space, and under Water,” U.S.
Department of State, n.d., 
11 Brian Garino and Jane Gibson, “Space System Threats,” in AU-18 Space Primer (Maxwell Air Force
Base, AL: Air University Press, ), 277, 
chap21.pdf.
12 Richard B. Langley et al., “Innovation: GNSS Spoofing Detection,” GPS World, June 1, 2013, https://

na-motion/.
CHINA
13 Jonathan McDowell, “Space Activities in 2022,” planet4589, January 17, 2023, 
space/papers/space22.pdf.
14 Andrew Jones, “China to Expand Its Space Station, International Astronaut Selection Underway,”
SpaceNews, February 28, 2023, 
tional-astronaut-selection-underway/.
15 “Military-Civil Fusion and the People’s Republic of China,” U.S. State Department Fact Sheet, , 
16 “Company Profile,” China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation, n.d., 
china.com/n16421/n17138/n17229/index.html.
17 Alexander Bowe, “China’s Pursuit of Space Power Status and Implications for the United States,”
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, April 11, 2019, 
default/files/Research/USCC_China’s%20Space%20Power%20Goals.pdf.
39 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

18 John Costello and Joe McReynolds, China’s Strategic Support Force: A Force for a New Era (Washing-
ton, DC: Institute for National Strategic Studies, ), 10–12, 15, 16, 
edu/Portals/68/Documents/stratperspective/china/china-perspectives_13.pdf.
19 Andrew Jones, “China Sends Second Shiyan-10 Test Satellite Sent into Orbit with Its Final Launch of
2022,” SpaceNews, December 29, 2022, 
satellite-sent-into-orbit-with-its-final-launch-of-2022/.
20 Andrew Jones, “China Scraps Expendable Long March 9 Rocket Plan in Favor of Reusable Version,”
SpaceNews, November 9, 2022, 
et-plan-in-favor-of-reusable-version/.
21 “Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center,” Rocket Rundown, n.d., 
sites/jiuquan-satellite-launch-center/.
22 “China’s Satellite Launch Centers,” China Internet Information Center, accessed March 1, 2023, http://
 and “North Korea’s Missile Activity in 2022,”
International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), , 
strategic-comments/2022/north-koreas-missile-activity-in-2022.
23 Andrew Jones, “China Launches 14 Satellites with New Solid Rocket from Mobile Sea Platform,”
SpaceNews, December 9, 2022, 
rocket-from-mobile-sea-platform/.
24 Irina Liu et al., Evaluation of China’s Commercial Space Sector (Alexandria, VA: Institute for Defense
Analyses, Science and Technology Policy Institute, ), 49, 
search-and-publications/publications/all/e/ev/evaluation-of-chinas-commercial-space-sector.
25 Ibid.
26 Andrew Jones, “Chinese Rocket Firm Space Pioneer Set for First Launch,” SpaceNews, February 16,
2023, 
27 Eric Berger, “China’s Secretive Space Plane Flies Higher and Longer Than Before,” ArsTechnica, August
9, 2022, 
ger-than-before/.
28 Todd Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2021 (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 
csis.org/analysis/space-threat-assessment-2021; and Andrew Jones, “China’s Mystery Spaceplane
Releases Object into Orbit,” SpaceNews, November 2, 2022, 
tery-spaceplane-releases-object-into-orbit/.
29 Jones, “China’s Mystery Spaceplane Releases Object into Orbit”; and Andrew Jones, “China’s Space-
plane Raises Orbit and National Funding,” SpaceNews, October 25, 2022, 
chinas-spaceplane-raises-orbit-and-national-funding/.
30 Jones, “China’s Spaceplane Raises Orbit and National Funding.”
31 Jones, “China’s Mystery Spaceplane Releases Object into Orbit.”
32 “ ” [My Country Successfully Launches Reusable Spacecraft],
我国成功发射可重复使用试验航天器 我
, August 4, 2022, 
国成功发射可重复使用试验航天器_新浪新闻
05/doc-imizirav6807770.shtml#/, Google translated.
33 Sandra Erwin, “X-37B Spaceplane Completes Its Sixth Mission, Lands after Nearly 30 Months in Orbit,”
SpaceNews, November 12, 2022, 
sion-lands-after-nearly-30-months-in-orbit/.
34 Andrew Jones, “China Makes Progress in Reusability with Secretive Second Flight of Suborbital
Spaceplane,” SpaceNews, August 26, 2022, 
ability-with-secretive-second-flight-of-suborbital-spaceplane/; Eric Mack, “China Briefly Had Two
Secretive Spaceplanes In Flight, And One Is Still Unaccounted For,” Forbes, August 28, 2022, https://

and-one-is-still-unaccounted-for/; and CSNA Watcher, Twitter post, August 25, 2022, 1:09 p.m., https://
twitter.com/CNSAWatcher/status/1563045959503716360.
35 Yang Cheng and Zhao Cong, “My Country’s Suborbital Vehicle Reusable Flight Test a Complete
Success,” China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation, August 25, 2022, 
qq.com/s/ngOK_mUFar4hbZFfqVW6-g.

36 Zhang Tong, “China’s Suborbital Space Plane Project Gets Major Funding Boost,” South China Morning
Post, September 16, 2022, 
orbital-space-plane-project-gets-major-funding-boost; and Lia Wong, “Chinese Space Plane Makes
Second Flight, China’s First Reusable Design,” OVD, August 30, 2022, 
com/2022/08/30/chinese-space-plane-makes-second-flight-chinas-first-reusable-design/.
37 Meera Suresh, “China’s Spaceplane Tengyun May Take Off and Land at Airports: Reports,” Internation-
al Business Times, December 20, 2021, 
take-land-airports-reports-3360929.
38 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space (Washington, DC: 2022) 3, https://

Space_2022.pdf.
39 Makena Young and Akhil Thadani, Low Orbit, High Stakes (Washington, DC: CSIS, ),
2, and Larry Press, “Update on China SatNet’s
GuoWang Broadband Constellation – Can They Do It?,” CircleID, February 3, 2022, 
com/posts/20220203-update-on-china-satnets-guowang-broadband-constellation-can-they-do-it.
40 Young and Thadani, Low Orbit, High Stakes, 13; and Xinhua, “Full Text: China’s Space Program: A 2021
Perspective,” The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, updated January 28, 2022, https://
english.
41 Cao Siqi, “Robot Prototype Capable of Clearing Space Debris Shines at Airshow China,” Global Times,
November 13, 2022, and “China Launches
Robot Prototype Capable of Catching Space Debris with Net,” CNA, April 27, 2021, 
nelnewsasia.com/asia/china-launches-robot-prototype-capable-catching-space-debris-net-247601.
42 “Space Debris Removal,” Origin Space, n.d., and Siqi,
“Robot Prototype Capable of Clearing Space Debris Shines at Airshow China.”
43 Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Com-
munity (Washington, DC: Office of the Director of National Intelligence, ), 
gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/ATA-2021-Unclassified-Report.pdf.
44 Stephen Chen, “The Powerful Chinese Megawatt Laser ‘Small Enough for a Satellite’,” South China
Morning Post, January 7, 2022, 
nese-megawatt-laser-powerful-small-enough-be-used-satellite.
45 Todd Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2020 (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 
csis.org/analysis/space-threat-assessment-2020.
46 Xinhua, “China’s space tracking ship sails for monitoring missions,” China Daily, August 23, 2022,

47 Naqi Wasif, “China displays transportable SLC-18 space surveillance radar,” Janes, Novem-
ber 16, 2022, 
able-slc-18-space-surveillance-radar.
48 “China’s Anti-stealth Radar Comes to Fruition,” Defense News, November 22, 2014, 
defensenews.com/global/asia-pacific/2014/11/22/chinas-anti-stealth-radar-comes-to-fruition/.
49 Matthew P. Funaiole et al., “Eyes on the Skies: China’s Growing Space Footprint in South America,”
Hidden Reach, CSIS, October 4, 2022, 
space/.
50 “SJ 21,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
51 “SJ21 with Compass G2,” YouTube video, posted by COMSPOC, January 28, 2022, 0:21, 
youtube.com/watch?v=vSs0Ic3LlZE.
52 “SJ 12,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., and “USA270 and
Shiyan12,” YouTube video, posted by COMSPOC, January 28, 2022, 0:39, 
watch?v=G--70E8nc7Y.
53 Debra Werner, “An In-Orbit Game of Cat and Mouse: Close Approaches Prompt Calls for Communica-
tions and Norms,” SpaceNews, June 16, 2022, 
mouse-close-approaches-prompt-calls-for-communications-and-norms/.
54 “SJ 23,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
41 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

55 Andrew Jones, “Classified Chinese Satellite Releases Small Object in Orbit,” space.com, January 24,
2023, 
RUSSIA
56 “Russia Claims Its Zadira Laser Weapon Destroyed a Drone in Ukraine,” Defense News, May 19, 2022,

stroyed-a-drone-in-ukraine/.
57 Florian Vidal, Russia’s Space Policy: The Path of Decline? (Paris: French Institute of International
Relations, ), 
cy-path-decline.
58 Todd Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2022 (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 
csis.org/analysis/space-threat-assessment-2022.
59 Emma Helfrich, “Russian Military Satellite Appears to Be Stalking a New U.S. Spy Satellite,” The Drive,
August 3, 2022, 
ellites-may-be-underway.
60 Samuel Bendett et al., “04 Russian Space Systems and the Risk of Weaponizing Space,” Chatham
House, September 23, 2021, 
gy-russia/04-russian-space-systems-and-risk-weaponizing-space.
61 Kenneth Chang and Anton Troianovski, “In Space, U.S.-Russian Cooperation Finds a Way Forward,”
New York Times, July 15, 2022, 
nauts-space.html.
62 Rogozin’s Twitter has since been cleared of any tweets pre-2017. Mike Wall, “Russia Threatens to
Leave International Space Station Program (Again),” Space.com, April 3, 2022, 
com/russia-threatens-leave-international-space-station-program-rogozin; and “Yury Ivanovich Bor-e
isov,” Globalsecurity.org, July 15, 2022, 
htm.
63 “Orbital Launches of 2022,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
64 РОСKОСМОС, Twitter post, March 4, 2022, 5:13 a.m., 
tus/1499689419808378882.
65 Jeff Foust, “OneWeb Takes $229 Million Charge for Canceled Soyuz Launches,” SpaceNews, September
7, 2022, 
66 “Angara-A5 Persei,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
blok-dm-03.htm; and Gunter D. Krebs, “Angara-1.2,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
et.de/doc_lau_det/angara-1-2.htm.
67 Jonathan McDowell, Twitter post, December 10, 2022, 7:47 a.m., 
status/1601740380722044928; and Jonathan McDowell, Twitter post, May 18, 2022, 7:38 a.m., https://
twitter.com/planet4589/status/1526889947541737474.
68 “Angara Family,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
69 “Putin Congratulates Russians on Cosmonautics Day from Far East’s Vostochny Spaceport,” TASS,
April 12, 2022, 
70 “Putin, Lukashenko Kick off Bilateral Meeting at Vostochny Spaceport,” TASS, April 12, 2022, https://
tass.com/politics/1436311.
71 “Yury Ivanovich Borisov,” globalsecurity.org.
72 “Angara Family,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
73 “Orbital Launches of 2022,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
74 Ibid.
75 Anatoly Zak, “Russia Approves Its 10-year Space Strategy,” The Planetary Society, March 23, 2016,

76 Eric Berger, “Putin Slashes Russia’s Space Budget and Says He Expects Better Results,” Ars Technica,
October 8, 2021, 
says-he-expects-better-results/.

77 “N° 9–2022: ExoMars Suspended,” European Space Agency, Press Release, March 17, 2022, https://

78 Jeff Foust, “Majority of tracked Russian ASAT debris has deorbited,” SpaceNews, September 29, 2022,

79 Mark Garcia, “Space Station Maneuvers to Avoid Orbital Debris,” National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, October 24, 2022, 
neuvers-to-avoid-orbital-debris/; Mark Garcia, “Life Science, Debris Avoidance Maneuver Takes Place
on Station,” National Aeronautics and Space Administration, June 16, 2022, 
spacestation/2022/06/16/life-science-debris-avoidance-maneuver-takes-place-on-station/; and
“ISS Maneuvers to Evade Space Debris - Roscosmos,” TASS, October 17, 2022, 
ence/1523997.
80 “Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-31BM Foxhound,” JetPhotos, September 14, 2018, 
com/photo/9074544; and Amanda Macias, “A Never-Before-Seen Russian Missile Is Identified as an
Anti-satellite Weapon and Will Be Ready for Warfare by 2022,” CNBC, October 25, 2018, 
cnbc.com/2018/10/25/russian-missile-identified-as-anti-satellite-weapon-ready-by-2022.html.
81 Ron Lerch, “The Space Domain: Emerging Factors and Threats,” (presentation, n.d.), 
spaceforce.mil/Portals/3/20220516%20Threat%20Baseline_AATS_1.pdf.
82 Defense Intelligence Ballistic Missile Analysis Committee, Ballistic and Cruise Missile Threat 2020
(Washington, DC: Department of Defense, ), 
Jan/11/2002563190/-1/-1/0/2020%20BALLISTIC%20AND%20CRUISE%20MISSILE%20THREAT_FI-
NAL_2OCT_REDUCEDFILE.PDF.
83 Bart Hendrickx, “Kalina: A Russian Ground-Based Laser to Dazzle Imaging Satellites,” The Space Re-
view, July 5, 2022, 
84 Marco Langbroek, “The Flyby of USA 326 by Kosmos 2558 on August 4: A Post-Analysis,” SatTrackCam
Leiden (b)log, August 6, 2022, 
kosmos-2558-on.html.
85 “Top U.S. Generals Take Issuewith Russian Satellite Near U.S. Orbit,” YouTube video, posted by NBC
News, August 9, 2022, 2:40, 
86 Emma Helfrich, “Russian Military Satellite Appears to Be Stalking a New U.S. Spy Satellite,” The Drive,
August 3, 2022, 
ellites-may-be-underway.
87 Marco Langbroek, “Kosmos 2558 Keeping Its Orbit Close to USA 326 [UPDATED],” SatTrackCam Leiden
(b)log, September 7, 2022, 
bit-close-to.html.
88 John Wiseman, Twitter post, December 20, 2022, 3:58 p.m., 
tus/1605306677590310912; and Matt Burgess, “GPS Signals Are Being Disrupted in Russian Cities,”
Wired, December 15, 2022, 
89 “Russia Integrates Military Capabilities into Civil Communications Infrastructure,” Resilient Navigation
and Timing Foundation, , 
mers-Russia.pdf.
90 Harrison, Space Threat Assessment 2020, 26–27.
91 Christian Vasquez, “CISA Researchers: Russia’s Fancy Bear Infiltrated US Satellite Network,” Cyber-
Scoop, December 16, 2022, 
92 “Russian State-Sponsored and Criminal Cyber Threats to Critical Infrastructure,” Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, April 20, 2022, 
93 Dylan Malyasov, “Russia Is Jamming European Space Agency’s Sentinel Satellite?,” Defence Blog, July
25, 2021, 
94 Bart Hendrickx, “Russia Gears Up for Electronic Warfare in Space (part 1),” The Space Review, October
26, 2020, 
95 “News: End of Mission of the Copernicus Sentinel-1B satellite,” European Space Agency, August
3, 2022, 
nel-1b-satellite/1.5: and “Sentinel-1B In-flight Anomaly Summary Report,” European Space Agency,
43 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

port.pdf.
96 Sandra Erwin, “On National Security | Drawing Lessons from the First ‘Commercial Space War’,” Spa-
ceNews, May 20, 2022, 
commercial-space-war/.
97 “OSCE SMM Spot Report 16/2021: SMM Long-Range Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Lost Due to Dual GPS
Signal Interference Assessed as Jamming near Government-Controlled Stepanivka,” Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe, June 30, 2021, 
sion-to-ukraine/491383.
98 “Spot Report 6/2021: SMM Long-Range UAV Unable to Take Off due to Dual GPS Signal Interference,”
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, April 7, 2021, 
cial-monitoring-mission-to-ukraine/483008.
99 “HawkEye 360 Signal Detection Reveals GPS Interference in Ukraine,” HawkEye 360, March 4, 2022,

100 Sunil J.B. Babu and Huw Williams, “Ukraine Conflict: Russian Battlefield EW Capabilities,” Jane’s
International Defence Review, March 1, 2022.
101 “Russia behind Cyber-Attack with Europe-Wide Impact an Hour before Ukraine Invasion,” gov.uk, May
10, 2022, 
pact-an-hour-before-ukraine-invasion.
102 Andrea Valentino, “Why the Viasat Hack Still Echoes,” Aerospace America, , https://
aerospaceamerica.aiaa.org/features/why-the-viasat-hack-still-echoes/; and ibid.
103 “Alert (AA22-076A): Strengthening Cybersecurity of SATCOM Network Providers and Customers,”
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, March 17, 2022, 
alerts/aa22-076a.
104 Michael Sheetz, “SpaceX Shipment of Starlink Satellite-Internet Dishes Arrives in Ukraine, Gov-
ernment official says,” CNBC, February 28, 2022, 
dates-starlink-satellite-dishes.html.
105 Kate Duffy, “A Top Pentagon Official Said SpaceX Starlink Rapidly Fought Off a Russian Jamming
Attack in Ukraine,” Business Insider, April 22, 2022, 
pentagon-russian-jamming-attack-elon-musk-dave-tremper-2022-4.
106 Elon Musk, Twitter post, October 13, 2022, 9:20 p.m., 
tus/1580594379751686149; and Elon Musk, Twitter post, May 10, 2022, 8:56 p.m., 
elonmusk/status/1524191785760788480?t=D5b7RO7LpDGjk3RHhm7pYw&s=19.
107 “2022-02R1: Global Navigation Satellite System Outage Leading to Navigation / Surveillance Degrada-
tion,” European Union Aviation Safety Agency, February 17, 2023, 
02R1.
108 “Finland Detects GPS Disturbance near Russia’s Kaliningrad,” Reuters, March 9, 2022, 
reuters.com/article/ukraine-crisis-finland-gps/corrected-finland-detects-gps-disturbance-near-rus-
sias-kaliningrad-idUSL5N2VB4KS.
109 Thomas Withington, “Russia’s Electronic Warfare Capabilities Have Had Mixed Results against
Ukraine,” The Drive, June 16, 2022, 
pened-so-far-in-ukraines-electronic-warfare-battle; Tanmay Kadam, “Russia’s Electronic Warfare
Capability ‘Exposed’ in Ukraine War; Is Putin’s Techno-Savvy Army Losing the EW Battle?,” The
EurAsian Times, April 18, 2022, 
posed-in-ukraine-war; and Juan Pons, “The Unseen and Unknown Electronic War in Ukraine,” Atala-r
yar, March 14, 2022, 
110 Sunil J.B. Babu and Huw Williams, “Ukraine Conflict: Russian Battlefield EW capabilities,” Jane’s
International Defence Review, March 1, 2022; and raging545, Twitter post, March 15, 2022, 3:45 p.m.,

111 Amy Cheng, “Russia Touts New Laser Weapons, but Ukraine and U.S. Are Skeptical,” Washington
Post, May 19, 2022, 
ra-peresvet-ukraine/.
112 Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2021, 15.

113 Todd Harrison, Kaitlyn Johnson, and Thomas G. Roberts, Space Threat Assessment 2018 (Washington,
DC: CSIS, 2018), 15, 
114 “Statement by Deputy Head of the Russian Delegation Mr. Konstantin Vorontsov at the Thematic
Discussion on Outer Space (Disarmament Aspects) in the First Committee of the 77th Session of the
UNGA,” Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations, October 26, 2022, https://
russiaun.ru/en/news/261022_v.
115 Kari Bingen, Kaitlyn Johnson, and Zhanna Malekos Smith, “Russia Threatens to Target Commercial
Satellites,” CSIS, Critical Questions, November 10, 2022, 
ens-target-commercial-satellites.
116 Robyn Dixon, “Russia’s Rifts with the West Keep Growing. How Did We Get Here?,” Washington Post,
January 8, 2022, 
117 “Intelsat 39 at 62°E,” Intelsat, , 
telsat-39-fact-sheet.pdf.
118 “Coverage Maps,” Intelsat, n.d., 
INDIA
119 Muali Krishnan, “Indian Defence Forces on Mission to Secure Place in Space,” rfi, October 22, 2022,

place-in-space.
120 “About ISRO,” Indian Space Research Organisation, Department of Space, n.d., 
in/about-isro.
121 Vivek Raghuvanshi, “India to Launch a Defense-Based Space Research Agency,” Defense News, June
12, 2019, 
research-agency/.
122 “Defence Space Agency to Come Up at Bengaluru,” ANI, May 15, 2019, 
national/ general-news/defence-space-agency-to-come-up-at-bengaluru20190515191050/.
123 Vivek Raghuvanshi, “India to Launch a Defense-Based Space Research Agency.”
124 Ibid.
125 Aditya Pareek and Megha Pardhi, “India Needs a Comprehensive Space Strategy,” Hindustan
Times, February 11, 2022, 
sive-space-strategy- 101644571361711.html.
126 “About DRDO,” Defence Research & Development Organisation, n.d., 
about-drdo.
127 “Rocket Launch Sites in India List,” Byju’s Exam Prep, February 17, 2023, 
prep/rocket-launch-sites-india.
128 “Launchers,” Indian Space Research Organisation, Department of Space, n.d., 
in/ Launchers.html.
129 Anonna Dutt, “ISRO’s SSLV-D2 launch: The Mini Vehicle’s Second Flight, with Promise on Board,”
Indian Express, February 10, 2023, 
janus-1-and- azaadisat2-second-flight-of-isros-mini-vehicle-with-promise-on-board-8435348/.
130 Ibid.
131 “Launchers,” Indian Space Research Organisation.
132 “List of International Customer Satellites Launched by ISRO,” Indian Space Research Organisation,
Department of Space, February 17, 2023, 
isro.gov.in/media_isro/pdf/ForeignSatellites/381_foreign_satellites.pdf.
133 Park Si-soo, “India’s PSLV Rocket Launches Nine Satellites in Final Mission of 2022,” SpaceNews,
November 26, 2022, 
sion-of-2022.
134 “After Successful Mission, India’s First Private Rocket Company Skyroot Aerospace Looks to Slash
Satellite Costs,” Economic Times, November 26, 2022, 
45 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

after-successful-mission-indias-first-private-rocket-company-skyroot-aerospace-looks-to-slash-satel-
lite-costs/articleshow/95782212.cms; and “Skyroot Aerospace Plans to Launch Vikram-1 in One Year,”
Economic Times, November 29, 2022, 
aerospace-plans-to-launch-vikram-1-in-one-year/articleshow/95849755.cms?from=mdr.
135 “Satellites,” Indian Space Research Organisation, Department of Space, n.d., 
Satellites.html.
136 “Chandrayaan-1,” Indian Space Research Organisation, Department of Space, n.d., 
gov.in/Chandrayaan_1.html.
137 “Chandrayaan-2,” Indian Space Research Organisation, Department of Space, n.d., 
gov.in/Chandrayaan_2.html.
138 “GSAT-7,” Indian Space Research Organisation, Department of Space, n.d., 
GSAT_7.html; and “GSAT-7,” National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
gov/nmc/spacecraft/display.action?id=2013-044B.
139 “GSAT 7A,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
140 “EMISAT (Electromagnetic Intelligence-gathering Satellite),” European Space Agency, n.d., https://

141 Surendra Singh, “India’s First ‘Spy’ Satellite Risat-2 Re-enters Earth after 13.5-yr Job, Lands near Ja-
karta,” Times of India, November 4, 2022, 
satellite-risat-2-re-enters-earth-after-13-5-yr-job-lands-near-jakarta/articleshow/95286968.cms.
142 “Microsat-R,” Indian Space Research Organisation, Department of Space, n.d., 
in/Microsat_R.html.
143 Anjana Pasricha, “India Looks to Enhance Military Capabilities in Space,” VOA News, June 27,
2021, 
ties-space/6207536.html; and “Two Years after Mission Shakti, India Increasing Its Military Capa-a
bilities in Space,” Economic Times, March 26, 2021, 
defence/two-years-after-mission-shakti-india-increasing-its-military-capabilities-in-space/article-
show/81707328.cms?from=mdr.
144 Snehesh Alex Philip, “DRDO Rules Out A-SAT Tests in Lower Earth Orbits, but Keeps Options Open in
Higher Orbits,” The Print, April 6, 2019, 
er-earth-orbits- but-keeps-options-open-in-higher-orbits/217879/.
145 Kartik Bommakanti, “An A-SAT Test Ban Can Wait: India Needs to Widen Kinetic A-SAT Capabilities,”
Observer Research Foundation, January 25, 2023, 
test-ban-can-wait/.
146 “Electronics and Communication Systems (ECS): About Us,” Defence Research & Development Organi-
sation, n.d., communications.
147 Meera Rohera, “Indian Space Policy for the Private Sector,” Aerospace Security, CSIS, December 7,
2021, 
IRAN
148 “Simorgh,” CSIS, Missile Threat, updated July 31, 2021, 
morgh/.
149 “Iran Announces New Space Launch amid Nuclear Talks,” Jordan Times, December 31, 2021, http://
jordantimes.com/news/region/iran-announces-new-space-launch-amid-nuclear-talks; ;David Axe,
“Iran’s New Space Rocket Could Double As A Nuclear Missile,” Forbes, February 1, 2021, 
forbes.com/sites/davidaxe/2021/02/01/irans-new-space-rocket-could-double-as-a-weapon/?sh=2b-
d5eec82d40; and Patrick Wintour, “Iran nuclear talks deadlock risks dangerous vacuum,” The Guard-
ian, January 17, 2022, 
lock-risks-dangerous-vacuum.
150 “Views and Analysis of the Islamic Republic of Iran on the Resolution ‘Reducing Space Threats
through Norms, Rules, and Principles of Responsible Behavior’ proposed by United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland in the First Committee of the UN (A/C.1/75/L.45/Rev.1) 11/6/2020,” Per-
manent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations, 2021.

151 “Iranian Laws & Government: The Structure of Power in Iran,” Iran Chamber Society, n.d., https://

152 John Krzyzaniak, “Part 1: Explainer - Iran’s Space Program,” United States Institute of Peace, The Iran
Primer, August 9, 2022, 
153 “MKS International Co. Ltd.,” Iran Watch, February 7, 2017, 
ties/mks-%20international-co-ltd.
154 “Iran Takes 1st Step for Implementing 10-year Space Plan,” Islamic Republic News Agency, January 7,
2023, 
155 Luis Linares Petrov, “Iran Begins Implementation of 10-year Space Program,” Prensa Latina, January
8, 2023, 
program/.
156 Jim Lamson and Jeffrey Lewis, “Iranian President Raisi’s Renewed Emphasis on Space is Likely to
Create New Tensions,” War on the Rocks, December 20, 2021, 
iranian-president-raisis-renewed-emphasis-on-space-is-likely-to-create-new-tensions/.
157 “Safir,” CSIS, Missile Threat, updated August 2, 2021, 
158 Ibid.
159 “Simorgh,”CSIS, Missile Threat; and Michael Rubin, “Zuljanah: Iran’s New Solid-Fuel Rocket,” American
Enterprise Institute, March 1, 2021, solid-fuel-rock-t
et/.
160 Maziar Motamedi, “Iran Test Launches Zuljanah Satellite Carrier: State Media,” Al Jazeera, June 26,
2022, 
rier; and “Iran Conducts 2nd Test of Satellite Launcher as Nuclear Talks Said Set to Resume,” Times of
Israel, June 26, 2022, 
nuclear-talks-said-set-to-resume/.
161 Jon Gambrell, “Satellite Photos Show Iran Had Another Failed Space Launch,” Associated Press,
March 2, 2022, 
71f17a612e8aef2c9b58af4538183.
162 William Graham, “Iran Carries Out Military Launch with Qased Rocket and Noor-2 Satellite,” NASA
Spaceflight.com, March 8, 2022, 
sed-noor-2/.
163 Tariq Malik, “Iran’s Revolutionary Guard Launches Successful Rocket Test: Report,” Space.com, No-i
vember 5, 2022, “How the Ghaem-100
Rocket Puts Iran’s Space Program on a New Trajectory,” Iran Watch, December 19, 2022, 
iranwatch.org/our- publications/articles-reports/how-ghaem-100-rocket-puts-irans-space-program-
new-trajectory; and “Iran Says It Tests Satellite-Carrying Rocket, U.S. Calls Move ‘destabilising’,”
Reuters, November 5, 2022, 
100-space-launcher-state-tv-2022-11-05/.
164 “Nahid 1,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., and “Iran to
Launch Nahid Satellite into Space: ICT Minister,” Tasnim News Agency, November 20, 2022, https://

minister.
165 Andrew Hanna, “Iran’s Ambitious Space Program,” United States Institute of Peace, The Iran Primer,
June 23, 2021, 
gram.
166 “Iran Says It Launched Test ‘Tug’ into Suborbital Space,” Associated Press, October 4, 2022,

84c72dd3cee5dbc0f075b74975; and “Simorgh,” Astronautix, n.d., 
web/20190716114802/
167 “Iran Says It Launched Test ‘Tug’ into Suborbital Space,” Associated Press.
168 “Shahroud Missile Test Site,” Nuclear Threat Initiative, n.d., 
facilities/shahroud-missile-test-site/.
169 “Imam Khomeini Space Center,” Nuclear Threat Initiative, n.d., 
facilities/imam-khomeini-space-center/.
47 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

170 Maziar Motamedi, “Russia Launches Iranian Satellite into Space from Kazakhstan Base,” Al Jazeera,
August 9, 2022, 
to-space-from-kazakhstan-base.
171 Ibid.
172 “Iran Puts Second Military Satellite into Orbit - Tasnim,” Reuters, March 8, 2022, 
com/world/middle-east/irans-revolutionary-guards-put-noor-2-satellite-orbit-tasnim-2022-03-08/.
173 “Iranian Noor-2 Satellite Releases Image of 5th US Navy,” Al Mayadeen Net, May 10, 2022, 
glish.almayadeen.net/news/politics/iranian-noor-2-satellite-releases-image-of-5th-us-navy.
174 “Operational Stage of Gen. Soleimani Satellite Project Launched,” Tehran Times, January 22, 2023,

ect-launched.
175 Motamedi, “Russia Launches Iranian Satellite into Space from Kazakhstan Base.”
176 Felicia Schwartz, “US Says Russia Providing ‘Unprecedented’ Military Support to Iran,” Financial
Times, December 9, 2022, and
Courtney Kube and Carol E. Lee, “Russia Is Providing ‘Unprecedented’ Military Support to Iran in Ex-
change for Drones, Officials Say,” NBC News, December 9, 2022, 
russia-providing-unprecedented-military-support-iran-exchange-drones-o-rcna60921.
177 “Iran, Russia, Sign Space Cooperation Document,” Islamic Republic News Agency, December 14,
2022, sign-space-cooperation-document; and Hos-a
sein Dalirian, Twitter post, December 14, 2022, 11:51 a.m., 
tus/1603070084158717953.
178 Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2020, 29–34.
179 Lily Hay Newman, “The Challenge of Cracking Iran’s Internet Blockade,” Wired, September 30, 2022,
 and Johnna Crider, “Report: Iran
Blocks SpaceX Starlink Website after Elon Musk Activated Internet for Iranians,” Teslarati, September
24, 2022, 
180 Brett Tingley, “Eutelsat Accuses Iran of Jamming 2 Persian-Language Broadcast Satellites,” Space.
com, October 7, 2022, 
NORTH KOREA
181 Robert Z. Pearlman, “North Korea’s ‘NADA’ Space Agency, Logo Are Anything but ‘Nothing’,” Space.
com, April 2, 2014, and
“National Aerospace Development Administration of DPRK,” Korean Central News Agency, April 1,
2014, 
space-development-administration/.
182 Ji Da-gyum, “N. Korea’s Parliament Revises Outer Space Law, Plans Key Meeting before Foundation
Day,” The Korea Herald, August 8, 2022, 
183 Carlotta Dotto, Brad Lendon, and Jessie Yeung, “North Korea’s Record Year of Missile Testing Is Putting
the World on Edge,” CNN, December 27, 2022, 
missile-testing-year-end-intl-hnk/index.html; and “North Korea’s Missile Activity in 2022,” IISS, De-
cember 2022, 
tivity-in-2022.
184 Soo-Hyang Choi and Josh Smith, “North Korea Fires 23 Missiles, One Landing Off South Korean Coast
for First Time,” Reuters, November 2, 2022, 
rea-fires-ballistic-missile-says-south-korean-military-2022-11-02/; and Mike Wall, “North Korea
Launches Record 23-Missile Barrage,” Space.com, November 2, 2022, 
korea-launches-23-missile-barrage.
185 Min Joo Kim, “North Korea Says It Held Test for Spy Satellite Launch,” Washington Post, February
27, 2022, U.S. Pacific
Command, “Statement by Pentagon Press Secretary John Kirby on Recent DPRK Missile Tests,” Press
release, March 10, 2022, 
statement-by-pentagon-press-secretary-john-kirby-on-recent-dprk-missile-tests/; and Ankit Panda,

“Two Unusual Missile Launches Hint at a New Security Crisis in North Korea,” Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace, Commentary, March 15, 2022, 
two-unusual-missile-launches-hint-at-new-security-crisis-in-north-korea-pub-86642.
186 Martyn Williams, “A North Korean Satellite Launch: What to Watch For,” 38 North, March 10, 2022,
 Joseph S.
Bermudez, Jr., Victor Cha, and Jennifer Jun, “Dramatic Progress of New Construction at the Sohae
Satellite Launching Station,” CSIS, Beyond Parallel, October 26, 2022, 
dramatic-progress-of-new-construction-at-the-sohae-satellite-launching-station/.
187 Joseph S. Bermudez, Jr., Victor Cha, and Jennifer Jun, “Recent and Future Developments of the So-
hae Satellite Launching Station,” CSIS, Beyond Parallel, April 13, 2022, 
recent-and-future-developments-of-the-sohae-satellite-launching-station/.
188 Joseph S. Burmudez, Jr., Victor Cha, and Jennifer Jun, “New Engine Test Stand and Construction
Progress at Sohae Satellite Launching Station,” CSIS, Beyond Parallel, December 15, 2022, 
yondparallel.csis.org/probable-new-engine-test-stand-and-construction-progress-at-sohae-satellite-
launching-station/.
189 “North Korea’s Tonghae Satellite Launching Ground,” 38 North, October 28, 2016, 
w.38north.org/2016/10/tonghae102816/; and “VOA: Transportable Building at Sohae Satellite Launch-e
ing Ground Partially Dismantled,” KBS World, October 26, 2022, 
news_view.htm?lang=e&Seq_Code=173340.
190 Missile Defense Project, “Taepodong-2 (Unha-3),” CSIS, Missile Threat, August 8, 2016, last modified
July 31, 2021, 
191 Hyung-Jin Kim, “North Korea Says Latest Launches Tested 1st Spy Satellite,” Associated Press,
December 18, 2022, 
473cdd7f76f; and Williams, “A North Korean Satellite Launch: What to Watch For.”
192 “N Korea Completes ‘Important’ Test of Spy Satellite: State Media,” Al Jazeera, December 19, 2022,

state-media.
193 “NADA Conducts Important Test for Development of Reconnaissance Satellite,” Pyongyang Times,
December 19, 2022, 
ers&blogid=639ff8151c38 bb05f7ae0ec4; and Lin Congyi, “DPRK Conducts ‘Final-Stage’ Test for 1st
Military Reconnaissance Satellite,” China Daily, December 19, 2022, 
WORLD_209198/WorldMilitaryNews/10206621.html.
194 Colin Zwirko, “North Korea Says It Took Photos over Seoul in Military Satellite Test,” NK News, Decem-
ber 19, 2022, 
launch-state-media/; and ibid.
195 Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2021, 21–23.
OTHERS
196 “Defence Announces Space Division,” Australia Department of Defence, May 19, 2021, 
defence.gov.au/news-events/releases/2021-05-19/defence-announces-space-division; and “De-o
fense Space Command,” Royal Australian Air Force, n.d., 
fence-space-command.
197 Australia Department of Defence, Australia’s Defence Space Strategy (Canberra: Australia Department
of Defence, 2022), and
“Defence Soars into Space,” Australia Department of Defence, March 23, 2022, 
gov.au/news-events/news/2022-03-23/defence-soars-space.
198 Courtney Albon, “Space Force Surveillance Telescope Now Operational in Australia,” Defense News,
September 30, 2022, 
scope-now-operational-in-australia/.
199 “Opening Ceremony - IAC 2022,” YouTube video, posted by International Astronautical Federation,
September 19, 2022, 1:51:37, 
200 Gosnold, “ASTERX 22: France’s Annual Military Space Exercise,” SatelliteObservation.net, March 6,
2022, 
49 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

and Armée de l’Air et de l’Espace, Twitter post, February 16, 2022, 10:25 a.m., 
mee_de_lair/status/1494015174617047042.
201 Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2020, 48–49.
202 “YODA,” Hemeria, n.d., 
203 Arie Egozi, “Israel to Spend $150 Million on Laser Defenses, after US Hesitation,” Breaking Defense,
August 3, 2022, 
after-us-hesitation/; and Aaron Mehta, “Iron Beam, Israel’s Laser Air Defense System, Could Be Ready
in 2-3 Years,” Breaking Defense, October 4, 2022, 
raels-laser-air-defense-system-could-be-ready-in-2-3-years/.
204 Mehta, “Iron Beam, Israel’s Laser Air Defense System, Could Be Ready in 2-3 Years.”
205 “National Security Strategy of Japan,” Cabinet Secretariat of Japan, December 16, 2022, 
cas.go.jp/jp/siryou/221216anzenhoshou/nss-e.pdf; “National Defense Strategy,” Japan Ministry of
Defense, December 16, 2022, 
strategy_en.pdf; “Defense Buildup Program,” Japan Ministry of Defense, December 16, 2022, https://
 and Mike Yeo, “New
Japanese Strategy to Up Defense Spending, Counterstrike Purchases,” Defense News, December 20,
2022, 
defense-spending-counterstrike-purchases/.
206 Japan Ministry of Defense, Defense Programs and Budget of Japan (Tokyo: ), 
mod.go.jp/en/d_act/d_budget/pdf/20220420.pdf; and Mike Yeo, “Japan Seeks to Increase Defense
Spending to 2% of GDP,” Defense News, December 1, 2022, 
asia-pacific/2022/12/01/japan-seeks-to-increase-defense-spending-to-2-of-gdp/.
207 Japan Ministry of Defense, Defense Programs and Budget of Japan.
208 Ibid.
209 Mike Wall, “Japanese Rocket Launches Radar Spy Satellite,” Space.com, January 26, 2023, https://

210 “IGS-Radar 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, Spare,” Gunter’s Space Program, n.d., 
igs-radar-3.htm; and “Japan Launches Intelligence Gathering Satellite To Keep Vigil On North Korea,”
Outlook, January 26, 2023, 
gence-gathering-satellite-to-keep-vigil-on-north-korea-news-256943.
211 “Orbital Launches of 2022,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
htm.
212 “South Korea Launches First Satellite with Homegrown Rocket,” NBC News, June 22, 2022, https://

213 Hyung-jin Kim, “South Korea’s Unannounced Rocket Launch Causes UFO scare,” Associated Press,
December 30, 2022, 
ogy-abe96197f899c94f9e9f5c02e407d367.
214 “South Korea Launches First Satellite with Homegrown Rocket,” NBC News; and Park Si-soo, “South
Korea’s New President Seeks Independent Space Agency, Deeper US Space Cooperation,” SpaceNews,
May 9, 2022, 
cy-deeper-us-space-cooperation/.
215 Lucia Retter, James Black, and Theodora Ogden, Realising the Ambitions of the UK’s Defence Space
Strategy Factors Shaping Implementation to 2030 (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2022), 
uk/government/publications/realising-the-ambitions-of-the-uks-defence-space-strategy.
216 Anonymous TV, Twitter post, March 1, 2022, 2:49 p.m., 
tus/1498792639877074945; and Bryan Bender, “Russia’s Space Chief Says Hacking Satellites ‘a Cause
for War’,” Politico, March 2, 2022, 
hacking-satellites-war-00013211.
217 “Roscosmos CEO Debunks Claims of Loss of Control over Russian Satellites,” TASS, March 1, 2022,

218 Joseph Cox, “Hackers Breach Russian Space Research Institute Website,” Vice, March 3, 2022, https://

WHAT TO WATCH
219 Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2022.
220 “Joint Statement of the 2023 U.S.–Japan Security Consultative Committee (‘2+2’),” U.S. Department
of Defense, January 11, 2023, 
joint-statement-of-the-2023-usjapan-security-consultative-committee-22/.
221 Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2022.
222 “National Defense Strategy of The United States of America,” U.S. Department of Defense, October 27,
2022, 
EGY-NPR-MDR.pdf.
223 Agence France-Presse, “US Space Operations Chief Counts China, Russia as ‘Most Challenging
Threat,’” Hindustan Times, February 19, 2023, 
space-operations-chief-counts-china-russia-as-most-challenging-threat-101676806730175.html; and
Bryan Clark, “The Fall and Rise of Russian Electronic Warfare,” Hudson Institute, July 30, 2022, https://

224 Defense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space.
225 “Yaogan 30-01, ..., 30-10 (CX 5)”, Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
gan-30-01.htm; and Andrew Jones, “China Performs Two Launches inside Two Hours,” SpaceNews,
September 6, 2022, 
226 Vladislav Kustov and Alice Krause, “Sazhaet BPLA I obmanyvaet rakety: kak rabotaet supersovremen-
nyj kompleks rJeB v hode specoperacii” [Lands UAVs and Deceives Missiles: How the Ultra-Modern
Electronic Warfare Complex Works during a Special Operation], Tvzvezda, April 15, 2022, https://
tvzvezda.ru/news/2022415512-BefVV.html; and “The Fall and Rise of Russian Electronic Warfare,”
Hudson Institute, July 30, 2022, 
of-russian-electronic-warfare.
227 Olivia Savage, “Commercial Space: Industry Steps Up to Deliver Satellite-Based Capabilities,” Jane’s
International Defence Review, December 8, 2022.
228 Kevin Collier, “Starlink Internet Becomes a Lifeline for Ukrainians,” NBC News, April 29, 2022, https://

na25360.
229 Stephen Chen, “Chinese Physicists Simulate Nuclear Blast against Satellites,” South China Morning
Post, October 20, 2022, 
cists-simulate-nuclear-blast-against-satellites.
230 Daniel L. Oltrogge and Salvatore Alfano, “The Technical Challenges of Better Space Situational
Awareness and Space Traffic Management,” Journal of Space Safety Engineering 6 (2019): 72–79,
doi:10.1016/j.jsse.2019.05.004.
231 “FACT SHEET: Vice President Harris Advances National Security Norms in Space,” The White House,
April 19, 2022, 
fact-sheet-vice-president-harris-advances-national-security-norms-in-space/.
232 United Nations General Assembly, “Destructive Direct-Ascent Anti-satellite Missile Testing,” A/
RES/77/41, December 12, 2022, 
N2273892.pdf.
233 “Destructive Direct-Ascent Anti-satellite Missile Testing : Resolution / Adopted by the General Assem-
bly,” United Nations Digital Library, December 7, 2022, 
CONCLUSION
234 Theresa Hitchens, “China Tops US in Defense-Related Satellites Orbited in 2022: Report,” Breaking
Defense, January 6, 2023, 
satellites-orbited-in-2022-report/.
235 Todd Harrison et al., Escalation and Deterrence in the Second Space Age (Washington, DC: CSIS, Octo-
ber 2017), 
51 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2023

1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202 887 0200 |