CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 1
CSIS
BRIEFS
Battle Networks and the Future Force
Part 2: Operational Challenges and Acquisition Opportunities
By Todd Harrison
THE ISSUE
This CSIS brief is the second in a series on the future of battle networks and Joint All-Domain Command and Control (JADC2).
This paper examines the operational advantages and adversary threats driving the requirements for greater interoperability
and resilience in battle networks. It draws on lessons from previous attempts to improve battle network integration and explores
how DoD can properly scope the problem it is trying to solve and organize itself to effectively and efficiently acquire the systems
needed to realize its vision for JADC2. This paper recommends that DoD (1) clearly define organizational roles and responsibilities
for JADC2 to include the possibility of creating a Joint Program Executive Office, a new independent agency under the Under
Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering (USD/R&E), or a lead combatant command (COCOM) for JADC2; (2) make
key top-level architecture decisions, including narrowing the scope of JADC2 to just battle networks, as soon as possible; and (3)
expand its typical make/buy analysis to include options for buying services instead of products and including systems that may be
commercially owned and operated.
BATTLE NETWORK COMPETITION The hypothetical scenarios below help demonstrate how
Battle networks, and more specifically DoD’s vision for a battle network can use each of the functional elements
JADC2, should ultimately be about enabling better options discussed in the first brief in this series to close the
for commanders, speeding the tempo of decisionmaking, sensor-to-shooter kill chain—or more appropriately, the
and optimizing effects in the battlespace. Connecting sensor-to-shooter kill web. The first scenario illustrates
platforms and units across domains and with allies and the warfighting advantages integrated battle networks
partners by seamlessly passing surveillance, targeting, can provide. The second scenario shows the other side of
damage assessment, and other information from one the battle network competition—how an adversary can
platform to another improves the accuracy, range, attempt to disrupt and degrade one’s battle network. While
persistence, and speed of effects. These improvements an adversary may not have (or be successful in using)
increase in a nonlinear manner as more platforms, sensors, all the capabilities described to attack a battle network,
communication paths, and other nodes are added to these attacks can have significant effects even if they are
a battle network, transforming what was traditionally only partially successful. Importantly, many of the steps
thought of as a force multiplier effect into a force exponent in the process for both closing and breaking the sensor-
effect. The ultimate objective is to see farther with greater to-shooter kill web may occur in parallel as operations
clarity and to act faster with more precision than one’s unfold, and some processes may take longer and only yield
adversary. valuable intelligence for future operations.

Figure 1: Example of Future Battle Network Operations
Source: CSIS Aerospace Security Project.
Figure 1 depicts a hypothetical future engagement in data is also used to predict the likely impact site and alert
which an adversary launches a boost-glide hypersonic forces in the area. While the intercept and other force
missile at U.S. and allied forces. The engagement is protection activities are underway, the SAR satellites,
divided into six overlapping activities to depict how F-35s, and other aircraft within range begin a combined
future battle networks could operate. In this example, a response to track the missile launcher’s movements on
missile launch (1) is detected by a Space-Based Infrared the ground (4). Commanders use this mesh view of the
(SBIRS) satellite in geostationary orbit (GEO) and/or by battlespace to determine what combination of strike
the infrared sensors on F-35s in the area. As the SBIRS aircraft, ships and subs with land-attack missiles, and
satellite and F-35s follow the missile plume to higher ground units with long-range fires are best suited to
altitudes, this data cues infrared and synthetic aperture destroy the missile launcher depending on where they
radar (SAR) satellites in a variety of orbits (some of which are located, the weapons they have available, the time
could be commercial satellites) to characterize the threat of flight to the target, and whether these forces may be
and establish a high-quality track of the missile (2)— needed for other missions (5). In parallel to all of this,
including after burnout of its booster stage. This tracking analysts aided by artificial intelligence and machine
and characterization data is relayed through a variety of learning (AI/ML) algorithms begin sifting through
means (e.g., through RF and lasercom links, with military terabytes of archived surveillance data from space-based
and commercial satellites, and among space-based and and airborne platforms to track the missile launcher’s
airborne communications nodes) to crewed and remotely location in reverse from the time it launched its payload
crewed aircraft in the area as well as to sea- and land- (6). The reverse tracking operation follows the missile
based interceptor sites. The battle network acts as a launcher back in time to determine where it came from
distributed and resilient kill web rather than a serial kill and how it operated to better respond to future attacks
chain to assist operators in deciding which platform is and, importantly, to refine predictive algorithms to
best positioned to fire interceptors (3). The trajectory anticipate future attacks before they occur.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 2

Figure 2 depicts the opposite side of the battle network operations and battle networks of adversary forces. The
competition in this hypothetical engagement, showing systems that are best suited to operate in a contested
some of the ways an adversary can use the full spectrum battle network environment include platforms that are
of attacks to delay or prevent detection and to increase stealthy or can operate effectively outside (or above) the
the odds its attack will succeed. Even before a missile is range of adversary defenses; methods of communication
launched, an adversary could attempt to disable or degrade that are difficult to detect, intercept, and disrupt;
the airborne and space-based sensors used for missile distributed and diversified sensors and communication
defense. For example, a laser could attempt to dazzle nodes (i.e., web or mesh networks rather than serial data
the infrared sensors on satellites (1), land and airborne links); and sensor fusion systems that automatically
electronic attack systems could attempt to jam or spoof aggregate and pass data among platforms. The last
radar and communications systems (2), and co-orbital characteristic is particularly important because operators
ASAT weapons could be used to jam or kinetically strike are increasingly overloaded with tasks and require higher
satellites used for missile warning and communications levels of automation in the way sensors are operated and
(3). Cyberattacks could also be used to target command data is transmitted. Where possible, the tasking of sensors
and control sites, terrestrial networks, and satellite should be automated or remotely controlled by others in
ground stations to disrupt these networks (4). Defensive
the network to reduce the workload on platform operators
counterair aircraft and surface-to-air missiles could
and ensure the highest priority missions receive the data
threaten aerial refueling aircraft, airborne communications
they need.
nodes, drones, and strike aircraft (5) to further degrade
and disrupt the sensor-to-shooter kill chain. ROLE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
As these examples illustrate, U.S. and allied forces must This competition among battle networks, while not
be able to protect their battle networks from attack while new, is an increasingly important component of modern
they simultaneously go on the offensive to disrupt the warfare, and it is a competition that will largely be fought
Figure 2: Example of Future Counter Battle Network Operations
Source: CSIS Aerospace Security Project.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 3

directly among machines in rapidly evolving ways. Much some cases, stock prices can be driven significantly higher
attention has been paid in recent years to how AI/ML or lower in short periods of time as one trading firm’s
This portrait of potential transmission can enhance warfighting capabilities, but robust and algorithms battle against the algorithms of others.
resilient battle networks are the underlying enabler that
from the Sahel to coastal West Africa— A telling example of the potential consequences of not
makes these enhanced capabilities possible—specifically
being prepared for the dynamics involved in competing
repeated by diplomats, practitioners, the communications and data processing elements of
algorithms is the “flash crash” that occurred on May 6,
battle networks. AI/ML algorithms depend on having
and journalists—unhelpfully favors 2010. On that afternoon, the Dow Jones Industrial Average
timely access to large volumes of sensor data and the
plunged by more than 9 percent in less than five minutes—
policies and programs that intend to ability to communicate data products and analysis
the fastest decline in its history. This precipitated sharp
among decisionmakers and operators. Robust and
inoculate border regions and replicate drops in other stock exchanges. But as the trading
resilient battle networks using AI/ML algorithms can
continued, the Dow rebounded to near its original level
unsuccessful security strategies used in speed decisionmaking and automate processes to enable
within 15 minutes. While the factors that triggered the
algorithmic warfare at the tactical and operational level.
the Sahel. momentary crash continue to be debated, the dynamics
In peacetime competition, these same networks and
observed that day were the result of competing algorithms
algorithms can greatly improve indications and warnings
at work in the markets responding to one another and to
to prevent an adversary from avoiding detection and
human traders.
ultimately enhance deterrence.
In the military domain, the battle network competition
Using algorithms to enhance indications and warnings
can potentially have additional consequences that should
is analogous in some ways to the way algorithms are
be considered when developing operational concepts and
already used for detecting and tracking the spread of
testing algorithms and decisionmaking processes. For
diseases. For example, the AI system known as BlueDot
example, blinding an opponent’s intelligence, surveillance,
was able to detect the emergence of the Covid-19 virus in
and reconnaissance (ISR) or severing command and
, before many global health agencies were
control links among its forces during a crisis could increase
aware. The system mines data from a variety of sources,
the odds of miscalculation and escalation if adversary
such as statements from official health agencies, social
forces begin acting without accurate information.
media, livestock health reports, and airline ticketing data.
Moreover, without adequate situational awareness, an
BlueDot uses this information to locate outbreaks and
opponent may not be able to detect signs of de-escalation
predict how they will spread. It had similar success in 2016
or could confuse benign or defensive actions with offensive
when it predicted the spread of the Zika virus to Florida
or escalatory behavior.
six months before it occurred. The key to the algorithm’s
success, however, is not that it takes the human out of the
OPERATIONAL CHALLENGES
loop. Rather, it uses algorithms to find the “needles in the
As battle networks grow to encompass more capabilities,
haystack” and present them to experts for analysis.
their complexity, effectiveness, and vulnerabilities will
The potential advantages of algorithmic warfare are not increase as well. Several operational factors should
unique to the United States. Other nations can use the be considered when designing the battle networks of
same methods and capabilities to enhance the situational the future, including adversary threats, the resilience
awareness and decision speed of their own forces. This of networks to interference and attacks, and the
will inevitably lead to peacetime competition in which interoperability of networks across the military services
algorithms are fighting one another through overlapping and with allies and partners.
and competing battle networks. This algorithmic
competition is similar in some respects to the high- THREATS
frequency trading systems used in financial markets In his book, Kill Chain: Defending America in the Future of
today. These systems use algorithms to process large High-Tech Warfare, Chris Brose provides a vivid account
volumes of data in real time, ranging from economic of how adversaries are exploiting vulnerabilities in battle
analysis and business financial reports to social media and networks to gain devastating advantage. He describes
news feeds. Trading algorithms use this information to how in the 2014 seizure of Crimea, Russia’s “Little Green
make decisions in fractions of a second, competing against Men” used electronic attacks to jam the control links to
other investors across multiple markets simultaneously. In Ukrainian drones, prevent fuses on bombs from arming
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 4

properly, and target Ukrainian forces whenever they used systems to protect themselves and other aircraft operating
radios to communicate. In one disturbing incident, the in a battle network.
Russian forces called the mother of a particular Ukrainian
One of the ways battle networks can be made more
commander they were trying to locate and told her that he
resilient and capable is by linking distributed sensors
had been badly injured. When the mother called her son’s
across multiple domains and orbits using diverse
mobile phone, they quickly detected the signal, located
methods to collect information, such as infrared, optical,
him, and killed him with rocket fire.
and radar. Distribution and diversification can be
The many operational advantages battle networks provide achieved, in part, by using existing assets for multiple
make them a natural target for attack. For example, both roles and missions simultaneously, rather than keeping
Russia and China have made significant advances in them focused on just one mission. For example, aircraft
building and testing a suite of kinetic and non-kinetic intended primarily for strike or counterair missions may
anti-satellite (ASAT) weapons designed to disrupt U.S. and also have significant ISR capabilities. From an altitude
allied battle networks that depend upon or transit through of 40,000 feet, airborne platforms can see a distance
space. Many of these ASAT weapons are designed to have of roughly 240 miles on the surface, limited by the
reversible effects, such as jamming or spoofing satellite curvature of the Earth. Once a target missile or aircraft
communications (SATCOM) and Global Positioning System rises above the horizon, the distance at which aircraft
(GPS) signals, and may be difficult to detect or could be can detect them increases even more and is ultimately
publicly deniable. Forms of attack against battle networks limited by the resolution of the sensors. The infrared
that are difficult to attribute in a timely manner or can sensors used on the F-35, for example, have been able to
be ambiguous in terms of intent are ideal for use in gray detect and track a rocket launch at a distance of more
zone activities. They can be used to confuse U.S. and allied than 800 miles.
indications and warnings or conceal low-level aggression
Graceful degradation of capabilities under attack is also
and malicious activities. In situations like this, the best
a key element of resilience. Graceful degradation in
defense is not necessarily a good offense. Rather, battle
battle networks means using a mesh architecture and
network resilience gives senior leaders better options and
designing systems so that they dynamically break into
more decision space.
smaller subnetworks as necessary and automatically
connect to alternative networks as opportunities arise.
RESILIENCE
AI/ML systems can be used to detect anomalies and
Resilience can involve many forms of risk avoidance,
network attacks that humans might otherwise miss and
management, and mitigation to allow networks to respond
reconfigure networks as necessary. Alternative networks
to and quickly recover from disruptions. Resilience
can include commercial systems used to provide
assumes that disruptions and attacks will occur as part
additional surge capacity or to augment capabilities that
of both peacetime and wartime operations, and systems
have been degraded.
must be designed to accommodate this reality. Resilience
can be enhanced by improving passive defenses, such as The GPS constellation of satellites is an example of a
using laser communications (lasercom) or forms of radio system that degrades gracefully. The Space Force typically
frequency (RF) communications that are difficult for an operates 30 to 32 satellites in the constellation, even
adversary to detect, intercept, and disrupt. Likewise, having though only 24 are needed to provide global, continuous
redundant nodes and paths in the network, such as multiple coverage. If some satellites are disrupted, the “extra”
types of sensors that can identify and track a target and satellites in the constellation minimize the effects on
multiple communication paths to relay this information, users. And if the constellation drops below 24 satellites,
improves both resilience and performance. Dispersion and their orbits can be modified to ensure continuous
diversification improve resilience by limiting single-point coverage of priority areas and direct coverage gaps to
vulnerabilities in the network and greatly increasing how times and locations that are lower priorities. Moreover,
many targets (and domains) an adversary must attack to be GPS receivers that can use other space-based navigation
successful. Resilience can also be enhanced by incorporating systems, such as Europe’s Galileo, Russia’s GLONASS, or
more active defenses into the systems that comprise a battle Japan’s QZSS (to name a few), can continue to operate
network. For example, aircraft acting as forward sensors without disruption even if the entire GPS constellation
can be armed with air-to-air missiles or electronic attack fails. Most commercial GPS chips sold today (in phones
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 5

or other devices) use multiple constellations and are not Global Information Grid (GIG), which was scoped to
dependent on GPS alone. include the entire information technology infrastructure
of DoD, including government-owned and leased software
INTEROPERABILITY and hardware across all missions (strategic, operational,
The ability to share data across platforms, domains, tactical, and business).
military services, and allied nations is fundamental to the
To implement this vision nearly 20 years ago, DoD
concept of JADC2. This vision of dynamic interoperability
reshaped organizations, issued new policies and
requires coordination on multiple levels: data standards,
requirements, and redirected many acquisition programs
communications protocols and waveforms, multilevel
already in progress. For example, in , Defense
security standards, and—perhaps most importantly—
Secretary Rumsfeld redesignated the assistant secretary
policy agreements with allies and partners that allow for
of defense (ASD) for command, control, communications,
real-time data sharing and access. Interoperability is not
and intelligence (C3I) to be the ASD for network and
a binary variable—there are degrees of interoperability
information integration (NII). ASD/NII subsequently
among systems and networks, and the right level of
issued a number of policies that, for example, directed all
interoperability depends on the advantage provided and
DoD radio acquisition programs to adhere to the standards
the costs involved.
in the Software Communications Architecture (SCA)
A memo from Deputy Defense Secretary Hicks and to build only software-programmable radios with
outlines five “DoD data decrees” aimed at improving waveforms that could be ported across systems. The Joint
the Department’s ability to share data and create data Staff went a step further by issuing a set of Net-Ready Key
interfaces that are more automated and platform- Performance Parameters (NR-KPPs) to levee requirements
independent. While this policy memo is broader than across programs at all acquisition category (ACAT) levels.
battle networks, it specifically cites its application to Joint
All Domain Operations. It calls on the DoD chief data LESSONS LEARNED
officer to issue policy and guidance to implement these Despite the steps taken in the early 2000s to put DoD on a
decrees and work with the Joint Staff “to scale existing path to greater data sharing and interoperability across the
capabilities that have proven themselves in the battlespace joint force, the objectives of Joint Vision 2020 remained
and in real-world operations, simulations, experiments, elusive when 2020 arrived. While a myriad of factors
and demonstrations.” contributed to the slow pace of progress, several lessons
stand out as providing valuable insights for current efforts.
DATA-CENTRIC VERSUS NET-CENTRIC
• Overly ambitious acquisition programs: Many of the
flagship acquisition programs intended to enable the
PRIOR EFFORTS
new net-centric way of operating—programs such as
The current concept for data sharing and interoperability
the Army’s Future Combat System (FCS), the Air Force’s
as applied to battle networks is reminiscent of the
Transformational SATCOM (TSAT), the Navy’s DDG-
network-centric warfare concept of more than two decades
1000 destroyer, and the Joint Tactical Radio System
ago. While the two initiatives are not identical—the
(JTRS)—attempted to “leap ahead” and skip a generation
current effort appears to be more focused on data sharing
of technology. Instead of leveraging advances in
than connecting networks—their ultimate aims have
proven commercial technology or scaling back program
many similarities. The 2001 Quadrennial Defense Review
objectives, too often these programs attempted to
(QDR) noted that “new information and communications
proceed with key technologies that were immature. Each
technologies hold promise for networking highly
of the programs listed above were ultimately canceled or
distributed joint and combined forces and for ensuring
curtailed, negating many of the efforts and funding that
that such forces have better situational awareness—both
had been invested in net-centric warfare.
about friendly forces as well as those of adversaries—than
in the past.” The QDR was informed in part by Joint Vision • Assigning responsibility without authority: ASD/
2020 and its concept of network-centric warfare, which NII was intended to be a focal point within the office
it described as a way to achieve “asymmetric information of the secretary of defense (OSD) for net-centric
advantage” by making data more readily available and transformation, but the office proved ineffective in
usable. Underpinning network-centric warfare was the practice and was eventually eliminated, along with
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 6

its counterpart office in the Joint Staff (J6), as part of proceeds and its prospects for success. Time is of the
efficiency initiatives within OSD. While it was given essence because each of the military services and several
significant responsibilities for oversight and it pursued defense-wide agencies are pressing ahead with JADC2-
these with vigor, ASD/NII did not have the necessary related programs of their own without a plan for how these
authority to enforce its decisions. It could issue policies efforts will converge or deconflict.
and weigh in during acquisition milestone reviews, but
the military services retained the ultimate authority— ORGANIZATIONAL ROLES AND AUTHORITIES
budget authority—over program plans and schedules. DoD needs to define the responsibilities and authorities
of different organizations in the JADC2 development and
• Issuing requirements and policies prematurely: ASD/
implementation process—who is in charge of what, and
NII and the Joint Staff also fell into the trap of moving
how the various organizations involved will work together.
too quickly to implement policies and requirements
Many different organizational models are possible, and
without providing enough technical detail for effective
as CSIS’s Morgan Dwyer previously noted, DoD has tried
implementation. Both the JTRS/SCA policy and the NR-
many models in the past without much success. Below
KPPs created significant uncertainty and instability as
are a few examples of how DoD could assign roles and
acquisition programs struggled to understand how they
authorities for JADC2 development, and many hybrid
could be implemented in existing programs at various
approaches are possible that incorporate one of more of
stages of development. The 2003 JTRS/SCA policy, for
the organizational structures discussed below.
example, required all radios (including those operating
at much higher frequencies and data rates) to be JPEO: DoD could create a Joint Program Executive
software programmable and SCA compliant. The problem Office (JPEO) to centralize the management of JADC2
was that the JTRS compliance guidelines (as they existed development and procurement. This is similar to the
at that time) were not intended for the higher data rates approach tried for the JTRS program in the 2000s, which
and higher frequencies used for some applications, such had many shortcomings. A lesson learned from the F-35
as wideband and protected satellite communications. joint program office is that each of the services may benefit
While it is important for policymakers to act quickly to from establishing their own integration offices to liaison
rein in divergent programs, it is difficult for program with the program office and ensure their requirements
managers and engineers to meet requirements that are are properly represented. A joint program office can also
ill-defined or ill-conceived. make it easier to interface with allies and partners during
development by providing a single point of contact for
• Expanding the scope beyond battle networks: Perhaps
technical and programmatic issues, and it gives senior
the most important lesson to learn from this earlier
leaders in DoD and Congress a specific focal point (the
attempt at improving network and data interoperability
person serving as the joint program executive officer)
is to scope the problem more appropriately. There
for accountability. However, the Department should be
are many advantages to be gained from greater
mindful not to create a major acquisition program (or set
interoperability and accessibility of data across all DoD
of interdependent programs) that is simultaneously too big
networks used for strategic, operational, tactical, and
to fail and too big to succeed.
business missions. But scoping the problem to include
everything—as was the case with the GIG—is a recipe Independent Agency: The Department could create a
for dysfunction. Data sharing across backend business new independent agency under USD/R&E for JADC2
systems is a fundamentally different challenge than with its own acquisition authority and budget, similar
interoperability among battle networks, and the two to the Missile Defense Agency (MDA) and the Space
should not be part of the same effort. Development Agency (SDA). Alternatively, it could expand
the role of the Defense Information Systems Agency
KEY DECISIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS (DISA) to include JADC2, although this would go well
Experience from the 2000s suggests that the organizational beyond the agency’s core capabilities and could come at the
structure and acquisition strategy for JADC2 are likely to expense of efforts to modernize and support defense-wide
be determining factors in how much progress is made. In IT systems. An independent agency could manage multiple
the coming months, DoD will need to make several key ongoing programs and make trades across investments
decisions that will have major implications for how JADC2 within its portfolio as prototyping and experimentation
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 7

begin to yield results. Like the JPEO model, an independent challenge with this approach is preventing redundancies
agency provides a focal point for interfacing with allies and conflicts with the military services if some of their
and partners, and it gives Congress and senior DoD leaders JADC2-related efforts are not transferred to the command.
a specific person to hold accountable for results. One A COCOM would arguably be more in tune with warfighter
of the risks with using an independent agency is that it requirements to make cross-portfolio trades among
creates the possibility of redundancies and conflicts with programs than an independent agency, and if it retained
the services’ existing JADC2-related programs if they are operational authority for global command and control, it
not completely transferred to the new agency. There is could also ease the transition of capabilities it develops
also no guarantee that whatever the agency develops will into operational forces. A risk (and potential benefit) of
be adopted and used by the services—a variation on the this approach is that COCOMs typically have a relatively
so-called valley of death. To be effective, an independent near-term focus on what the warfighter needs now and
agency would require close coordination with service-led over the next couple of years. That could speed early
platform and munitions programs, strong support and development efforts to get new capabilities fielded sooner,
a sustained commitment from top OSD leadership, and but it could also hamper long-term strategic planning and
top-level decisions that are enforced by OSD through the the development of more complex capabilities.
annual program review process.
Decentralized Development: The default approach if a
Lead Military Service: A different approach would be to deliberate decision is not otherwise made is to continue
designate a lead military service for JADC2 and direct the with decentralized development of JADC2 systems
other services, agencies, and COCOMs to work with the and components across the services and agencies with
lead service to ensure it develops the capabilities they oversight by OSD and the Joint Staff. Responsibility could
need. This approach goes against the cultural instincts and again be assigned to an ASD, and both the ASD and Joint
the institutional incentives of the services, and the past Staff could issue policies, strategies, and KPPs that attempt
seven decades since the Key West Agreement are replete to guide and coordinate the services’ independent efforts—
with examples of where this approach has not worked as was the case with ASD/NII and J6 for net-centric warfare
well (e.g., close air support, missile defense). For the in the early 2000s. The services would retain independent
lead service approach to be effective, OSD and Joint Staff control of JADC2-related program schedules and budgets,
leaders would need to be consistent and disciplined during which would likely proceed at different paces, depending
the Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution on the other budgetary priorities within each service. But
(PPBE) and Joint Requirements Oversight Council (JROC) cross-program and cross-service interoperability becomes
processes to ensure (1) that the lead service is fully increasingly difficult if some programs are proceeding
responsive to the requirements of the other services, through development into procurement well before other
(2) that the lead service fully funds these efforts in each programs. A likely outcome from this approach is that
year’s budget, and (3) that the other services do not begin the services would each develop a new generation of
alternative programs or procure incompatible systems on stove-piped command and control systems that are highly
their own. In short, it would likely be a constant struggle capable within their respective domains. Cross-service
to make this work. and cross-domain interoperability would be a secondary
priority—or worse, an unfunded requirement.
Lead Functional Command: Another approach would
be to designate a lead COCOM for JADC2 and provide
TOP-LEVEL JADC2 ARCHITECTURE
it with independent acquisition authority in the model
DoD also needs to make several key decisions about the
of Special Operations Command. This could be a new
overall architecture it envisions for JADC2 and how it
functional command created specifically for command
will be implemented. These architectural decisions are
and control, or this function could be assigned to an
interconnected with the organizational models discussed
existing COCOM, such as Strategic Command, Space
in the previous section because some architectures are
Command, Cyber Command, or Northern Command. Like
better suited for development under certain organizational
the JPEO and independent agency models, designating
structures.
a lead COCOM provides a focal point for interfacing
with allies and partners and makes a senior commander Scope: One of the most consequential architectural
accountable to DoD and Congress for delivering results. A decisions is the scope of what is considered part of
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 8

JADC2—what types of systems, data, networks, and “middleware” that integrates dissimilar systems into a
missions will be part of the architecture. OSD’s data battle network. However, this means that applications
strategy and the Joint Staff’s JADC2 strategy appear to written for one operating system will not be natively
be taking a broad, enterprise-wide approach to scoping interoperable with other systems and will require some
JADC2. This approach was tried in the 1990s and 2000s level of preparation time and development work to make
with DoD’s concepts for the GIG and net-centricity. The them interoperable. A common operating system creates
challenge is that the more the scope expands, the more the possibility of a truly open ecosystem for software
divergent the mission requirements become and the more development, which can reduce barriers to entry for small
difficult it is to make meaningful progress. When drawing companies, encourage innovation, increase software
the lines around what is included in JADC2 and what is reusability, and prevent vendor lock. The downside of
not, DoD should be mindful that not all interoperability is creating a common operating system for JADC2 is that
worth the price, and one-size-fits-all approaches to data it would be difficult to develop one operating system
standards, security, and communications protocols are capable of meeting the diverse and often yet-to-be-define
often suboptimal at best and unworkable at worst. For requirements of users, and whatever is developed will not
example, do the data systems that process and manage be fully optimized for any specific mission or hardware
medical records and spare parts inventories need to be configuration.
interoperable with missile defense systems and tactical
Interfaces: The JADC2 architecture should also identify
fighter networks? If not, then why make them part of the
and define key interfaces both internally and externally.
same effort and subject to the same policies?
Interfaces are a critical part of defining the scope of the
The key to solving big problems is to break them into system, and DoD should carefully articulate the interfaces
smaller, more manageable problems. The scope of JADC2 to the data systems and networks that support battle
should be carefully narrowed to only the five functional networks but are not directly part of the battle networks
elements that comprise battle networks: sensors, (delineating what is external to the architecture and
communications, data processing, decisionmaking, and therefore outside the scope of JADC2). External interfaces
effects. While there are many other information systems would include things like maintenance and inventory
that these functional elements rely upon for support, the management systems, training systems, and personnel
Department risks traversing down a slippery slope if it management systems. Interfaces are more than just
begins to include supporting systems within the scope of technical specifications; they also include the policies and
JADC2. Likewise, attempting to define the scope of JADC2 processes that govern how the interfaces will be used and
by the level of missions supported (strategic, operational, by whom. The JADC2 architecture should also define the
and tactical) leaves too much to interpretation because internal interfaces necessary for allies and partners to be
many of the systems and components that make up battle part of U.S. battle networks and share data in real time,
networks can be used for multiple missions. Importantly, including the policies and agreements across nations to
DoD should acknowledge the increasingly important enable this connectivity both in peacetime competition
role commercial systems play in its battle networks— and in conflict. Similar internal interfaces are needed
for sensing, communications, and data processing in to enable DoD to leverage and integrate commercial
particular—and include these systems in its architecture. capabilities into battle networks to augment government
systems.
Common Operating System: A key architectural decision
for JADC2 is whether to mandate the use of a common
MAKE/BUY/BORROW DECISIONS
operating system or allow different parts of the battle
In a traditional acquisition approach, one of the first
network to run separate operating systems. Dissimilar
analyses conducted is whether warfighter requirements
operating systems within and across networks have been
can best be met by (1) upgrading or repurposing something
the traditional approach, and the main advantage is that
that already exists, (2) buying something that has already
it allows systems to be optimized for the functions they
been developed (i.e., off the shelf), or (3) developing a
perform and the specific hardware they use. Technologies
new material solution. While this framework still applies,
like DARPA’s System-of-systems Technology Integration
given the rapid advancement of commercial technology
Tool Chain for Heterogeneous Electronic Systems
in areas that have considerable overlap with military
(STITCHES) can be used to automatically generate
battle networks, the range of options should be expanded.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 9

The first option (upgrading or repurposing) can mean operators and platforms may be put at grave risk (such
adding new sensors and payloads to existing platforms or as in a combat zone) or where the operators may be
adjusting operational concepts to use existing platforms required to perform uniquely military functions (such as
in different ways. For example, the military has added directing fires or carrying out strikes). And neither COCO
strike capabilities to ISR platforms, used strike platforms nor COGO would be viable for capabilities that private
for ISR, and is planning to use aerial refueling aircraft as firms cannot legally or financially develop on their own.
communication and data processing hubs. The third option The JADC2 acquisition strategy should, however, make a
(a new start development) should usually be considered deliberate effort to decide what it needs to buy as a product
as a last resort to meet truly military-unique requirements versus a service and what needs to be government versus
that cannot be met otherwise. New developments do not commercially operated.
necessarily mean hardware programs—they could include
applications (such as AI systems) that sit on top of the CONCLUSION
network to process and exploit information in new ways. Battle networks and the competition among them are
an increasingly important component of military power.
The second option, buying capabilities off the shelf, needs
In a highly “informationized” warfighting environment,
to be expanded and reimagined to fully leverage the
U.S. and allied forces must be able to protect their battle
capabilities resident in the private sector, including both
networks from attack while simultaneously attacking the
traditional and non-traditional defense contractors. Buying
battle networks of adversary forces. AI/ML algorithms
something “off the shelf” can be done in many ways. The
running within highly integrated battle networks can
military can buy something as an off-the-shelf product and
be used to improve indications and warnings, speed
operate it using government personnel, what is known as
decisionmaking, and enable an exponential increase in
government owned and government operated (GOGO). In
operational efficiency and effectiveness.
some cases, the military can access similar capabilities by
buying something as a service instead of a product, where The resilience and interoperability of battle networks
the capability is commercially owned and commercially are closely connected because one enables the other.
operated (COCO). In other cases, the military can lease Resilience can be enhanced by passive and active defenses;
a capability from a commercial firm and operate it using and interoperability across services, domains, and nations
government personnel, what is known as commercially enhances resilience by providing more opportunities for
owned and government operated (COGO). diversification and distribution of capabilities. But this
does not mean that everything needs to be interoperable.
While the traditional approach to off the shelf is GOGO,
The right level of interoperability among systems depends
the COCO and COGO approaches offer several potential
on the advantage provided and the costs involved.
advantages. First, COCO and COGO leverage private capital
for the large, upfront expenses involved in developing and This paper finds that current efforts to improve
acquiring systems. It also allows the military to continually interoperability and data sharing across DoD—what
adjust how much of something it uses and only pay for has become known as JADC2—are similar to the
what it needs rather than being saddled with a fixed “transformation” and “net-centric” initiatives of the late
number of assets at all times. It also gives the government 1990s and early 2000s. DoD should heed the lessons from
flexibility to switch between capabilities quickly as these initiatives when charting a path forward for JADC2.
technology improves and warfighter demands evolve, and In particular, it should avoid (1) starting overly ambitious
this in turn gives contractors an incentive to invest their acquisition programs that attempt to “leap ahead”
own capital in continuing to improve capabilities to better in technology, (2) assigning responsibility for JADC2
anticipate and meet the military’s needs and win more task strategy and oversight to organizations that do not have
orders. Importantly, the COCO and COGO approaches give budget authority over programs, (3) issuing policies and
contractors a direct financial stake in reducing operation requirements without sufficient technical maturity, and
and sustainment costs, which often comprise the majority (4) expanding the scope of JADC2 beyond battle networks.
of a system’s total lifecycle cost.
DoD is at a pivotal point in JADC2 development where it
To be sure, commercial approaches are not appropriate needs to make several key decisions that will have long-
in all situations. For example, the COCO and COGO term effects on how successful this attempt at creating
approaches would not be suitable for missions where the a more networked and interoperable force will be. First,
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 10

it needs to define organizational responsibilities and Todd Harrison is the director of Defense Budget Analysis and
authorities for JADC2 development and implementation. director of the Aerospace Security Project at the Center for
Several organizational models are available, such as Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C.
consolidating programs into a JPEO for JADC2, creating a
This brief is made possible by support from General Atomics,
new independent agency for JADC2 development under
Lockheed Martin, and general support to CSIS.
USD/R&E, designating a lead service for JADC2, and
designating or creating a COCOM for JADC2 development
and operations. The default approach if no decision is
made is to continue with decentralized development of
JADC2 systems across the military services and agencies
with oversight by OSD and the Joint Staff.
DoD also needs to make several important decisions about
the JADC2 architecture and acquisition strategy. The most
important architectural decision is the scope of what is
considered part of JADC2, and the Department should
learn from past efforts (like the GIG) and not expand the
scope of JADC2 to include more than just battle networks.
It needs to define key internal and external interfaces
in the system, which also helps define the scope. DoD
also needs to decide whether the military wants to
use a common operating system for JADC2 and how
that operating system will be developed and managed.
Importantly, the JADC2 acquisition strategy needs to
include processes for determining what it can buy as a
product versus a service and what can be government
versus commercially operated.
The many questions that remain unanswered for JADC2 are
not merely academic or hypothetical. Billions of dollars are
already being invested in programs, activities, and
capabilities that are intended to form the battle networks
of the future, and the ability of the U.S. military to
maintain its qualitative advantage is at stake. The vision
and ideas behind JADC2 are not new—they have been
decades in the making, and the lessons drawn from past
organizational and acquisition missteps should serve as a
guide for how to proceed. It is not a question of if DoD will
eventually achieve its vision for JADC2 but rather how long
it will take to get it right.
CSIS BRIEFS are produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a private, tax-exempt institution
focusing on international public policy issues. Its research is nonpartisan and nonproprietary. CSIS does not take specific
policy positions. Accordingly, all views, positions, and conclusions expressed in this publication should be understood to
be solely those of the author(s). © 2021 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
Cover Photo: Petty Officer 3rd Class Marianne Guemo U.S. Northern Command
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 11