2020–2021 Annual Report
Stanford Institute for
Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence
See the progress HAI has made in research, policy, and
education during our second academic year.

Contents Letter from the The landscape of AI has changed markedly in the
last three years. The cost of technical AI research
Denning Co-Directors
has skyrocketed, commensurate with the ever-
increasing capabilities and complexity of AI.
1 Letter from the Denning Co-Directors For example, a new class of large-scale neural
2 HAI by the Numbers networks has the ability to generate text, audio and
imagery, transforming the field of AI in ways we are
only beginning to understand. This past year HAI
5 Research
responded by establishing a Center for Research
6 HAI Research Focus on Foundation Models that involves hundreds of
Stanford scholars across many different fields,
7 Grant Programs for AI Research
contributing to research and driving important
10 Center for Research on Foundation Models
conversations about the risks and opportunities of
11 Stanford Digital Economy Lab
these large models.
12 AI Index
Fei-Fei Li and John Etchemendy, Denning Co-Directors of the Today, conversations about AI are more charged
13 Research Events / Ethics and Society Review Stanford Institute for Human-Centered AI
than ever, spanning tough topics like bias, facial
recognition, fake generative data, large models
15 Policy As we write this letter, we can’t help but reflect on how and more. At HAI we believe it’s our responsibility
the development of the Institute for Human-Centered to engage in challenging debate, facing questions
16 National Research Cloud / Education and Training for Policymakers Artificial Intelligence (HAI) since our founding in 2019 without easy answers, and learning from failure.
17 Policy Steering Committees / Policy Resources / Policy Workshops has taken a course no one could have predicted. Despite
Even after a decade of historic advances, AI’s
the challenges of the ongoing pandemic, HAI has grown
most impactful discoveries have yet to be made.
19 Education in size and strength as an organization and campus
Academic research, by Stanford scholars and
community, all while we were working remotely. A silver
others, is key to pushing the frontiers of basic
20 Programs for Today’s Leaders / AI+Activism+Art lining of working from home was that it enabled us to
science, both for the sake of discovery and to
entirely remodel the Gates Computer Science Building,
21 Programs for Emerging Leaders
evaluate the ethical and societal implications that
providing HAI with its first home. Please come visit!
industry developers may not consider, or may not
22 People During the 2020-2021 academic year our milestones be equipped to address.
included progress with the National Research
22 Denning Co-Directors As the pandemic winds down, AI is clearly
Cloud, a significant program for EU policymakers,
23 Associate Directors exciting findings from our first six Hoffman-Yee grant intertwined with the most critical issues of our time:
geopolitics, work, climate, healthcare, and more.
25 Staff recipients, and our first executive education class.
Courage has never been more important in the field
We invite you to read about these advancements
26 Faculty and Fellows
of AI—to deeply examine evidence-based research,
and more in this, our second annual report.
27 Junior Fellows Program / Visiting Artist
to listen to all voices, and to have conviction of
We sincerely appreciate the support of our growing reason. We look forward to ongoing collaboration
28 Events community of faculty, fellows, and students, as with you in the coming year and welcome your ideas
well as scholars and researchers beyond Stanford, and participation in our journey.
29 Corporate Members Program
around the world. Our supporters, advisors, and
30 Research Centers and Partners
corporate members have been generous with
31 Content / Advisory Council / Support for HAI their time and resources, while the HAI staff has
32 Financials worked tirelessly to move the organization forward.
We simply could not achieve this important work
Fei-Fei Li John Etchemendy
without the contributions of our community.

HAI by the Numbers

Although we measure our success by impact, these facts paint a picture of
the scope and depth of our work over the 2020-2021 academic year.
Stanford faculty funded by HAI

All

blog articles featuring the work of HAI Stanford schools
faculty, students, and fellows represented by HAI faculty

$11
M
projects funded
issued in grants
by HAI grants
120,000
views of HAI virtual events
2 3

Research
Championing
Human-Centered AI
Interdisciplinary work is key to solving society’s most
complex problems. During the 2020-21 academic
year, HAI continued to promote human-centered AI
technologies and applications. We are proud to have
funded dozens of new faculty across all seven Stanford
schools, bringing new voices, perspectives, and talent
into the community.
4 5

HAI Research Focus Grant Programs for AI Research
We are committed to ensuring that humanity benefits from AI technology HAI strives to foster a culture of AI research in which technological advances
and that the benefits are shared broadly by all. In support of this are linked inextricably to research about their potential societal impact. HAI
commitment, our research falls into three key focus areas: Human Impact, builds on the strength of Stanford research by offering multiple grant programs.
Augmenting Human Capabilities, and Intelligence.
108 faculty funded in AY 2020-21
School of Engineering
Human Impact
To develop equitable and trustworthy technology, School of Medicine
we must understand how AI performs in practice and
affects humanity. Our multidisciplinary research on this
School of Humanities and Sciences
technology’s human impact aims to realize this vision.
School of Earth, Energy and Environmental Sciences
Seed
School of Education AIMI-HAI
Cloud
Precourt
School of Law
Hoffman-Yee
Augmenting Human Capabilities
AI should communicate and collaborate effectively with
Graduate School of Business
people to augment their capabilities and make their work
better and more enjoyable. Breakthroughs in this research
area will allow great progress in healthcare, education,
sustainability, automation, and countless other domains.
AIMI-HAI Grants for AI in Precourt Institute for
Healthcare and Medicine Energy Grants
Intelligence HAI contributed $550,000 toward a first-time grant HAI joined the Precourt Institute for Energy grants
partnership with the Stanford Center for Artificial and the Bits & Watts initiative in funding $1.2 million
Current AI systems resist explanation or interaction in
Intelligence in Medicine and Imaging (AIMI), for new projects in energy AI and environmental
terms that are comprehensible by humans. Ultimately,
providing a total of $1.14 million to six teams over justice. The first two Precourt Pioneering Projects
we need to develop machine intelligence that
the next two years for healthcare AI research with were selected for their efforts using artificial
understands human language, emotions, intentions,
near-term applications. intelligence and machine learning to make energy
behaviors, and interactions at multiple scales.
systems more sustainable, affordable, resilient, and
fair to all socioeconomic groups.
6 7

HAI Seed Grants Featured HAI Seed Grants Cloud Credit Grants Featured Cloud Credit Grants
HAI seed research grants support new, ambitious, Cloud credit grants from Google and Amazon
Featured Grant in Human Impact Featured Grant in Human Impact
and speculative ideas with the objective of getting Web Services (AWS) provide the cloud compute
initial results. These projects range from discrete AI Accountability in Practice: What required for rigorous AI research. HAI allocates Learning in Cooperative and
studies and book-length research to speaker series Keeps Companies from Implementing these credits to projects showing promising, novel, Competitive Games
and system building and evaluation. In AY 2020-21, Socially Responsible AI? or emerging research.
Cooperative and competitive games have been
HAI awarded 25 seed grants totaling approximately
This project examines the concrete organizational During the 2020-21 academic year, 28 faculty well-studied in game theory and machine learning
$1.8 million to 54 faculty across all seven schools.
roadblocks shaping the implementation of FATE completed 52 projects using $2 million in AWS literature. However, in real life there are many
Almost half of the funded faculty (24 people) had
(fairness, accountability, transparency, and ethics) cloud credits awarded by HAI in AY 2019-20. HAI settings in which the optimal action is sometimes
not been previously funded by HAI.
values as the technology industry designs and also launched the Google cloud credit program, to cooperate and other times to compete. This
25 $1.8 implements AI systems. distributing $2 million to 36 faculty members project aims to discover how humans behave in
across 66 projects. Each recipient was eligible for these games, so we can investigate how to design
seed grants million
Featured Grant in Augmenting Human Capabilities up to $100,000 in credits for the year. a new AI-agent that increases cooperativeness
56 and results in higher payoffs for everyone.
Using Wearable Electrodermal Activity
Google Cloud Credits
faculty Sensors to Identify ADHD Biotypes
36 66 Featured Grant in Augmenting Human Capabilities
This study examines the use of longitudinal
faculty projects Advancing the Neuroscientific Discovery
measurement of electrodermal activity (EDA)
Hoffman-Yee Research Grants
of Disease-Specific Phenotypes
—a peripheral index of autonomic arousal—
Hoffman-Yee research grants are made possible by a as a biomarker to aid in the objective diagnosis AWS Cloud Credits This team received AWS credits to develop
gift from philanthropists Reid Hoffman and Michelle of ADHD and augment the diagnosis of ADHD 28 52 deep learning and statistical models for
Yee. These grants support multidisciplinary teams that by identifying potential subtypes, or biotypes. neuroscience applications. The work
faculty projects
are leveraging AI to focus on real-world problems in contributed to a better understanding of
health care, education, and society. In , Featured Grant in Intelligence brain disorders and documented healthy
Stanford HAI held the first Hoffman-Yee Symposium neurodevelopment during adolescence.
Self-Supervised Representation
for inaugural grant recipients to present their research
Learning of Screen Data to Facilitate
results to date and their plans for the future. Four of Featured Grant in Intelligence
Behavioral and Reinforcement
the six inaugural teams were selected for additional
Learning Models Embodied Intelligence Via Learning
funding. Their work focuses on these goals:
and Evolution
This team is using newly available data and
• building robotics to improve human locomotion
analyses grounded in media psychology to Animals display remarkable degrees of embodied
• developing artificial tutors to augment teachers develop visual representations that facilitate intelligence by leveraging their evolved
in the classroom semantic labeling of human screen-based morphologies to learn complex tasks. This project
behavior and support development of new investigates how intelligent behavior is a function
• understanding how humans play to improve AI tools
computational models of human learning of the brain, morphology, and the environment.
• investigating cultural concepts through time and curiosity. Since the principles governing relations among
with AI these three functions require large-scale in
silico experiments, the team has created a new
Each of these four teams will receive an additional
framework to evolve AI agents with diverse
$500,000 to $1 million for each of the next two
morphologies to learn hard locomotion and
years, on top of their original awards of $500,000.
manipulation tasks in complex environments.
Researchers created a computer-simulated playground where
arthropod-like agents dubbed “unimals” learn and evolve.
8 9

HAI Research Center HAI Research Center
Center for Research on Foundation Models Stanford Digital Economy Lab
Stanford is the first university to launch an initiative to examine “foundation The Stanford Digital Economy Lab brings together leading researchers and
models”—an emerging class of AI models, including BERT, DALL-E, and experts to pursue a deeper understanding of the digital economy.
GPT-3—that are trained on broad data using self-supervision at scale and
Research
can be adapted to a wide range of downstream tasks.
After one full year in operation, the lab currently
Foundation models represent a dramatic increase in supports more than 50 projects across four
capability in terms of accuracy, generation quality, and major research areas: AI and the Future of
extrapolation to new tasks; however, they also pose Work, Measuring the Digital Economy, Digital
clear risks in that they may be used for widespread Platforms, and Data-Driven Decision-Making and
disinformation, potential exacerbation of historical Management Practices. The lab prioritized the
inequities, and problematic centralization of power. scale-up of the following two topics:
In the human-centered spirit of HAI, the Center for AI and the Future of Work: We are investigating the
Research on Foundation Models (CRFM) consists effects of the current, ongoing phase of automation
of an interdisciplinary team of 200+ students, Erik Brynjolfsson, Director of the Stanford and augmentation of the workforce; the introduction
faculty, and researchers across 10+ departments or Digital Economy Lab of AI and robotics on employment, wages, and
schools, including computer science, economics, inequality; and the nature of work in the future.
Jerry Yang and Akiko Yamazaki Professor and Senior Fellow at
Percy Liang, Director of the Center for
political science, law, and medicine. The center’s HAI, Ralph Landau Senior Fellow at the Stanford Institute for
Measuring the Digital Economy: We are working
first report, “On the Opportunities and Risks of Research on Foundation Models Economic Policy Research (SIEPR), and professor, by courtesy,
at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and Stanford to create better methods of measuring the health
Foundation Models,” provided an unprecedented Percy Liang is an associate professor of computer science at
Department of Economics and progress of an increasingly digital economy.
look into the legal ramifications, environmental and Stanford University and the director of the Center for Research on
Foundation Models. His research spans many topics in machine Christie Ko, Executive Director
economic impact and ethical issues associated
learning and natural language processing, including robustness, Events and Community
with these new models. In , our launch
interpretability, semantics, and reasoning. Percy’s awards include
event, called Workshop on Foundation Models, the Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers Our launch event, AI & The Future
brought leaders from the broader community (2019), IJCAI Computers and Thought Award (2016), an NSF of Work, featured an all-star lineup of thought
CAREER Award (2016), a Sloan Research Fellowship (2015), and a
to discuss and debate opportunities and risks, leaders, including James Manyika, Gina Raimondo,
Microsoft Research Faculty Fellowship (2014).
technological considerations, industry applications, and Eric Schmidt.
As the director of CRFM, he is leading Stanford’s efforts to
and potential societal harms.
make fundamental advances in the study, development, and The lab hosted 15 seminars featuring research
deployment of foundation models through an interdisciplinary
from world-renowned experts, including Cornell
group of faculty, students, postdocs, and researchers.
University Professor Erica Groshen, Columbia
University Professor Joseph Stiglitz, and London
School of Economics Professor Phillippe Aghion.
Publications
The lab published more than two dozen academic
papers by affiliated faculty, fellows, and students.
We also launched a YouTube channel and published
a working paper series to showcase new research
and voices.
10 11

Research Program Research Program
AI Index Research Events Ethics and
Society Review
In , HAI published the fourth edition Each spring and fall, the HAI research team
of its AI Index, one of the most comprehensive organizes weekly seminars and frequent workshops
For the first time at Stanford, a new program piloted
reports about AI to date. The AI Index measures to bring the AI community together around
with support from HAI requires AI researchers to
and evaluates the rapid rate of AI advancement, common interests. In AY 2020-21, HAI hosted
evaluate the potential societal implications of their
enabling leaders and decision makers to take 27 seminars featuring scholars from Stanford
proposed research before receiving funding from
meaningful action to advance AI responsibly and and beyond across a wide range of topics, from
HAI. The Ethics and Society Review (ESR) requires
ethically with humans in mind. collaborative robots to ethical AI, and healthcare
researchers seeking funding to consider how
AI applications to embodied intelligence. This
The 2021 report significantly expanded the amount of their proposals might pose negative ethical and
year’s seminars included DeepLearning founder
data tracked compared to the prior index; this latest on AI development from multiple perspectives. Most societal risks, to come up with methods to lessen
Andrew Ng’s discussion around bridging AI’s proof-
report covered hiring data, corporate investment, notably, data demonstrates that the pandemic had little those risks, and, if needed, to collaborate with
of-concept to production gap, and HAI Visiting
global policy and regulation, technical advances effect on AI hiring and private investment. an interdisciplinary faculty panel to ensure those
Artist Rashaad Newsome’s innovative creation
and academic trends, diversity in the workforce, and HAI promoted the 2021 report through two public “BEING: The Digital Griot.” On average, about 300 concerns are addressed before funding is received.
ethical challenges. The AI Index team also worked with
events and five virtual briefings with policymakers attendees joined for each virtual live event.
a broader set of academic, private, and civil society
and industry leaders, and the institute received
organizations to gather and calibrate the information. In , researchers from OpenAI,
considerable positive press coverage in both
The fourth edition also shows the effects of COVID-19 HAI, and other universities convened to discuss
business and technology media.
open research questions surrounding GPT-3, the
largest publicly disclosed, dense language model
at the time. Participants represented a variety of
disciplines including computer science, linguistics,
philosophy, political science, communications,
and cyber policy. The new Center for Research on
Foundation Models, organized by HAI and made up
of more than 120 faculty and students, emerged as
a result of these discussions.
The program has reviewed more than 70 grants to
date and is in the process of expanding beyond HAI
to other funding programs on campus. This work
was published in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences and after its initial funding by
HAI, the program has received additional funding
from the Public Interest Technology University
Network; Stanford’s Ethics, Science, and Technology
Hub; HAI; and the National Science Foundation. The
Patrick J. McGovern Foundation also has approved
the ESR for funding through a gift to the Center for
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences (CASBS).
0002 2002 4002 6002 8002 0102 2102 4102 6102 8102
Global Private Investment in AI by
Focus Area, 2019 vs 2020

Prates et al., 2018; adapted from the AI Index 2021 Annual Report Source: CapIQ, Crunchbase, and NetBase Quid, 2020; adapted from the
AI Index 2021 Annual Report
seltit
repap
fo
rebmuN
Number of Paper Titles Mentioning Ethics
Keywords at AI Conferences, 2000-19
Drugs, cancer, molecular, drug discovery
Autonomous vehicles, fleet, autonomous driving, road
The Ethics and Society Review creates a path for researchers to
consider the wider ramifications of their work before embarking
on research.
Students, courses, edtech, English language

Open source, compute, Hadoop, DevOps 2020
Speech recognition, computer interaction, dialogue, machine translation
0 5,000 10,000 15,000
HAI research events bring together the AI community of
scholars for discussion and collaboration.
12 13

Policy
Convening
Global Discussions
Stanford HAI plays a leading role in producing critical
scholarship on AI governance and appropriate uses, as well
as serving as a convener of national and global discussions.
By engaging AI leaders across all sectors and training
policymakers around the world on these issues, HAI leaders
have positioned the institute to be a natural hub for policy
impact in human-centered AI. In AY 2020-21, HAI published 10
policy briefs, established three policy steering committees, and
held several pivotal events for legislators and policy experts.
14 15

National Research Cloud Policy Steering Policy Workshops
Committees
On January 1, 2021, the U.S. Congress authorized the National AI HAI hosted three policy workshops in
Research Resource Task Force Act as part of the National Defense AY 2020-21:
In early 2021, HAI established three faculty-led
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021. The Biden administration
policy committees on subjects that represent • Opportunities and Challenges for
established the task force to study and provide an implementation
unique opportunities for HAI: Civil Society
pathway to create world-class computational resources and robust
government datasets for researchers across the country in the form of • The Committee on Healthcare Policy, chaired by • Assessing and Managing Risks with the Use of
a National Research Cloud (NRC). HAI Denning Co-Director Fei-Fei Artificial Intelligence
Curt Langlotz from Stanford School of Medicine
Li was named to the task force, and a Stanford Law School policy
• Breakthroughs and Barriers for Industry
• The Committee on International Security,
lab composed of graduate students in computer science, business,
chaired by Amy Zegart from the Freeman Spogli
engineering, and law completed six months of investigation into the
Institute (FSI) and Hoover Institution
issue. The resulting white paper, Building a National AI Research
Resource, was released in . • The Committee on Technology Governance,
chaired by David Engstrom from Stanford
Law School
Education and Training for Policymakers Policy Resources
European-North American Intensive Congressional Testimony HAI publishes numerous policy briefs, explainers, and
Policy Lab white papers throughout the year to help lawmakers
In , Susan Athey, Economics of
understand issues related to AI. Highlights from AY
In May, HAI convened this lab together with Technology Professor at the Stanford Graduate
2020-21 include these publications:
Brookings and the European University Institute. School of Business and HAI associate director,
The event engaged 28 current and former senior provided congressional testimony to the House • AI’s Promise and Peril for the U.S. Government,
policymakers, as well as 24 prominent speakers. Budget Committee on the impact of AI on by Dan Ho
During the multiday event, the group engaged in economic recovery and the future of work.
• The Moment of Reckoning: AI and the Future of
critical conversations around the economics of
U.S. Intelligence, by Amy Zegart
AI, international security and cooperation, and National Research Cloud Feedback Session
regulating emerging technologies. • European Regulation on AI, by Marietje Schaake
The co-authors of the National Research Cloud
white paper hosted a feedback session on the • Improving AI Software for Healthcare
Congressional AI Caucus Briefing NRC executive summary for approximately 50 Diagnostics, by David Larson, Curt Langlotz, and
HAI hosted a briefing on various AI policy subjects participants from other universities, government, Daniel Rubin
for members of the Congressional Artificial industry, and civil society organizations.
Intelligence Caucus.
16 17

Education
Programs for Current
and Future Leaders
HAI creates multidisciplinary programs for both
Stanford affiliates and the general public. Our programs
help people pursue cutting-edge research, create
useful and responsible AI, and respond thoughtfully to
the societal and ethical implications of global AI. In AY
2020-21, we held multiple events for each audience.
18 19

Programs for Today’s Leaders Programs for Emerging Leaders
High-impact decision makers need to stay abreast of rapid advancements Future leaders will face immense challenges as AI continues to shape society.
in AI technology and applications so they can advocate for appropriate Our programs for this audience seek to build awareness and community
human-centered development and policies. around key issues.
Harnessing Design Thinking, Ethics, and the The Value of Data and AI: Strategies for
Power of AI for Social Innovation Senior Leadership
Together with the Stanford Social Innovation Review This course for executives, launched in ,
(SSIR), HAI hosted a two-part webinar for executives helps company leaders understand how to leverage
in social innovation nonprofit and civil society their data and gain a competitive advantage.
organizations. Part one focused on Integrating
Design Thinking in AI for Social Innovation, and part
two covered Ethical and Societal Implications of AI.
Stanford AI4ALL Art+Tech Monthly Salon
This summer camp program for high school students Launched for the Stanford community through
from underserved populations provides hands- the Office of the Vice President for the Arts, this
AI+Activism+Art
on learning and a supportive peer community. In program focuses on building connections at the
I came into Stanford as a humanities June-, attendees worked closely with AI intersection of art and technology.
In the spring quarter of 2021, Michele Elam,
practitioners and went deep into new ideas that are
William Robertson Coe Professor of Humanities major and always wondered how
defining the AI landscape. Summer Faculty Speaker Series Highlights
and HAI associate director, introduced a pilot
to connect the arts and computer
class, AI+Activism+Art. This course puts arts and Technology and the 2020 Election Project • AI for Good: The Promise and the Peril,
science. This course reassured me
humanities right at the center of conversations about with Jeremy Weinstein
In Fall 2020 this was offered as a Stanford course, a
the impact of AI on humans and society at large. that I could bridge them and that
Continuing Studies course, a Coursera course, and • Artificial Intelligence in Space Exploration,
Students enrolled from a wide range of fields, there was a lot to be pursued at this a public event, engaging more than 8,000 students with Marco Pavone
across all platforms.
including computer science, art, English, comparative intersection. • Artificial Intelligence, Activism, and Art,
studies in race and ethnicity, African and African
with Michele Elam
American studies, symbolic systems, and science, Isabelle Lee, a rising senior studying
computer science
technology and society. Throughout the quarter,
they examined AI from the perspective of feminist,
gender, and sexuality studies; decolonialism, and
race studies. Michele featured lectures by visiting
artists and technologists, classroom discussion, and
a final project of either a scholarly paper or a creative
interdisciplinary project.
20 21

People Associate Directors
The associate directors of HAI represent the diverse fields and expertise
that help enrich the multidisciplinary approach of the institute.
Passionate people are essential to the work and progress of our organization.
From our leaders and advisors to faculty, fellows, and staff, we all share a
Russ Altman
commitment to the mission of guiding human-centered AI.
Kenneth Fong Professor and Professor of Bioengineering, of Genetics, of Medicine (General
Medical Discipline), of Biomedical Data Science, and, by courtesy, of Computer Science
Denning Co-Directors Despite a sabbatical in 2021, Russ Altman helped lead the HAI Spring
Conference on Intelligence Augmentation: AI Empowering People to Solve
The co-directors of HAI share a vision of artificial intelligence serving the Global Challenges. He was also the faculty director for the AI100 project,
collective needs of humanity. It is this goal that guides the work of HAI. leading the publication of its second report, and contributed to the report on
“Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models.”
John Etchemendy
Susan Athey
Provost, Emeritus, and Patrick Suppes Family Professor in the School of Humanities and Sciences
Economics of Technology Professor, Senior Fellow at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy
In AY 2020-21, John Etchemendy provided leadership across the HAI Research and Professor, by courtesy, of Economics
community, including as a member of the AI Index Steering Committee. He Susan Athey was named president-elect of the American Economic Association
taught “Philosophy of Artificial Intelligence” to undergraduate students and and continued to lead the Golub Capital Social Impact Lab, which deployed an
was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. AI-based recommendation system for an educational technology application,
leading to a 30 percent improvement in user engagement. She taught a
course in which engineers and business students collaborated to use AI and
experimentation in projects for social impact organizations. Susan also testified
Fei-Fei Li for the U.S. House Budget Committee on Artificial Intelligence & the Workforce.
Her papers on artificial intelligence and causal inference were published in
Sequoia Professor, Computer Science Department AIStats, ICML, PNAS, JASA, Econometrica, and the Journal of Econometrics.
Among her many contributions as co-director of HAI, Fei-Fei Li was named
to the National Artificial Intelligence Research Resource Task Force and
Michele Elam
participated in HAI’s most viewed event of the year, Healthcare’s AI Future: A
Conversation with Fei-Fei Li & Andrew Ng. She was elected to the National William Robertson Coe Professor of Humanities, Department of English, Center for
Comparative Studies in Race & Ethnicity, African & African American Studies
Academy of Medicine and to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
Michele Elam helped launch the HAI VPA Office Arts-Tech Salons and served
on the Hoffman-Yee, Junior Fellows, Post-Doc and Education Committees.
Michele was invited to speak at the Critical Borders: Radical (Re)Visions of AI
conference, hosted by the Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence.
In the spring Michele piloted a new interdisciplinary course, “AI+Activism+Art.”
She authored articles related to AI, art, and race in Daedalus: Publication of the
Academy of Arts and Sciences, the American Literature journal, and Feminist AI.
She presented in the HAI Summer Faculty Speaker Series on AI, Activism, and
Art, as well as the capstone event with Ruha Benjamin at the 2021 Tech & Racial
Equity Conference: Anti-Racist Technologies for a Just Future.
22 23

Surya Ganguli
Christopher Manning
Associate Professor of Applied Physics, and, by courtesy, of Neurobiology, of Electrical
Thomas M. Siebel Professor in Machine Learning, Professor of Linguistics and of Computer
Engineering, and of Computer Science
Science; Director, Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (SAIL)
Surya Ganguli was a co-lead of the HAI Fall Conference on Triangulating
Christopher Manning co-organized the HAI Fall Conference on Triangulating
Intelligence: Melding Neuroscience, Psychology, and AI.
Intelligence: Melding Neuroscience, Psychology and AI. He co-authored a paper on
emergent linguistic structure in artificial neural networks trained by self-supervision in
the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
as well as a paper in Computational Linguistics on universal dependencies (for
Daniel E. Ho language). Christopher contributed to a workshop and report on “Opportunities and
Risks of Foundation Models” and released a 2021 update of the widely used, freely
William Benjamin Scott and Luna M. Scott Professor of Law; Professor of Political Science;
available online course CS224N Natural Language Processing with Deep Learning.
Senior Fellow, SIEPR; Faculty Fellow, CASBS; Faculty Director, Stanford RegLab
Daniel E. Ho co-authored “Building a National AI Research Resource: A
Blueprint for the National Research Cloud.” He co-led research on AI to Rob Reich
improve COVID-19 testing and contact tracing with the Santa Clara County
Professor of Political Science, Faculty Director of the McCoy Family Center for Ethics in Society, and the
Public Health Department, published in part in the Proceedings of the
Marc and Laura Andreessen Faculty Co-Director of the Stanford Center on Philanthropy and Civil Society
National Academy of Sciences.
Rob Reich published two important books in AY 2020-21: Digital Technology and
Daniel was appointed to the Administrative Conference of the United States
Democratic Theory, edited with Lucy Bernholz and Hélène Landemore, and System
and was awarded the C arole Hafner Award for Best Paper at the International
Error: Where Big Tech Went Wrong and How We Can Reboot, with Mehran Sahami
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law.
and Jeremy M. Weinstein. He joined the Center for Research on Foundation
Models and contributed to the report and workshop on “Opportunities and Risks of
Foundation Models.” In addition to these accomplishments, Rob continued to guide
James Landay development of the Embedded EthiCS initiative.
Anand Rajaraman and Venky Harinarayan Professor in the School of Engineering, Professor of
Computer Science
Staff
James Landay continued to lead the Hoffman-Yee and Seed grant process
for HAI, from calls for proposals through reviews and decisions. James was
The staff of HAI serves to further the mission
also the co-lead of the HAI Spring Conference on Intelligence Augmentation:
of the institute, working closely with faculty to
AI Empowering People to Solve Global Challenges, and served on the Junior
design and implement programs and initiatives
Fellows, Post-Doc and Education Committees.
with global impact.
Krysten Hommel Vanessa Parli
Curtis P. Langlotz
Senior Associate Director, Interim Director of Research
Michael Sellitto, Deputy Director
Strategic Initiatives
Professor of Radiology and Biomedical Informatics; Director, Center for Artificial Intelligence in Stacy Peña
Medicine & Imaging Amita Kumar Director of Communications Michael Sellitto led the institute through a substantial
Interim Associate Director Curtis P. Langlotz chaired the HAI Steering Committee Director of Administration and John Robichaux growth phase, more than doubling its size during the
Operations pandemic and significantly expanding its internal
on Healthcare Policy and helped to establish and lead the Medical Imaging Director of Education
Panos Madamopoulos- and external reach. He is also a co-author of the
and Data Resource Center, a national repository to support the development
Russell Wald
Moraris
annual AI Index report and co-chairs an experts
of machine learning methods for the diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19. He
Director of Policy
Managing Director of Industry
working group on national AI policy implementation
authored a white paper proposing regulatory frameworks for the development
Programs and Partnerships
at the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
and evaluation of AI in medical imaging, and he also collaborated on the first
Development (OECD).
multi-institutional prospective clinical trial of a radiology AI algorithm.
24 25

Faculty and Fellows Junior Fellows Program
The HAI Junior Fellows Program is a prestigious program for exceptionally qualified
HAI aims to appoint and support promising researchers working at
early-career scholars to conduct innovative AI research as assistant professors in a
intersections often overlooked by traditional academic departments,
unique, supportive, and interdisciplinary environment with unparalleled opportunities for
as well as outstanding researchers pursuing core disciplinary topics.
impact in research, policy, and education. In AY 2020-21, our first Junior Fellow appointee
In addition to our fellows, we have more than 250 affiliated Stanford
Johannes Eichstaedt was joined by our second Junior Fellow, Hariharan Subramonyam.
faculty from across all seven schools and more than 90 departments.
Hariharan Subramonyam,
Featured Fellows
HAI Junior Faculty Fellow
Sarah Bana, Stanford Digital Economy Lab Hari Subramonyam is jointly appointed as the Ram and Vijay Shriram HAI Junior
Faculty Fellow, and an assistant professor (research) in the Graduate School of
Postdoctoral Fellow
Education. He is also a member of the Human-Computer Interaction Group
Sarah Bana is passionate about the opportunities that unstructured data at Stanford. Hari’s research focuses on augmenting critical human tasks (such
create to answer questions about the future of work. Her main projects use as learning, creativity, and sensemaking) with AI by incorporating principles from
online job postings and syllabi to characterize valuable tasks and skills. These cognitive psychology. He also investigates support tools for multidisciplinary
insights serve to provide improved strategic advice for firms and workers, teams to co-design human-centered AI experiences.
along with improved policy prescriptions for governments.
Jennifer King, HAI Privacy and Data Policy Fellow
An information scientist by training, Jennifer King is a recognized expert and
scholar in information privacy. Sitting at the intersection of human-computer
VPA-HAI Visiting Artist
interaction, law, and the social sciences, her research examines the public’s
understanding and expectations of online privacy as well as the policy Rashaad Newsome
implications of emerging technologies. In AY 2020-21, she contributed to the
HAI-sponsored National Research Cloud report, as well as three major areas
Rashaad Newsome’s work blends collage, sculpture, film, photography,
of research: AI/algorithmic regulation, dark patterns, and data governance.
music, computer programming, software engineering, community organizing,
and performance to create a new field that celebrates Black contributions to
the art canon and creates inclusive forms of culture and media.
Working with Stanford students, he has created a text-generating machine
learning model that allows the new generation of his primary work, Being:
The Digital Griot, to develop their own poetry. The model was trained on
the work of Oakland-based Black Queer poet Dazié Grego-Sykes, as well as
bell hooks and Audre Lorde.
In addition, Rashaad surveyed members of the Black community at Stanford
to discover what culturally specific sounds they find soothing. Using the
material from this survey, he worked with composer Robert Aiki Aubrey
Lowe to create a Black ASMR soundscape.
26 27

Events
Fellows Corporate
The strength of the HAI Corporate Program lies in the breadth
HAI Fellowship Programs are designed to support Events are an integral part of the HAI mission. Members Program
of opportunity to engage with a wide range of faculty and
researchers in exploring topics related to AI
HAI hosted weekly seminars and several departments. Our partnership helps to inform the strategic
technologies. In the 2020–21 academic year, HAI conferences in AY 2020-21, all designed to HAI recognizes that industry is at the forefront of direction across IBM’s portfolio of fundamental research. The
sponsored 16 fellows, including several fellowships expansion of the program’s ‘wallet’ feature, along with the
bring our community together in new ways that AI, and we are committed to working closely with
white-glove treatment shown by the HAI team, will allow us
offered in partnership with other Stanford centers,
lead to insight and action: business leaders seeking to harness the opportunities to increase research collaborations and generate even more
including the following:
posed by AI while understanding and mitigating its measurable value.
• Center for Comparative Studies in Race & risks. To help establish these bridges, HAI published Jeffrey J. Welser, COO IBM Research,
VP Exploratory Science & University Collaboration
Ethnicity (CCSRE) Coded Bias Screening and Panel industry briefs on healthcare and life sciences, the
Discussion, co-sponsored by Stanford Arts future of work post-COVID, and financial services.
• Center for International Security and
HAI also launched the next phase of the Founding
Cooperation (CISAC)
 Members Program for industry stakeholders. It The HAI Founding Members Program allows for customizable,
• McCoy Family Center for Ethics in Society (EIS) HAI Fall Conference on Triangulating now includes a research fund that can be allocated project-based collaborations that engage participating Googlers
with new topics, methods, and people in the domain of human-
Intelligence: Melding Neuroscience, according to members’ priorities, new pathways
• Graduate School of Business (GSB) centered AI. We look forward to expanding on these initiatives
Psychology, and AI of engaging with and recruiting students, and new
—Google recognizes that HAI’s interdisciplinary perspective is
• John S. Knight Journalism Fellowships (JSK)
partnerships with the Stanford Digital Economy Lab key to shaping an inclusive AI future.
 and the Stanford AI Lab. HAI founding members
Jeff Dean, Google Senior Fellow and SVP of
2020–21 HAI Fellows HAI Spring Conference on Intelligence have been using the program’s new structure to seed, Google Research
Augmentation: AI Powering People to Solve support, and collaborate on research projects across
Elizabeth Adams, HAI-CCSRE Practitioner Fellow
Global Challenges Stanford, as well as to curate tailored professional
Renata Avila, HAI-CCSRE Practitioner Fellow education programs for their companies.
The HAI Corporate Program facilitates an effective engagement

among Stanford University, the larger industry trends, and a
Sarah Bana, S-DEL Postdoctoral Fellow In addition to these efforts, HAI launched a
Healthcare’s AI Future: A Conversation with broad cross-section of our leadership and employees across the
Corporate Affiliate Program for companies
Kathleen Creel, Embedded EthiCS Fellow Fei-Fei Li & Andrew Ng, HAI’s most viewed world. The innovative program structure has helped us engage
interested in AI research, policy, and practice with some interesting challenges specific to the financial services
event of the academic year
Jeffrey Ding, HAI-CISAC Predoctoral Fellow to interact with HAI. The inaugural focus of this industry and bring new ways of thinking about the future.
Samir Doshi, HAI-CCSRE Practitioner Fellow program is on AI and financial services. Chintan Mehta, CIO, Head of Digital Technology

and Innovation, Wells Fargo
Jazmia Henry, HAI-CCSRE Practitioner Fellow 2021 Tech & Racial Equity Conference:
Anti-Racist Technologies for a Just Future,
Todd Karhu, HAI-EIS Postdoctoral Fellow
co-sponsored with the Stanford Center for
Geoff Keeling, HAI-EIS Postdoctoral Fellow Comparative Studies in Race & Ethnicity
(CCSRE), Digital Civil Society Lab (DCSL) at
Jennifer King, HAI Privacy and Data Policy Fellow
the Stanford Center on Philanthropy and Civil
Jae Joon Lee, S-DEL Postdoctoral Fellow
Society, and the Stanford Program in African &
J. Frank Li, S-DEL Postdoctoral Fellow African American Studies, with support from the
Public Interest Technology University Network
Hong Qu, HAI-CCSRE Practitioner Fellow
Marietje Schaake, HAI International Policy Fellow
8 27
Michelle Spektor, HAI-CISAC Predoctoral Fellow
Xiupeng Wang, S-DEL Postdoctoral Fellow workshops weekly seminars
Stanford University
HAI offers corporate members access to Stanford researchers on the leading edge of AI, spanning multiple disciplines.
28 29

Research Centers and Partners Open Virtual Assistant Lab (OVAL) Content
OVAL is creating an ecosystem founded on open
Close collaboration with labs, centers, and institutes across and beyond the virtual assistant technology that (1) democratizes On the HAI Blog, we highlight cutting-
AI for linguistic user interfaces, (2) creates an open edge Stanford AI research, faculty thought
Stanford campus helps HAI achieve progress toward our mission.
and non-proprietary web, and (3) promotes sharing leadership, and key insights from HAI scholars.
with individual data ownership. In AY 2020-21, we posted 113 blog articles and
HAI Centers and Labs
60 videos, featuring 160 scholars, and reached
AI100 Center for the Study of Language Regulation, Evaluation, and more than 74,000 social media accounts
The One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence, and Information (CSLI) Governance Lab (RegLab) across Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, and
Instagram. Our news and blog articles brought
or AI100, is a 100-year effort to study and anticipate how CSLI serves Stanford faculty and students who Stanford’s RegLab partners with government
in more than 360,000 views to the website,
the effects of artificial intelligence will ripple through are engaged in research involving computational, agencies to design and evaluate programs, policies,
representing a third of all HAI website traffic.
every aspect of how people work, live and play. logical, and stochastic modeling of cognitive and technologies that modernize governance.
functions and processes.
Advisory Council
AI Index Stanford Artificial Intelligence
The AI Index is an effort to track, collate, distill and Data Analytics for What’s Next (DAWN) Laboratory (SAIL)
The HAI Advisory Council consists of leaders in
visualize data relating to artificial intelligence. It Despite incredible recent advances in machine SAIL has been a center of excellence for artificial
science, civil society, and business who provide
aspires to be a comprehensive resource of data and learning, building machine learning applications intelligence research, teaching, theory, and practice
HAI with expert advice on issues relevant to the
analysis for policymakers, researchers, executives, remains prohibitively time-consuming and expensive since its founding in 1962.
institute’s mission and programs. Reid Hoffman
journalists and the general public to develop for all but the best-trained, best-funded engineering
serves as chair of the council, along with vice
intuitions about the complex field of AI. organizations. DAWN is a five-year research project
Stanford Partners chairs Steve Denning and Srinija Srinivasan.
to democratize AI by making it dramatically easier to
Center for AI Safety build AI-powered applications. Black in AI Innovation and Research (BlackAIR)
Support for HAI
The mission of the Stanford Center for AI Safety is Center for AI in Medicine & Imaging
Digital Economy Lab (S-DEL)
to develop rigorous techniques for building safe and
Center for Comparative Studies in Race and Ethnicity Stanford HAI gratefully recognizes the
trustworthy AI systems and establishing confidence The Digital Economy Lab at the Stanford Institute
generosity of those who provide support and
in their behavior and robustness, thereby facilitating for Human-Centered AI is an interdisciplinary Center for Ethics in Society
made our work possible. Contributions made
their successful adoption in society. research group studying how digital technologies Center for International Security and Cooperation
prior to August 31, 2021 are listed on the HAI
are transforming work, organizations, and the
Cyber Policy Center website and will be updated annually, per our
Center for Research on Foundation economy. An engine for research and education,
fundraising policy.
Models (CRFM) the lab brings together an unprecedented group Digital Civil Society Lab
of stakeholders to analyze data, run experiments,
The Center for Research on Foundation Models is Hoover Institution
develop theories, and provide actionable insights.
an interdisciplinary initiative born out of Stanford
Institute for Diversity in the Arts
HAI that aims to make fundamental advances in the
Golub Capital Social Impact Lab John S. Knight Journalism Fellowships
study, development, and deployment of foundation
models for AI. The Golub Capital Social Impact Lab uses digital Office of the Vice President for the Arts
technology and social science research to
Stanford Aging and Ethnogeriatrics (SAGE)
improve the effectiveness of leading social sector
Research Center
organizations. Based out of Stanford GSB, the lab
is a research initiative of affiliated academics and Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research
staff, as well as researchers and students, who are
External Partners
passionate about conducting research that guides
and improves the process of innovation.
AI4All
30 31

Financials Expenditures
Operations
11%
$2,209,988
Sources of Income1 HAI Research Support
Predocs, postdocs, fellows
5%
$944,756
$2,684,144
Gifts and other income Seed Grants
83%
$24,660,369
Faculty
$2,973,974
Hoffman-Yee Grants 13%
$2,476,873
Endowment payouts
6%
$1,805,061 Total $5,658,118
Research programs
34%
$6,735,710
Sponsored research
4%
$1,242,709
Partnerships, communications,
From 2018-2020, HAI issued
and engagement
Cloud Credits (in kind) $8.5m 9%
$1,862,891
7%
$2,000,000
in cash grants. Educational programs
2%
$338,185
Total $29,708,140 Cumulatively to date, these projects
have subsequently attracted
Policy programs and
research dissemination
$6.2m
1 Income does not include increases in endowment principal 2%
$494,801
in external funding.
Workshops and events
0.2%
$59,398
Other research and faculty support
13%
$2,529,916
Support to Stanford partner centers
0.8%
$175,195
Capital reserve for building renovations
10%
$2,000,000
Total $19,827,717
32 33

Thank You Visit us
hai.stanford.edu
Thank you for taking the time to learn about our ongoing work
Reach out
across the AI landscape. We appreciate your support and
hai-institute@stanford.edu
encourage you to contact us with any questions.
Subscribe to our
353 Jane Stanford Way
newsletter
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
Follow us