A REPORT OF
THE CSIS
AEROSPACE
SECURITY
PROJECT
S P A C E
T H R E A T
A S S E S S M E N T
2 0 2 0
Principal Authors
TODD HARRISON
KAITLYN JOHNSON
THOMAS G. ROBERTS
TYLER WAY
MAKENA YOUNG
Foreword
MARTIN C. FAGA

S P A C E
T H R E A T
A S S E S S M E N T
2 0 2 0
Authors
TODD HARRISON
KAITLYN JOHNSON
THOMAS G. ROBERTS
TYLER WAY
MAKENA YOUNG
Foreword
MARTIN C. FAGA
A REPORT OF THE
CSIS AEROSPACE SECURITY PROJECT

ABOUT CSIS
For over 50 years, the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS)
has worked to develop solutions to the world’s greatest policy challenges.
Today, CSIS scholars are providing strategic insights and bipartisan policy
solutions to help decisionmakers chart a course toward a better world.
CSIS is a nonprofit organization headquartered in Washington, D.C. The
Center’s 220 full-time staff and large network of affiliated scholars conduct
research and analysis and develop policy initiatives that look into the
future and anticipate change.
Founded at the height of the Cold War by David M. Abshire and Admiral
Arleigh Burke, CSIS was dedicated to finding ways to sustain American
prominence and prosperity as a force for good in the world. Since 1962,
CSIS has become one of the world’s preeminent international institutions
focused on defense and security; regional stability; and transnational
challenges ranging from energy and climate to global health and econom-
ic integration.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in
. Former U.S. deputy secretary of defense John J. Hamre
has served as the Center’s president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views ex-
pressed herein should be understood to be solely those of the author(s).
ABOUT ASP
The Aerospace Security Project (ASP) at CSIS explores the technological,
budgetary, and policy issues related to the air and space domains and
innovative operational concepts for air and space forces. Part of the Inter-
national Security Program at CSIS, the Aerospace Security Project is led by
Senior Fellow Todd Harrison. ASP’s research focuses on space security, air
dominance, long-range strike, and civil and commercial space. Learn more
at aerospace.csis.org.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report is made possible by general support to CSIS. No direct spon-
sorship contributed to this report. The authors would like to thank Martin
C. Faga, Brian Weeden, Victoria Samson, Emily Tiemeyer, Jeeah Lee, and
Jacque Schrag for their support of this project.
© 2020 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights
reserved.
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
202-887-0200 | 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020
II

CONTENTS
IV FOREWORD
1 INTRODUCTION
2 TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
3 Kinetic Physical
3 Non-Kinetic Physical
4 Electronic
4 Cyber
5 Threat Characteristics
8 CHINA
10 Space Organization and Doctrine
11 Counterspace Weapons
18 Summary
19 RUSSIA
20 Space Organization and Doctrine
21 Counterspace Weapons
28 Summary
29 IRAN
31 Space Organization and Doctrine
31 Counterspace Weapons
34 Summary
35 NORTH KOREA
37 Space Organization and Doctrine
38 Counterspace Weapons
40 Summary
41 INDIA
43 Space Organization and Doctrine
45 Counterspace Weapons
46 Summary
47 OTHERS
47 France
50 Israel
51 Japan
52 United Kingdom
52 Non-State Actors
53 Summary
54 WHAT TO WATCH
56 ABOUT THE AUTHORS
57 APPENDIX I
59 ENDNOTES
III

FOREWORD
MUCH IS SAID THESE DAYS about the possibility of conflict in
space during, before, or perhaps, instead of conflict on land, at
sea, or in the air. Why is this the case?
The subject is discussed as though it emerged in the last 13
years since the Chinese demonstration of a kinetic ASAT in 2007. In fact, the
United States was concerned in 1957 that Sputnik represented a precursor
to space-based nuclear weapons. An ASAT program started in the United
States in 1958, and the Soviets did similarly. Both superpowers deployed
several ASAT systems and performed orbital tests.
Nonetheless, fear on both sides of a serious threat of conflict in space did
not emerge until recently. Both the Soviets and the United States under-
stood that the satellites of “National Technical Means” were stabilizing and
were keys to de-escalation should a conflict occur. This view changed after
the First Gulf War, when space systems moved from being primarily stra-
tegic systems to tactical ones providing near real-time support to tactical
forces. By that time, the satellites of the Department of Defense and of the
Intelligence Community operated and reported almost instantly, and the
military services developed the equipment and techniques to acquire, ana-
lyze, and distribute space system information very quickly.
Following the First Gulf War, a Russian analysis of the rapid American suc-
cess noted the efficacy of precision weapons and real-time intelligence.
Much of this capability depended on space systems and spurred the Rus-
sians and Chinese to a sustained program to develop ASAT capabilities--not
only those for physical attack but cyber and electronic attacks as well. In
recent years, we have read Russian and Chinese doctrine explaining the im-
portance of ASAT capabilities, and we have seen systems deployed to carry
them out.
The situation we confront today was inevitable. Capability is always met
with counter-capability. In recognition of this need to defend and to in-
crease our space power in the face of such threats, the United States has
wisely created the Space Force and the U.S. Space Command. This is where
the people who will design, build, and operate our military space systems
reside and where personnel will be trained, careers managed, doctrine de-
veloped, and a myriad other elements of a military force undertaken.
Several years ago, an Army general gave a speech where he said, “every
company commander depends on space, and takes it for granted.” What a
challenge for our Space Force and Space Command to assure that our mili-
tary is served at every level of command without failing.
MARTIN C. FAGA
Former Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Space and Director of
the National Reconnaissance Office
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020
IV

INTRODUCTION
THE PAST YEAR WAS A TRANSFORMATIONAL ONE for space pol-
icy in several respects. On December 20, 2019, President Trump
signed into law the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
Year 2020, creating the Space Force and ushering in what is ar-
guably the most significant reorganization of the U.S. military since the
Goldwater Nichols Act of 1986. While the newly created Space Force is re-
sponsible for organizing, training, and equipping space forces for the U.S.
military, the newly re-established United States Space Command is the
geographic combatant command responsible for space operations.
France also made significant organizational changes in 2019 with the is-
suance of its Space Defense Strategy. It calls for the creation of a Space
Command within the Air Force and the renaming of the Air Force to the Air
and Space Force. The French defense minister publicly stated that France
would develop space control capabilities and active defenses, such as
small bodyguard satellites and space-based laser defenses to protect im-
portant space assets.
Other countries continue to develop and test counterspace capabilities and
conduct suspicious or threatening activities in space. India became the fourth
country to successfully test a direct-ascent anti-satellite (ASAT) missile, as
well as the only country to conduct a debris-producing test since 2008. Rus-
sia continued its co-orbital activities in geostationary orbit (GEO) and caught
the attention of many in the space community with its proximity operations
around a classified U.S. government satellite in low Earth orbit (LEO).
In commercial space, both SpaceX and OneWeb began deployment of mega
constellations in LEO to deliver high-speed internet access globally. OneWeb
launched its first set of six satellites in , and SpaceX launched
its first batch of 60 satellites in . Both companies have conducted
additional launches since then, with SpaceX beginning to deploy at a steady
pace in early 2020. As of February 17, 2020, SpaceX has launched a total of
302 Starlink satellites, 297 of which are operational. In comparison, the total
number of operational satellites in LEO was roughly 1,500 in 2019—a number
that could double by the end of 2020. These commercial developments pres-
ent both opportunities and challenges in what is already a diverse, disruptive,
disordered, and dangerous space environment.
The purpose of this annual report from the CSIS Aerospace Security Project
is to aggregate and analyze publicly available information on the counter-
space capabilities of other nations. It is intended to raise awareness and un-
derstanding of the threats, debunk myths and misinformation, and highlight
areas in which senior leaders and policymakers should focus more attention.
While the report focuses on the capabilities of China, Russia, Iran, North Ko-
rea, and India, this year’s report places relatively more emphasis than previ-
ous years on the counterspace capabilities of select other countries, includ-
ing some allies and partners of the United States.
This report is not a comprehensive assessment of all foreign counterspace
capabilities because much of the information on what other countries are
doing is not publicly available. The information in this report is current as of
February 22, 2020.

COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
TYPES OF
COUNTERSPACE
WEAPONS
SPACE IS AN INCREASINGLY IMPORTANT ENABLER of economic
and military power. The United States National
Security Strategy prioritizes maintaining U.S. leadership and free-
dom of action in this critical domain, but it notes that:
Many countries are purchasing satellites to support their own strategic
military activities. Others believe that the ability to attack space assets
offers an asymmetric advantage and as a result, are pursuing a range of
anti-satellite (ASAT) weapons. The United States considers unfettered ac-
cess to and freedom to operate in space to be a vital interest. Any harmful
interference with or an attack upon critical components of our space ar-
chitecture that directly affects this vital U.S. interest will be met with a de-
liberate response at a time, place, manner, and domain of our choosing.1
Illustration A ballistic
missile can be used Counterspace weapons vary in the types of effects they create, and the level
as a kinetic phys- of technological sophistication and resources required to develop and field
ical counterspace them. They also differ in how they are employed and how difficult they are
weapon. to detect and attribute. The effects of these weapons can be temporary or
permanent, depending on the type of system and how it is used. The coun-
try-by-country assessments that follow this section group counterspace
weapons into four broad categories: kinetic physical, non-kinetic physical,
electronic, and cyber.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

both cases, the attacker is likely to know
KINETIC PHYSICAL
whether its attack is successful almost
immediately because the effects would
KINETIC PHYSICAL COUNTERSPACE be publicly visible through orbital debris
weapons attempt to strike directly or or a damaged ground station.
detonate a warhead near a satellite or
ground station. A direct-ascent ASAT
weapon attempts to strike a satellite us-
NON-KINETIC PHYSICAL
ing a trajectory that intersects the target
satellite without placing the interceptor
NON-KINETIC COUNTERSPACE weap-
into orbit. Ballistic missiles and missile
ons, such as lasers, high-powered micro-
defense interceptors can be modified to
wave (HPM) weapons, and electromag-
act as direct-ascent ASAT weapons pro-
netic pulse (EMP) weapons, can have
vided they have sufficient energy to reach
physical effects on satellites and ground
the target satellite’s orbit. A co-orbital
stations without making physical con-
ASAT weapon differs from a direct-ascent
tact. These attacks operate at the speed
weapon because it is first placed into or-
of light and, in some cases, can be less
bit. When commanded, the satellite then
visible to third-party observers and more
maneuvers to strike its target. Co-orbital
difficult to attribute.
ASATs can remain dormant in orbit for
days or even years before being activated. High-powered lasers can be used to dam-
A key technology needed to make both di- age or degrade sensitive satellite com-
rect-ascent and co-orbital ASAT weapons ponents, such as solar arrays. Lasers can
effective is the ability to detect, track, and also be used to temporarily dazzle or per-
guide the interceptor into a target satel- manently blind mission-critical sensors
lite. An onboard guidance system requires on satellites. Targeting a satellite from
a relatively high level of technological so- Earth with a laser requires high beam
phistication and significant resources to quality, adaptive optics, and advanced
test and deploy.2 pointing control to steer the laser beam
as it is transmitted through the atmos-
Ground stations are vulnerable to kinetic
phere—technology that is costly and re-
physical attacks by a variety of conven-
quires a high degree of sophistication.3 A
tional military weapons, from guided mis-
laser can be effective against a sensor on
siles and rockets at longer ranges to small
a satellite if it is within the field of view of
arms fire at shorter ranges. Because they
the sensor, making it possible to attribute
are often highly visible, located outside of
the attack to its approximate geograph-
the United States, and are more accessi-
ical origin. The attacker, however, will
ble than objects in space, ground stations
have limited ability to know if the attack
can be an easier target for adversaries
was successful because it would not likely
seeking to disrupt or degrade space sys-
produce debris or other visible indicators.
tems. Even if the ground stations them-
selves are difficult to attack directly, they An HPM weapon can be used to disrupt
can be disrupted indirectly by attacking a satellite’s electronics, corrupt data
the electrical power grid, water supply, stored in memory, cause proces-
and the high-capacity communications sors to restart, and, at higher
lines that support them.
Kinetic physical attacks generally have
irreversible effects on the satellites and
ground stations targeted. These counter-
space weapons are likely to be attributa-
ble because the United States and others
can identify the source of a direct-ascent
ASAT launch or ground attack and can,
Illustration A laser is an
in theory, trace a co-orbital ASAT’s orbit- example of a non-kinetic
al data back to its initial deployment. In counterspace weapon.

COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
power levels, cause permanent damage range of angles on the ground.6
to electrical circuits and processors. A
The technology needed to jam many
front-door HPM attack uses a satellite’s
types of satellite signals is commercial-
own antennas as an entry path, while
ly available and relatively inexpensive.
a backdoor HPM attack attempts to en-
Jamming is a reversible form of attack
ter through small seams or gaps around
because once a jammer is turned off,
electrical connections and shielding.4
communications return to normal. Jam-
Because electromagnetic waves disperse
ming can also be difficult to detect or
and weaken over distance and the atmos- distinguish from accidental interference,
phere can interfere with transmission at making attribution and awareness more
high power levels, an HPM attack against difficult. In 2015, General John Hyten,
a satellite is best carried out from anoth- then-commander of Air Force Space Com-
er satellite in a similar orbit. Both front- mand, noted that the U.S. military was
door and back-door HPM attacks can be unintentionally jamming its own commu-
difficult to attribute to an attacker, and as nications satellites an average of 23 times
with a laser weapon, the attacker may not per month.7
know if the attack has been successful.
Spoofing is a form of electronic attack
The use of a nuclear weapon in space can where the attacker tricks a receiver into
be an indiscriminate form of non-kinetic believing a fake signal, produced by the
physical attack. While a nuclear detona- attacker, is the real signal it is trying to re-
tion would have immediate effects for ceive. Spoofing the downlink from a satel-
satellites within range of its EMP, it also lite can be used to inject false or corrupted
creates a high radiation environment that data into an adversary’s communications
accelerates the degradation of satellite systems. If an attacker successfully spoofs
components over the long term for un- the command and control uplink signal to
shielded satellites in the affected orbital a satellite, it could take control of the sat-
regime.5 ellite for nefarious purposes.
Through a type of spoofing called “mea-
coning,” even the encrypted military GPS
ELECTRONIC signals can be spoofed. Meaconing does
not require cracking the GPS encryption
because it merely rebroadcasts a time-de-
ELECTRONIC ATTACKS TARGET the
layed copy of the original signal without
means through which space systems
decrypting it or altering the data.8 Like
transmit and receive data by jamming
jammers, once a spoofer is developed, it
or spoofing radio frequency (RF) signals.
is relatively inexpensive to produce and
Jamming is a form of electronic attack
deploy in large numbers and can be pro-
that interferes with RF communications
liferated to other state and non-state ac-
by generating noise in the same frequen-
tors.
cy band and within the field of view of
the antenna on the targeted satellite or
receiver. An uplink jammer interferes with
CYBER
the signal going from the Earth to a sat-
ellite, such as the command and control
uplink. Downlink jammers target the sig- UNLIKE ELECTRONIC ATTACKS, which
nal from a satellite as it propagates down interfere with the transmission of RF sig-
to users on the Earth. User terminals with nals, cyberattacks target the data itself
omnidirectional antennas, such as many and the systems that use this data. The
Illustration A truck-mounted GPS receivers and satellite phones, have antennas on satellites and ground sta-
jammer is a type of electronic a wider field of view and thus are suscep- tions, the landlines that connect ground
counterspace weapon. tible to downlink jamming from a wider stations to terrestrial networks, and the
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

user terminals that connect to satellites Counterspace weapons that are reversi-
are all potential intrusion points for cy- ble, difficult to attribute, and have limited
berattacks. Cyberattacks can be used to public awareness are ideally suited for sit-
monitor data traffic patterns (i.e., which uations in which an opponent may want
users are communicating), to monitor the to signal resolve, create uncertainty in the
data itself, or to insert false or corrupted mind of its opponent, or achieve a fait ac-
data in the system. While cyberattacks compli without triggering an escalatory
require a high degree of understanding of response. For example, an adversary that
the systems being targeted, they do not wants to deter the United States from in-
necessarily require significant resources tervening in a situation may believe that
Illustration to conduct. Cyberattacks can be contract- such attacks will stay below the threshold
Cyberattacks can be ed out to private groups or individuals, for escalation (i.e., not trigger the very
used to take control which means that a state or non-state ac- thing it is trying to prevent) while creating
of a satellite and tor that lacks internal cyber capabilities significant operational challenges for the
damage or destroy it. may still pose a cyber threat.9 United States that make the prospect of
intervention more costly and protracted.
A cyberattack on space systems can re-
Conversely, counterspace weapons that
sult in data loss, widespread disruptions,
have limited battle damage assessment
and even permanent loss of a satellite.
or that risk collateral damage may be less
For example, if an adversary can seize
useful to adversaries in many situations.
control of a satellite through a cyberat-
Without reliable battle damage assess-
tack on its command and control sys-
ment, for example, an adversary cannot
tem, the attack could shut down all com-
plan operations with the confidence that
munications and permanently damage
its counterspace actions have been suc-
the satellite by expending its propellant
cessful. Furthermore, weapons that pro-
supply or damaging its electronics and
duce collateral damage in space, such as
sensors. Accurate and timely attribution
large amounts of space debris, run the
of a cyberattack can be difficult, if not
risk of escalating a conflict and turning
impossible, because attackers can use a
other nations against the attacker.
variety of methods to conceal their iden-
tity, such as using hijacked servers to
launch an attack.
THREAT
CHARACTERISTICS
The types of counterspace threats de-
scribed above have distinctly different
characteristics that make them more
suitable for use in some scenarios than
others. As shown in Table 1, some types
of counterspace threats are difficult to
attribute or have fully reversible effects,
such as mobile jammers. High-powered
lasers, for example, are “silent” and can
carry out an attack with little public
awareness that anything has happened.
Other types of counterspace weapons
produce effects that make it difficult for
the attacker to know if the attack was
successful, and some produce collateral
damage that can affect space systems
other than the one being targeted.

Kinetic Physical Non-Kinetic Physical
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

kcattA
fo
sepyT
High Altitude High-
Ground Direct-Ascent High- Laser Dazzling
Co-Orbital ASAT Nuclear Powered
Station Attack ASAT Powered Laser or Blinding
Detonation Microwave
noitubirttA Variable Can be Clear attribution
attribution, Launch site can attributed by Launch site can Limited of the laser’s Limited
depending on be attributed tracking previous- be attributed attribution location at the attribution
mode of attack ly known oribt time of attack
ytilibisreveR Reversible or Reversible or
Irreversible or re- irreversible; irreversible;
Irreversible Irreversible versible depend- Irreversible Irreversible attacker may or attacker may or
ing on capabilities may not be able may not be able
to control to control
ssenerawA May or May or
Publicly known Only satellite Only satellite Only satellite
may not be may not be
depending on Publicly known operator will be operator will be operator will be
publicly publicly
trajectory aware aware aware
known known
egamaD
rekcattA
tnemssessA Limited Limited
Near real-time Near real-time Near real-time Near real-time confirmation of confirmation of
No confirmation
confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of success if satellite success if satellite
of success
success success success success begins to drift begins to drift
uncontrolled uncontrolled
egamaD
laretalloC
Table 1
TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
Station may
Orbital debris Higher radiation Could leave Could leave target
control multi- May or may not
could affect levels in orbit target satellite satellite disabled
ple satellites; produce orbital None
other satellites in would persist for disabled and and uncontrol-
potential for loss debris
similar orbits months or years uncontrollable lable
of life

Electronic Cyber

kcattA
fo
sepyT
Uplink Downlink Data Interccept Data Seizure
Spoofing
Jamming Jamming or Monitoring Corruption of Control
noitubirttA
Modest attribution Modest attribution Modest attribution Limited or Limited or Limited or
depending on mode depending on mode depending on mode uncertain uncertain uncertain
of attack of attack of attack attribution attribution attribution
ytilibisreveR
Irreversible or
Reversible Reversible Reversible Reversible Reversible reversible, depending
on mode of attack
ssenerawA Satellite operator Satellite operator Satellite operator Satellite operator
May or may not be May or may not be
will be aware; may will be aware; may will be aware; may will be aware; may
known to the known to the
or may not be or may not be known or may not be known or may not be known
public public
known to the public to the public to the public to the public
egamaD
rekcattA
tnemssessA
Limited
confirmation of Limited
Near-real time Near-real time Near-real time
No confirmation success if monitoring confirmation of
confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of
of success of the local RF success if effects
success success success
environment is are visible
possible
egamaD
laretalloC
Only dirupts the Only disrupts the
Only corrupts the Could leave target
signals targeted and signals targeted and
specific RF signals None None satellite disabled
possible adjacent possible adjacent
targeted and uncontrollable
frequencies frequencies

CHINA
Number of Successful
Orbital Launches in 201910

CHINA
“No force will stop IN THE PAST DECADE, China has been barreling toward its lofty space
goals. In the 2010s alone, China conducted over 200 successful orbital
or shake China or its
launches.12 China’s civil, military, and commercial capabilities are rapid-
people from achieving
ly growing, and its 2020 plans show that the country aims to launch over
its goals”
60 satellites into orbit via 40 launches over the coming year.13
PRESIDENT XI JINPING, 201911 China’s civil space program is focused on its network of BeiDou position-
ing, navigation, and timing (PNT) satellites, similar to the U.S. Global Posi-
tioning System (GPS). China plans on launching two BeiDou satellites into
geostationary orbit (GEO) in 2020 as well as further developing its Gaofen
remote sensing satellite constellation. Since early 2019, Chang’e-4, the Chi-
nese lunar lander mission that delivered a successful lunar rover called
Yutu-2, has been conducting an exploration mission on the far side of the
Moon. China plans to follow up this mission in late 2020 with Chang’e-5, a
mission that aims to return samples from the Moon back to Earth for further
study. To support its growing space capabilities, China has “built an expan-
sive ground support infrastructure to support its growing on-orbit fleet and
related functions including spacecraft and space launch vehicle (SLV) man-
ufacture, launch, C2 [command and control], and data downlink.”14
China also intends to send a mission to Mars with an orbiter and probe.
This mission will include 13 science payloads and is on track for a 
launch.15 Three different launch vehicles are also scheduled to make their first
flight in 2020: the Long March-5B, the Long March-7A, and the Long March-8.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

The Long March-5B will be China’s heavy-
lift workhorse, supporting future explora- JIUQUAN SATELLITE LAUNCH CENTER
Active
tion missions as well as the planned Chi-
nese Space Station (CSS).16 The first test Inactive
launch of the -5B will likely take place in Orbital Human TAIYUAN SATELLITE LAUNCH CENTER
. If successful, it will be used to Launch
launch the first section of the modular CSS.
Cumulative Launches
The Long March-8 is planned to be China’s
first rocket with a reusable first stage and is 136

planned to support China’s growing com- 4 WENCHANG SATELLITE
mercial space sector.17 Furthermore, “Chi- LAUNCH CENTER
na aspires for a 2036 first human mission
XICHANG SPACE CENTER
to the moon.”18
China is continuing to move forward
with a new modular space station. China
has successfully operated two previous
space labs in LEO, Tiangong 1 and Tian-
gong 2, through its Project 921 program, Figure 1: Chinese National Spaceports. China currently has four active spaceports, which
which began in 1992.20 The new space have collectively launched hundreds of satellites and several taikonauts, or Chinese astronauts.
station will consist of three modules.
space-track.org / csis aerospace security28
The core module of the CSS passed final
review but is facing possible launch de-
lays. Currently, it is expected to launch in SUCCESSFUL ORBITAL LAUNCHES PER YEAR BY COUNTRY (1957-2019)
2020, while the two additional modules 120
CHINA
are planned for launch between 2022 INDIA
and 2024.21 Three or four manned mis- 100 USA
RUSSIA
sions and several cargo missions are also
OTHERS
planned, but launch delays have caused 80
schedules to slip for the entire program.22
The station is estimated to have a 10- 60
year lifespan, with the possibility of an
extension.23 40
China is also expanding its international

cooperation. China hosted a selection
process for opportunities to host scien-

tific payloads on the CSS. The final selec- 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2019
tion was announced in 2019 and includes
nine projects, involving “23 institutions
from 17 Member States of the United Figure 2: Chinese Orbital Space Launches (1957-2019). China had more successful orbital
Nations in Asian-pacific, European, Af- space launches in 2019 than any other nation.
rican, North American and South Amer- space-track.org / csis aerospace security19
ican regions.”24 China has furthered its
space partnership with Russia through
cooperating to develop “Russia’s future
Luna-26 lunar orbiter, China’s Chang’e-7
lunar polar lander, and a joint lunar and in order to keep pace with China’s grow- cial space companies grew from around
deep space data center with a hub in ing national and commercial launch de- 30 in 2017 to over 100 in 2018. This growth
each country.”25 mands.27 has led to the introduction of new com-
China’s busiest launch site, the Xichang After a 2014 decree to allow private compa- mercial policies in 2019 in order to better
Satellite Launch Center, hosted 19 of Chi- nies to develop SLVs, several new nominal- regulate the growing commercial space
na’s 32 launches in 2019.26 Located in the ly private (though typically state-backed) launch sector.29 These regulations have
south of China, Xichang is currently ex- Chinese companies began to develop and had a relatively positive response from
panding by adding another launch pad test new launch vehicles. China’s commer- Chinese commercial companies.30

CHINA
This also builds on the 2015 Chinese white
SPACE ORGANIZATION
paper, which stated that “outer space
AND DOCTRINE
and cyberspace have become new com-
manding heights in strategic competition
among all parties.”35 Many scholars inter-
The Chinese government operates sepa-
preted this statement as a formal desig-
rate civil and military space organizations.
nation of both space and cyberspace as
The China National Space Administration
new warfighting domains.36 To this end,
(CNSA) falls within the State Council’s
the PLA founded the SSF to centralize and
State Administration for Science, Tech-
manage the military’s space, cyber, and
nology, and Industry for National Defense
electronic warfare missions. Before the
(SASTIND) and is the primary organization
2015 reorganization, responsibilities for
for China’s civil space activities. The main
cyber, space, and electronic warfare were
developer of national civil space technol-
scattered across at least four different
ogies is the China Aerospace Science and
PLA departments. The establishment of
Technology Corporation (CASC), a state-
the SSF indicates the PLA’s prioritization
owned aerospace corporation. Meanwhile,
of these critical areas of warfare.37
military space activities are run through
the People’s Liberation Army (PLA). How- In 2018, China published an Outline of
ever, each of these entities collaborate THE SSF Training and Evaluation doctrine, which
with one another on developing space emphasized joint warfare training be-
technologies.31 HAS BEGUN tween the different military services fo-
In , China released its first offi- cused on combating “strong military op-
TRAINING
cial defense white paper since 2015. Prior ponents.”38 For the space domain, this is
to this four-year gap, China had released likely directed against the United States.
SPECIALIZED
similar white papers about every two Originally, the SSF was not assessed to
years. Analysts acknowledge that the 2019 UNITS WITH have full control over China’s ASAT ca-
document “adds little to previous official pabilities. Experts believed that the re-
reports on the details of recent reforms.”32 DIRECT-ASCENT sponsibility for direct-ascent ASATs may
In line with how China views the space lie with either the PLA’s Rocket Force,
domain, the 2019 white paper references ASAT WEAPONS. which manages China’s nuclear arsenal,
“outer space, electromagnetic space and or the PLA’s Air Force.39 However, recent
cyberspace” all as one national defense records show that the SSF has begun
aim.33 China established the Strategic Sup- training specialized units with direct-as-
port Force (SSF) in 2015 to bring the man- cent ASAT weapons capable of targeting
agement of these strategic areas under satellites in LEO.40
one entity. Unlike the United States and
According to the U.S-China Economic
even Russia, the PLA appears to view these
and Security Review Commission, Beijing
three domains as inherently intertwined.
has “sought to leverage military-civil fu-
There is only one paragraph in the 2019 sion to commercialize its existing space
white paper that focuses solely on the technology.” Utilizing civil or commercial
space domain. It touts China’s activity in technologies to bolster or disguise its
international fora on space-related issues, military space systems is a recognizable
such as the UN Office for Outer Space Af- theme throughout China’s counterspace
fairs. The white paper recognizes space as weapons program. “The goal of mili-
of strategic importance to the nation and tary-civil fusion in China’s space sector
states that “space security provides strate- is not primarily to develop cutting-edge
gic assurance for national and social devel- technology but to produce existing tech-
opment.”34 This rhetoric is consistent with nology that meets most customers’ needs
other statements and posturing that China at a lower cost and at greater commercial
has demonstrated in recent years. scale and efficiency.”41
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

COUNTERSPACE Table 2
WEAPONS DIRECT-ASCENT ASAT OR DUAL-USE TESTS
Weapons Kinetic
Type Year Comments
Kinetic Physical System Impact?
Failed intercept of target.
China has very capable kinetic physical
ASAT test 2005 SC-19 First recorded test for a No.
counterspace capabilities and has proven
direct-ascent ASAT.
this several times with a range of direct-as-
ASAT test 2006 SC-19 Failed intercept of target. No.
cent ASAT weapons tests. Thus far, China’s
primary focus has been Yes, and
created
targets in LEO, but recent
ASAT test 2007 SC-19 Successful intercept of target. thousands
“China continues tests indicate China also
of debris
development of has a direct-ascent capa- on-orbit.
multiple counterspace bility able to reach GEO.
Reported successful technol-
It does not appear that Missile de-
capabilities designed ogy test against a suborbital
fense test
China has successfully 2010 SC-19 target. Likely “an effort to Yes.
to degrade and deny (suborbit-
tested a co-orbital ASAT understand the homing per-
adversary use of space- capability, although it al)48 formance of the interceptor.”49
based assets during a
has demonstrated sever- Reported successful technol-
Missile de-
crisis or conflict.” al of the technical capa- Possibly ogy test against a suborbital
fense test 2013 Yes.
bilities required to con- (suborbital)
SC-1950 target. Likely another tech-
U.S. OFFICE OF THE nology demonstration test.51
struct such a weapon.
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 42
China had its first suc-
China declared the test as a
cessful test of a kinetic high-altitude science mis-
physical ASAT weapon in 2007, after two sion. U.S. military assessed
ASAT test 2013 DN-2 No.
previous failed tests.43 This test of a di- the test as proof Chinese
direct-ascent ASATs could
rect-ascent SC-19 missile system targeted
reach targets up to GEO.52
and destroyed an aging Chinese meteor-
ological satellite, producing over 3,000
China claimed it was a
trackable pieces of debris in LEO. Around No. Possibly
land-based missile intercep-
2,800 trackable pieces of debris from this done to test
ASAT test 2014 SC-1953 tor test, while the United
timing ca-
test remain in orbit, with 11 pieces deor- States assessed the test as a
pabilities.55
biting in 2019.44 This debris threatens the non-destructive ASAT test.54
safe operation of hundreds of other sat-
China claimed it was a
ellites in LEO, including the International land-based missile intercep-
Space Station (ISS).45 ASAT test 2015 DN-356 tor test, while the United No.
States assessed the test as a
China has not conducted a debris-pro- non-destructive ASAT test.57
ducing direct-ascent ASAT test since 2007.
Missile de- Unsuccessful test of the DN-3
However, analysts believe several other ki- 2017 DN-3 No.
fense test missile interceptor.58
netic physical tests—or suspected tests—
DN-3 DN-3 midcourse interceptor
have occurred since then.46 These suspect- Missile de-
2018 successfully intercepted its Yes.
ed tests have not to date produced orbital fense test
DF-21 target.59
debris or threatened any orbiting satellite.47
Table 2 summarizes several Chinese ASAT,
or suspected ASAT, tests. The missile tests
tests have resulted in a verifiable destructive incident. Primarily, China has
are harder to judge because they could
been testing its rendezvous and proximity operations (RPO) capabilities, a
also function as a counterspace capability
during times of conflict. dual-use technology used to maneuver satellites in orbit near one another.
Whether this maneuvering is for nefarious purposes, possibly making it
China has also developed and launched
a co-orbital ASAT, or for peaceful purposes, such as for on-orbit servicing
several satellites which are testing tech-
nologies that could be used for co-orbital or active debris removal missions, is unclear. Distinguishing the intent of
counterspace capabilities. None of these the RPO movements is critical to determining whether or not a satellite is

CHINA
a counterspace weapon, but determin- China has been testing these technol- be released and recovered during its mis-
ing intent is almost impossible until a ogies for over a decade. For example, sion. According to official statements, the
hostile action takes place. According to in 2008, a Chinese spacecraft deployed Aolong-1 was intended to test technolo-
the U.S.-China Economic and Security a miniature imaging satellite, the BX- gies needed to collect and deorbit space
Review Commission, “China’s testing 1, that was jettisoned from its mother debris. Experts have debated the success
of RPOs has been similar to past U.S. spacecraft. It appears that the satellite of this test.69
tests, and no country has criticized RPOs was unable to be actively controlled un-
The South China Morning Post reported in
carried out by China as illegal or violating til after it had passed the International
2019 about recently declassified govern-
any norm.” China, Russia, and the United Space Station. It is estimated that the
ment documents which showcased how
States all have satellites in GEO perform- uncontrolled satellite came within 25
decade-old Chinese satellite technology
ing RPO activities around other satellites kilometers of the station. Despite many has provided a base for “the development
in orbit.60 reports in the United States claiming of new weapon systems powered by arti-
that this was the first co-orbital ASAT ficial intelligence.” It is unclear how AI is
test from China, the maneuver appears utilized, but the article reports that the
to have been unintentional.62 new small satellites can be equipped with
SJ-12, a Chinese satellite in LEO, conduct- robotic arms for active debris-removal
ed a series of remote proximity maneuvers missions. This technology is, of course,
with an older Chinese satellite, SJ-06F, in dual-use and could theoretically be used
2010. The maneuvers appeared to be slow, on a range of objects in orbit. The declas-
sified document states that China has
methodical, and intentional and occurred
over several weeks in the summer of 2010.63 been developing and testing this tech-
nology since 2008. Without elaborating
Some have speculated that this mission
further, the document claims that the ro-
was designed to test co-orbital jamming
botic arm technology has also been incor-
or other counterspace capabilities, how-
porated into “drones, smart weapons and
ever this has not been definitively proven
robots.” The article also claims that these
in an unclassified setting.64 At one point,
satellites could remain attached to the
SJ-12 made contact with SJ-06F at low
debris it collects “to avoid being tracked
speed; however, this incident was “unlike-
from the ground.”70
ly to have resulted in debris or significant
damage to either satellite.”65 Testing RPO On the same mission as Aolong-1, China
capabilities may have been a test run for also deployed the Tianyuan-1 spacecraft,
the 2011 docking of the Shenzhou space which according to Chinese press ac-
capsule with the Tiangong-1 space station, counts successfully tested the ability to
but the SJ-12 maneuver could have serious refuel other satellites while in orbit.71 This
counterspace implications as well.66 test, as well as the Aolong-1 test, received
significant media coverage in the United
China has also been testing satellites with
States due to its potential dual-use as
robotic arms, a dual-use technology that
ASAT weapons.
could be used as a test bed for docking op-
erations for China’s future space station,
While none of China’s RPO activities in
active debris removal missions, or a co-or-
LEO or GEO appear to have damaged
“China has engaged in dual-use activ- bital ASAT. In 2013, China claimed that
other satellites, these technological ad-
ities such as rendezvous and proxim- three new satellites were “conducting sci-
vancements in RPO have many experts
ity operations (RPO)—which demon- entific experiments on space maintenance
concerned about China’s intent. And un-
technologies.”67 However, U.S. officials re-
strate co-orbital capabilities—that,
like Russian RPO activity, China’s RPO
ported that the one satellite was equipped
while not prohibited, create problems
activities have been primarily focused on
with a robotic arm, which tested its ability
for U.S. national security.” to grapple and seize another satellite.68 other Chinese satellites.
U.S.-CHINA ECONOMIC AND Three years later, in 2016, China launched China can also pose a threat to space
SECURITY REVIEW COMMISSION61 the Aolong-1 spacecraft, which included a systems through its ability to attack the
robotic arm and a sub-satellite that would ground stations that control satellites
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

SJ-17 Nearest 200˚E
Neighbors
(2016-2019)
150˚E
1 Chinasat 5A (China)
2 Chinasat 6A (China)
100˚E
3 Telkom 3S
(Indonesia)
4 Chinasat 20 (China)
5 Chinasat 2C (China) 50˚E
6 Chinasat 1C (China)
7 Ekran 4 (Russia) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0˚E
8 Chinasat 6B (China) JAN 2017 JUL 2017 JAN 2018 JUL 2018 JAN 2019 JUL 2019

˚EDUTIGNOL
Taking a Break, SJ-17’s with its conventional forces. China has the “The [People’s Liberation Army]
largest standing army of any nation, and
is also deploying directed-energy
Lack of Movement over the past decade it has significantly
weapons, and we expect them to
increased its military budget and mod-
SJ-17, A CHINESE SATELLITE in geosta- ernized its conventional military forces.75 field a ground-based laser system
tionary orbit known for its unusual be- In a conflict, China could be capable of aimed at low-orbit space sensors by
havior, appears to have put a pause on
striking an adversary’s satellite ground next year.”
its rendezvous and proximity operations
stations with ballistic missiles, cruise mis-
in 2019. Compared to its first two years THEN-ACTING SECRETARY OF
siles, or long-range strike aircraft. As Chi-
of operation, when the satellite appears DEFENSE PATRICK SHANAHAN76
na’s military reach continues to expand, it
to have performed close approaches and
will be able to use its conventional forces
rendezvous operations with four Chi-
to hold ground stations at risk over pro-
nese satellites—Chinasats 5A, 6A, 20, and
gressively greater distances.
1C—the lack of movement in 2019 is no-
table. According to CSIS analysis, SJ-17
Non-Kinetic Physical
restarted RPO maneuvers with another
Chinese satellite in GEO, Chinasat 6B, in In 2018, then-U.S. Director of National In-
late and was still in an un- telligence Dan Coats assessed that China
usually close orbit in late . is making advances in directed-energy
In the past, SJ-17’s RPOs have lasted an- technology that can “blind or damage
ywhere from a few weeks to over three sensitive space-based optical sensors,
months.72 New analysis of SJ-17’s on-or- such as those used for remote sensing or
bit activity also found that the satellite missile defense.”77 While this may sound
spent significant time near an Indonesian like a major announcement of Chinese
communications satellite, Telkom 3S, in
capabilities, China had already demon-
late 2017 and early 2018, but there has
strated its ability to dazzle American sat-
been no public statement from Indone-
ellites in the mid-2000s. In 2006, reports
sia on SJ-17’s maneuvering within 10km
surfaced that U.S. imaging satellites were
of its satellite. In a 2015 paper published
illuminated by lasers over Chinese territo-
in a Chinese research journal, scientists
ry.78 Then-Director of the National Recon- Figure 3: Chinese Rendezvous and Prox-
speculated that a small satellite could be
imity Operations in GEO. Publicly availa-
naissance Office (NRO) Donald Kerr ac-
used to approach a large satellite in GEO
ble orbital positioning data suggests that
knowledged that U.S. imagery satellites
in order to take high-quality pictures and
Chinese satellite SJ-17 has made several
were dazzled while passing over China
quickly retreat or pass the target satellite
close approaches and inspections in GEO.
but stated that it did not “damage the U.S.
to minimize detection.73 While SJ-17 is by
Learn more about SJ-17’s behavior, includ-
satellite’s ability to collect information.”79
no means a small satellite, it is possible
ing a list of the satellite’s nearest neighbors.
that China is developing the skills and This incident demonstrates that China
at aerospace.csis.org/SJ17.
technology to accomplish such intelli- had much of the technology necessary to
gence-gathering missions.74 field an operational capability to dazzle space-track.org / csis aerospace security
DATE

CHINA
or blind a satellite back in 2006.80 Recent affect a satellite in orbit. Furthermore, a
statements indicate that China has con- top Chinese weapons firm is developing
tinued to build and field more capable synthetic diamonds, also likely for use CHINA IS LIKELY
directed-energy systems. As one China in directed-energy weapons. Diamonds
expert highlighted, “the only fundamen- can amplify and focus energy outputs to ALREADY
tal barrier to learning these abstract ele- better ensure that the energy beam is in-
ments [directed-energy] and achieving tense enough to damage targets.87 DEVELOPING
a practical weapon capability is effort—
Satellite imagery analysts speculated in
LASER
time, will, and money.”81
early 2019 that China had been develop-
Recently appointed Chief of Space Op- ing significant satellite lasing facilities.88 WEAPONS AS
erations, General John J. Raymond not- Analysts speculate that China is pursu-
ed in public remarks that, “we’re pretty ing these efforts in at least five different PART OF ITS
comfortable [in asserting] that they are locations across the country, due to the
developing directed energy weapons nature of the buildings and surrounding COUNTERSPACE
— probably building lasers to blind our infrastructure. One image even depicts a
STRATEGY.
satellites.”82 In early 2019, the Defense In- suspected electro-magnetic pulse (EMP)
telligence Agency made a similar claim, simulator suspended between two struc-
stating “China likely is pursuing laser tures.89 However, no other analysts appear
weapons to disrupt, degrade, or damage to have corroborated these assessments.
satellites and their sensors and possibly China also announced an airborne laser
already has a limited capability to employ in early 2020. While the details were con-
laser systems against satellite sensors.”83 fidential, the titles of two defense pro-
Chinese military and technical writings curement bid requests may give insight
have often referenced directed-energy on the PLA’s plans. The two bids request
weapons as a key technology in a suc- the “procurement plan for airborne laser
cessful counterspace strategy.84 The SSF attack pod” and a “price inquiry on pro-
is comprised of both Chinese space forc- curement plan for controlling software
es and electronic warfare-focused forces, module of laser attack platform.” The
likely indicating that the PLA sees inter- system appears to be intended to target
operability between these two areas of other aircraft or missiles, but similar tech-
warfare. Expert Mark Stokes testified that nology could be used to target satellites.90
“The PLASSF Network Systems Depart- While details from the PLA have been
ment is central to China’s counterspace minimal and no public test has occurred
mission.” Stokes went on to explain that on orbit, China has also shown inter-
“Technical articles published . . . suggest est in developing HPM weapons for air
the unit, at least in part, is responsible and missile defense. In ,
overseeing research, development, and Chinese media celebrated the work of
acquisition of electronic counterspace expert Huang Wenhua, who developed
systems.” These same units may also be a miniaturized HPM weapon capable
responsible for research and develop- of being placed on a ship.91 However,
ment and testing of high-powered micro- adding a mobile HPM system to a satel-
wave systems.85 lite would require further reductions in
size, weight, and power in addition to a
In 2019, China surprisingly released an an-
number of other integration challenges
nouncement alongside images of a new
unique to the space environment.
directed-energy system. This Chinese
laser gun is reportedly designed to focus As a nuclear power with intercontinental
on small boats or drones.86 While not di- ballistic missiles (ICBMs), China also has
rectly a counterspace weapon, some of the latent capability to launch a nuclear
the technology would likely be similar weapon into LEO. The resulting EMP from
for a higher-powered system that could the detonation would cause indiscrimi-
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

nate damage to satellites, creating a high added layer of defense, could conduct a “soft kill” by jamming
level of radiation in LEO that could last for the drone’s communications and GPS.99
years.92 While China has the technology
China has deployed military-grade truck-mounted jamming
necessary to field a nuclear-armed ASAT
equipment in its buildup of military installations in the man-
weapon, it appears to be focusing its ef-
made islands in the South China Sea. As of , U.S. offi-
forts in other areas.
cials confirmed that there are two islands in the Spratly Island
chain that have been equipped with jamming systems for tar-
Electronic
geting communications and radar. This assessment was sup-
In the late-1990s, China acquired foreign ported by satellite imagery that shows a suspected jamming
ground-based satellite jamming equip- system on Mischief Reef in the Spratly Islands. While China has
ment from Ukraine and has continued to been building military installations across the island chain since
develop the technology independently in 2014, this is the first visual evidence of jamming equipment
the ensuing decades.94 Currently, China there.100 Shortly after the identification of the jammers, Vietnam
has the ability to jam common satellite condemned China’s continued militarization and weaponization
“The PLA consid- communication bands and GPS signals, of the South China Sea and the Spratly Islands, also stating that
ers EW [elec- and it has made the development and de- the jamming equipment violates international law.101
ployment of satellite jamming systems a
tronic warfare] In 2018, the SSF even carried out advanced military exercises
high priority.95 China is further developing
capabilities simulating a complex electronic warfare environment with the
jamming systems that will be able to tar-
“SSF base pitted against five PLA Army, Air Force, and Rocket
key assets for
get a large range of frequencies of com-
Force units.”102
modern warfare mercial SATCOM as well as U.S. military
and its doctrine protected communication bands.96 China also reportedly developed a J-16D aircraft equipped
with jamming systems. This aircraft, which suspiciously looks
emphasizes Chinese technical writings have been
like the U.S. Navy’s EA-18G Growler electronic attack fighter, is
using EW weap- outspoken on how electronic warfare
equipped with “several new antennas and conformal electron-
ons to suppress may increase its advantage in a conflict
ic-warfare arrays along the fuselage.” According to the Nation-
with the United States. A paper from
or deceive enemy al Interest, the “D” in J-16D comes from “diànzǐ,” the Chinese
the China Electronic Technology Group
equipment.” word for electronic.103
Corporation proposed solutions for
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE “overcoming the high-power require-
AGENCY, CHALLENGES ments for jamming U.S. millimeter wave
TO SECURITY IN SPACE93 (MMW) satellite communications by
using space-based jammers hosted on Spoofing in the Port of Shanghai
small satellites, in a ‘David versus Goli-
ath’ attack.” The authors further identi- INCIDENTS WERE REPORTED SPORADICALLY THROUGHOUT
fied U.S. satellites that would be particu- 2018 and 2019 of the GPS signals for Automatic Identification
larly susceptible to such an attack, like System (AIS) transponders being inaccurate in the main port of
“the Advanced Extremely High Frequen- Shanghai. AIS signals broadcast the location, speed, and direc-
tion of a ship, as required by international maritime law.104 Doc-
cy (AEHF), Wideband Global SATCOM
umented by a U.S. container ship, the Manukai, spoofing activi-
(WGS), and Global Broadcast Service
ties caused nearby ships’ signals to be misrepresented in ways
(GBS) satellite constellations.”97 Another
that could have caused a serious disaster. For example, a nearby
Chinese technical paper provides further
docked ship’s signal was reported as traveling down the channel
insight into how China plans to jam GPS
toward the Manukai at significant speed. However, the captain of
signals used by U.S. drones, such as the
the Manukai could visually identify the ship in question as clearly
RQ-4 Global Hawk, over the Spratly Is-
docked and unmoving in a nearby slot at port. The incident did not
lands and South China Sea.98
stop there throughout the day, while the Manukai was securely
After the early 2020 U.S. drone strike on docked at port, its AIS signals were reporting the ship being over
the Iranian general Qasem Soleimani, three miles away from its actual location. The Manukai reported
a Chinese military analyst commented the incident to the U.S. Coast Guard which determined that there
that China would be able to detect an were “no known anomalies that might affect GPS signal integrity
incoming strike through its early warn- at the time and vicinity of the reported problem.”105
ing radars and anti-access/area denial Stunning for researchers is the peculiar circular shape of the plot
(A2/AD) systems. He went on to say that of the spoofed ships and other GPS receivers in the area. Dubbed
China would be able to shoot down the “crop circles” by confused researchers, this shape is unusual for
drone with its air defenses and, as an GPS spoofing. According to Todd Humphries, a leading authority

CHINA
on GPS jamming and spoofing, of the Radi-
onavigation Laboratory at the University of
Texas, Austin, declared “To be able to spoof
multiple ships simultaneously into a circle
is extraordinary technology.” It is extraor-
dinary because a single attack appears to
have been able to spoof several vessels
simultaneously, each to a different inac-
curate location.106 Furthermore, the D.C.-
based research organization C4ADS also
confirmed that civilian GPS was affected.
While the source of the spoofing remains
unconfirmed, one expert traced the epi-
center of the crop circle pattern to a non-
operational smokestack near the port and
speculates that it could be the origin of
these GPS attacks.107 GPS jamming and
spoofing requires a direct line of sight to
the target receiver. Therefore, to max-
imize impact and distance, many jam-
ming devices are mounted on something Figure 4 (above): GPS Crop Circles Near Dalian China. Research organization Skytruth found
with great height. For example, most mil- that two GPS interference locations around an oil terminal were active and had a dramatic
itary-grade truck-mounted jammers are effect on scrambling vessel positions in the area on September 5, 2019. Some vessels were
mounted on a tall radio tower that maxi- even shown to be far inland. “On the water many positions are appearing with very high speeds
mizes the range of the effects.
(over 25 knots, red) and it’s not possible to distinguish true and false locations. However, some
Who is responsible? Again, this remains slow speed positions (green) are appearing at dock where they would be expected, so some AIS
unclear. Early sources speculated that the broadcasts appear to be unaffected.”
attacks are actually GPS hacking caused by
skytruth / ais data courtesy of global fishing watch / orbcomm / spire.
a non-state actor: sand smugglers.108 How-
ever, the technology appears to be quite
advanced, which researchers believe indi-
Figure 5 (below): Map of Reported AIS Outages Depicting the Crop Circle Patterns.
cates that the Chinese government may be
skytruth / ais data courtesy of global fishing watch / orbcomm / spire
behind these attacks.
Another analyst, Bjorn Bergman, was in-
trigued by the reports and found similar
crop circle phenomena in at least 20 other
locations along the Chinese coast. Berg-
man assessed that 16 of these identified South
Korea
sites were oil terminals. A few of the other Japan
sites were Chinese government installa-
tions. Bergman assed that the oil termi-
nals suggest that this could be an effort by
the Chinese government to support Iran China
through importing Iranian crude oil in vio-
lation of sanctions.109 East China Sea
Due to the proximity to oil terminals, Berg-
man similarly assesses that the spoofing
signals are being broadcast by the Chi-
nese government.110 Similarly, Humphries
believes it is unlikely that a non-state ac- Locations where GPS interference
tor could have developed this highly ad- was detected in 2019
vanced technology.111
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

Cyber U.S. Geological Survey 2005
NASA
Through the SSF,
NOAA
China has been
Indian Government
integrating its LANDSAT-7
Private Industry Caused 12 minutes or more of
advanced cyber interferrence
capabilities with LANDSAT-7
its counterspace and electronic warfare Caused 12 minutes or more
of interferrence
“The PLA unit responsible for con- operations. The U.S. Defense Intelligence
JUNE
ducting signals intelligence has sup- Agency assessed that: “The PLA could em- TERRA EARTH
ploy its cyberattack capabilities to estab- 2010 Took full control of the satellite
ported cyberespionage against U.S. but did not execute any
lish information dominance in the early commands
and European satellite and aerospace
stages of a conflict to constrain an adver- OCTOBER
industries since at least 2007.” TERRA EARTH
sary’s actions, or slow its mobilization and
Took full control of the satellite
deployment by targeting network-based but did not execute any
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY,
commands
CHALLENGES TO SECURITY IN SPACE112 command, control, communications,
computers, intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance (C4ISR), logistics, and
commercial activities.”113 UNIDENTIFIED
Attack forced NOAA to take down
the system and stop transmitting
Chinese hacks against secure govern-
2015 satellite images to the National
ment networks to steal personal informa- Weather Service for two days
tion and technical data are well known,
but the country’s efforts to attack and
infiltrate space systems has received VIDEO CHAT
relatively less attention.114 Chinese writ- Took control of secure satellite
video link for four to five minutes
ings and research efforts indicate that
U.S.-BASED SATELLITE &
in a conflict it would attempt to conduct GEOSPATIAL IMAGERY
COMPANIES
cyberattacks against U.S. satellites and
Hackers infiltrated satellite control
ground stations.115 Specifically, “PLA mil- systems but did not execute any
commands
itary writings detail the effectiveness of 2020
information operations and cyberwarfare
in modern conflicts, and advocate target-
Figure 6: Timeline of Suspected Chinese
ing an adversary’s Command and Control
Cyber Interference with Space Systems.
and logistics networks to affect the adver-
various sources compiled by the
sary’s ability to operate during the early
aerospace security project
stages of conflict.”116
China has already been implicated or
suspected in several cyberattacks against
U.S. satellites.117 In and steps required to command the satellite
again in , cyberattacks believed but did not issue commands.”119
to originate in China targeted a remote
A 2019 NASA Inspector General report ref-
sensing satellite operated by the U.S. Ge-
erences several Chinese cyber intrusions
ological Survey called Landsat-7. These
into NASA, including a 2009 Chinese cy-
attacks are believed to have occurred
berattack on the Joint Propulsion Labora-
through a ground station in Norway.118
tory (JPL) which resulted in 22 gigabytes
Each attack caused 12 or more minutes
of data being transferred to a Chinese IP
of interference with ground station com-
munications, but the attackers did not address. Another transfer of data to Chi-
gain control of the satellite. In June and nese IP addresses occured in 2011 when
October of 2008, hackers also believed “intruders gained full access to 18 servers
to be from China attacked the National supporting key JPL missions, including
Aeronautics and Space Administration’s the DSN [Deep Space Network] and Ad-
(NASA) Terra Earth observation satellite. vanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission
In these attacks, the hackers “achieved all and Reflection Radiometer mission, and

CHINA
sensitive user accounts.” The Advanced admit that “the hackers infected comput- illegal activities on its own coast or in the
Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Re- ers that controlled the satellites, so that South China Sea. In 2020, it is likely that
flection Radiometer mission is a joint pro- they could have changed the positions of satellite jamming and spoofing capabil-
ject between NASA and Japan’s Ministry the orbiting devices and disrupted data ities will continue to be deployed and
of Economy, Trade, and Industry.120 traffic.” While Symantec did not directly used in areas of gray zone conflict, such
blame the Chinese government for the at- as the South China Sea and perhaps even
In , Chinese hackers at-
tack, the company made it clear that the to deter protests in Hong Kong.
tacked National Oceanographic and At-
well-coordinated attack originated from
mospheric Administration’s (NOAA) sat- China’s cyberattacks against space sys-
the Chinese mainland.125
ellite information and weather systems. tems have either not been publicly dis-
The attack forced NOAA to take down the Later in 2018, the United States charged cussed or did not occur in 2019. However,
system and stop transmitting satellite im- two Chinese nationals for their involve- this does not mean China is incapable of
ages to the National Weather Service for ment in a decade-long cyber theft pro- using cyber means to attack vulnerable
two days before the organization was able gram, sponsored by the Chinese govern- space systems or has abandoned this line
to seal off the vital data.121 After the attack ment. The program targeted aerospace of effort.
was made public almost two months lat- industry companies, as well as NASA’s
er, U.S. Representative Frank Wolf (R-VA) Goddard Center and JPL. However, spe-
announced that NOAA had informed him cific details of attacks by this group re-
that China was responsible for the hack main classified.126
on its systems. Chinese officials denied
these claims, asserting that cyberattacks
are common in today’s world.122 SUMMARY
Anonymous sources in India leaked in
 that a “high-profile govern- Overall, there appears to be an interest-
ment meeting last month involving video ing shift in Chinese counterspace de-
chat via satellite was compromised by velopments in 2019. Through the open-
Chinese hackers”. The video was in Chi- source assessment above, it appears that
nese control for four to five minutes be- China has paused, or at least slowed, de-
fore Indian cybersecurity teams were able velopment and testing of its kinetic phys-
to launch a counterattack and neutralize ical counterspace capabilities. This could
the breach. The sources also claimed be because its kinetic ASAT capabilities
that the attack was able to breach the are well developed or because kinetic
nation’s “most sophisticated and secret physical counterspace weapons are overt
link.” However, the sources note that the weapons that would likely draw a strong
Indian response team was unable to con- international condemnation if ever used.
clusively identify if the attack came from However, beginning in late December
the Chinese government or non-state cy- 2019 and through early ,
bercriminals.123
there is evidence that China’s inspector
On June 19, 2018, several researchers at satellite, SJ-17, was moving around in
Symantec—a U.S. software company— GEO, possibly signaling a return to opera-
reported that a “sophisticated hacking tions after a hiatus of nearly a year.127
campaign launched from computers China is greatly increasing its develop-
in China burrowed deeply into satellite ment, testing, and fielding of non-kinet-
operators, defense contractors and tel- ic physical and electronic counterspace
ecommunications companies.” The two weapons. The operational deployment
targeted companies were U.S.-based of lasers capable of dazzling or blinding
satellite companies, a DoD submarine U.S. satellites seems imminent, if it has
contractor, and a U.S. geospatial imag- not occurred already. Furthermore, Chi-
ing company.124 The researchers could na is growing bolder with its electronic
not determine exactly which systems had jamming and spoofing capabilities and
been accessed in the breach, but they did may be using these technologies to hide
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

Number of Successful RUSSIA
Orbital Launches in 2019128

RUSSIA
“[Russian] leader- WITH THE DISSOLUTION OF THE SOVIET UNION IN 1991,
Russia inherited both the majority of the former state’s vast
ship must be re-
space infrastructure and its place among the global space
stored [in the space
powers.130 Since then, Russia has maintained a leading role
domain]. This is
in the global space community by operating the third-largest number of
not just a question satellites on orbit, serving as a critical partner in international human
of prestige, but of spaceflight, and managing several of the world’s busiest spaceports—all
national security.” while facing an inconsistent federal budgetary environment and claims
of widespread internal corruption.131 By some metrics, Russia’s space
DMITRY MEDVEDEV, FORMER activity pales in comparison to the Soviet Union, which launched more
RUSSIAN PRIME MINISTER129 payloads to orbit than all other countries combined before its collapse.132
Other measurements, however, such as launch vehicle reliability and hu-
man spaceflight achievements, describe a formidable space actor with
remarkable resilience in a rapidly changing space domain.
As the only ISS partner agency with a human-rated launch vehicle, Russia
is responsible for ferrying all astronauts to and from the space station us-
ing its Soyuz rocket.133 Since the U.S. Space Shuttle’s final flight in 2011,
Russia has launched 53 foreign astronauts to the ISS, including 34 Amer-
icans.134 At over $80 million per seat, carrying passengers to orbit makes
up 17 percent of the Russian space agency’s annual budget, according to
leaked budget documents from 2018.135 For decades, NASA has had plans
to develop a U.S. launch vehicle capable of transporting its astronauts to
the ISS, lowering its dependence on the Russian Soyuz launch vehicle.
With the first crewed flight test of the SpaceX Dragon capsule expected
later this year as part of the U.S. Commercial Crew Program, the Russian
space agency may soon find itself with many fewer human spaceflight
customers compared to the past decade.136

RUSSIA
SUCCESSFUL ORBITAL LAUNCHES PER YEAR BY COUNTRY (1957-2019)
Despite the geopolitical tensions on 120
CHINA
Earth, Russia has pursued robust inter- INDIA
national partnerships in the space do- 100 USA
RUSSIA
main in addition to its commitments as OTHERS
part of the ISS agreement. For example, 80
the Russian space agency has entered

into discussions with the China National
Space Administration to pursue coopera-

tive lunar exploration missions beginning
in 2020.137 Since 2011, Russia has used the

low-latitude Guiana Space Centre oper-
ated by the European Space Agency to

launch Soyuz rockets, making it the only
1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2019
country in the world to launch a native or-
bital launch vehicle from a spaceport op-
Figure 7: Russian Orbital Space Launches (1957-2019).
erated by another space agency.138 Russia
has also indicated its interest in continu- spacetrack.org / csis aerospace security148
ing its partnership with the United States
after the ISS retires.139
While largely successful, the Russian
space industry has also been plagued
lift launch vehicle, and even land cosmo- When the Russian Ministry of Defense was
with serious corruption scandals. In
nauts on the Moon by 2030.144 The scale created in 1992, Russia established the
2018, Russia’s principal federal investi-
of these new missions would almost cer- world’s first space force.149 Now known as
gation authority discovered that fraud
tainly require the country to increase its the Russian Space Forces subbranch—a
cases within the country’s space and
budget for space activities, likely putting part of the broader Russian Aerospace
defense industry reached $1 billion.140
the space agency at odds with other fed- Forces—the Russian Space Force is re-
Roscosmos, the Russian space agency,
eral spending priorities.145 sponsible for launching military satellites,
has been particularly wrought with cor-
maintaining space-based assets, moni-
ruption. Last year, a high-level agency
toring space objects, and identifying po-
official—who was likely linked to an in-
SPACE ORGANIZATION tential attacks against the Russian home-
ternal embezzlement scheme—fled the
land from space.150
country to Europe while he was under AND DOCTRINE
Russia considers the “intention to place
investigation.141 Also in 2019, 58 peo-
weapons in outer space” a main exter-
ple received jail sentences after $172
Most state-sponsored space activities nal military danger and describes estab-
million was stolen from the Vostoch-
in Russia are linked to one of two gov- lishing “an international treaty on [the]
ny spaceport in the Russian Far East.142
ernment organizations: Roscosmos, the prevention of placement of any types
Only a fraction of the monies lost had
country’s civilian space body, and the of weapons in outer space” as a princi-
been recovered as of .
Russian Aerospace Forces, the branch of pal task for the Russian state in its mil-
When asked about the culture of cor-
the Russian armed services tasked with itary doctrine.151 Although Russia and
ruption at Roscosmos, the director of
military operations in the space domain. China co-submitted the “Treaty on the
the Russian Investigative Committee
Roscosmos, known as the Russian Fed- Prevention of the Placement of Weap-
said “there is no end in sight.”143
eral Space Agency until 2015, inherited ons in Outer Space, the Threat or Use of
In light of these issues, Roscosmos has significant space infrastructure from its Force Against Outer Space Objects” to
announced extravagant spaceflight plans predecessor, the Soviet space program.146 the Conference on Disarmament in 2008,
for the upcoming decade. In a presenta- Tasked with the pursuit of international the United States dismissed the propos-
tion to students at Moscow University cooperation with space partners around al as a “diplomatic ploy,” and refused to
in , the agency’s director an- the world, Roscosmos is one of five prin- support it.152 In 2014, Russia and China
nounced the country’s plans to invest in cipal partners that support the ISS, along reintroduced the treaty, prompting a
a new crewed space vehicle with flights with civilian space agencies in the United similarly chilly reaction from the United
to the ISS by 2023, develop a new heavy- States, Japan, Canada, and Europe.147 States. In response to the Indian ASAT
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

test in , the Russian Ministry weapon when it destroyed a domestic
of Defense acknowledged India’s other- satellite in LEO using a co-orbital ASAT.
wise strong dedication to preventing an Called Istrebitel Sputnikov (IS), mean-
arms race in space while simultaneously ing “satellite destroyer” in Russian, the
blaming the United States for creating an first Soviet co-orbital ASAT was tested 20
environment in which developing space times between 1963 to 1982, destroying
actors are compelled to test anti-satel- several targets launched as part of the
lite weapons on orbit—a clear jab at U.S. program.158 A follow-on version of the IS
opposition to Russia and China’s failed system, known as IS-MU, was operational
treaties.153 from 1991 to 1993.159
Although Russia’s military doctrine has not Prior to the fall of the Soviet Union, the
been publicly updated since December country began developing a much more
2014, some analysts expect a new version capable co-orbital ASAT known as the
may be released later this year.154 Since the Naryad. Reportedly designed to reach al-
last military doctrine was released, Dmitry titudes as high as 40,000 km and contain
Rogozin—the Roscosmos director general multiple warheads in a single launch, the
and former deputy prime minister for de- Naryad would likely have posed a serious
fense—has stated that Russia does not use threat to satellites in GEO.160 The system
satellites to damage other space objects.155 saw limited testing—with just one launch
More recently, Russian military leaders in 1994—and no confirmed intercepts.161
have suggested that the Trump adminis- Unlike the Soviet Union, Russia’s kinetic
tration’s support of the U.S. Space Force physical counterspace arsenal includes
warrants new “reciprocal and asymmetri- ground-launched direct-ascent ASAT
cal measures” from Russia in the space do- missiles. In , Russia con-
main.156 In a address, Rus- ducted its seventh test of the PL-19/Nudol
sian President Vladimir Putin stated that direct-ascent ASAT system.162 The PL-19/
the creation of a U.S. Space Force requires Nudol completed its first successful flight
Russia to further invest in its own military test in , after two unsuc-
space industry.157 cessful attempts.163 Unclassified U.S. re-
ports suggest that both this launch, and
a previous test in , used a mo-
COUNTERSPACE bile transporter erector-launcher (TEL)
within the Plesetsk Cosmodrome com-
WEAPONS
plex instead of a static launch pad.164 Al-
though at least six of the seven launches
are verified to have originated from Ple-
Kinetic Physical
setsk, a mobile launch system would the-
Evidence suggests that Russia has in- oretically allow the ASAT to be launched
vested in a sweeping range of kinetic outside of the Cosmodrome facility, en-
physical counterspace capabilities over suring greater flexibility to target LEO sat-
the past decade, including ground- and ellites in inclinations above 40 degrees as
air-launched direct-ascent ASAT missiles they transit over Russian territory.165
capable of targeting satellites in LEO and
Although not specifically designed as di-
co-orbital ASAT weapons that could oper-
rect-ascent ASAT weapons, Russian mo-
ate in any orbital regime. Russia’s kinetic
bile-launched S-400 surface-to-air mis-
physical counterspace activities often
siles—capable of reaching a maximum
closely resemble previously operation-
altitude of 200 km—could potentially
al Soviet-era ASAT programs, suggesting
reach a satellite in LEO. The follow-on
that the country has benefited from dec-
surface-to-air missile system, the S-500, is
ades of ASAT weapons research conduct-
expected to reach altitudes up to 300 km
ed by the Soviet Ministry of Defense.
if launched directly upward.166 Oleg Osta-
On October 20, 1968, the Soviet Union be- penko, Russia’s former deputy minister
came the second country in the world to of defense, once stated that the S-500
successfully demonstrate a counterspace will be able to intercept “low-orbital

RUSSIA
satellites and space weapons.”167 First
tested in 2018, the new missile’s pro-
duction timeline has since slipped, and
“there has been no indication of when
an actual S-500 will be made availa-
ble.”168 Like the PL-19/Nudol system,
using the S-400 or eventually the S-500
as a direct-ascent ASAT would require a
high-precision targeting capability that
has yet to be demonstrated via a de-
structive test.169
A modified Russian MiG-31 fighter jet was
photographed in carry-
ing an unidentified missile that some re-
ports suggest could be a “mock-up” of an
air-launched ASAT weapon.170 Although er, likely deployed from the first as a sub- MiG-31BM “Foxhound” Aircraft on Septem-
this development follows a 2013 state- satellite.175 The Russian Ministry of Defense ber 14, 2018. Photographed at the Zhuk-
ment from the Russian Duma express- ovsky airfield outside of Moscow, the aircraft
made a statement saying that the second
ing the Russian government’s intent to is carrying what has since been identified as a
satellite was designed to “inspect the state
build an air-to-space system designed potential anti-satellite weapon.
of a Russian satellite.”176 In ,
to “intercept absolutely everything that shipsash / jetphotos.com
a third satellite was deployed from either
flies from space,” the system depicted in
Cosmos 2519 or its subsatellite, resulting
the photo would almost
certainly be limited to targeting objects in three independent satellites in orbit.
in LEO, due to its size.171 In 2017, a Rus- Over the course of several months, the
sian Aerospace Forces squadron com- satellites engaged in a series of maneuvers
mander confirmed that an ASAT missile and RPO exercises, including slow flybys,
had been designed for use with the MiG- close approaches, and rendezvous. In
31BM aircraft—the same variant spotted
, Chief of Space Operations
with the mysterious missile.172 Citing
of the U.S. Space Force General John Ray-
several sources familiar with a U.S. re-
mond appeared to refer to one of these
port on the new weapons system, CNBC
three satellites when he said that Russian
reported that the missile may become
inspector satellites have “exhibited char-
operational as soon as 2022.173
acteristics of a weapon.”177
Russia has not publicly announced the
development of a new co-orbital ASAT Analysis published in Jane’s Intelligence
program since the fall of the Soviet Un- Review used Russian procurement doc-
ion. In the past few years, however, the umentation and contractor reports to
Russian Aerospace Forces has launched connect Cosmos 2519, 2521, and 2523
a series of small “inspector” satellites in with the program name Nivelir.178 Con-
LEO that have demonstrated some of the
tracts signed in 2016 between the Nivelir
technologies required to operate such a
program and a Russian company known
system. In 2017 and 2018, three small Rus-
for developing radiation-absorbing ma-
sian satellites—Cosmos 2519, 2521, and
terials suggest that future Nivelir satel-
2523—engaged in RPO in LEO, prompting
lites—such as Cosmos 2535, 2536, 2537,
a statement of concern from the U.S. State
or 2538, all launched in —may
Department.174 Although a Rus-
sian Soyuz launch appeared to place just be coated with a protective film to avoid
one satellite in LEO—Cosmos 2519—a sec- being tracked by optical or infrared sen-
ond satellite was detected two months lat- sors from the ground or in space.179
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

Spying on a Spy Satellite Russia’s newest co-orbital system may
be designed to target satellites in GEO.186
ON NOVEMBER 25, 2019, Russia
Designated Burevestnik, this program will
launched a small satellite, Cosmos 2543,
likely employ low-thrust but highly-effi-
into what the Russian Ministry of De-
cient electric propulsion to maneuver
fense described as a “target orbit from
lightweight satellites—possibly similar to
which the state of domestic satellites can
be monitored.”180 Two weeks later, the those from the Nivelir program—around
ministry announced that a subsatellite, the GEO belt.187 A report published in
Cosmos 2542, had been deployed from 2019 indicated that a new ground con-
Cosmos 2543.181 trol center was being built for Nivelir and
Three days after its deployment, Cosmos Burevestnik at the same site the Soviets
2542 performed an orbital maneuver used to control the Istrebitel Sputnikov
to synchronize its orbit with USA 245, missions in the 1960s.188
what is believed to be a U.S. National
Although there is no evidence yet of light-
Reconnaissance Office (NRO) satellite.
weight Russian satellites maneuvering in
Amateur satellite observers who record
the GEO belt, a larger satellite has been
and share satellite observations online
observed engaging in suspicious RPO ac-
noticed that USA 245 performed its own
maneuver soon thereafter, possibly to tivity in the regime. The satellite—known
steer clear of Cosmos 2542.182 In January as Olymp-K or Luch—has attracted atten-
2020, Cosmos 2542 maneuvered toward tion for shifting its position within the geo-
the American spy satellite again, this synchronous belt on a relatively frequent
time coming as close as 50 km.183 A day basis, occupying at least 19 different posi-
later, USA 245 made another maneuver,
tions since its launch in .189
further distancing itself from the Russian
Luch first attracted attention when it
inspector satellite.184
repositioned itself between two satellites
In an interview with SpaceNews, Gener- operated by Intelsat, a U.S. satellite com-
al John Raymond, the Commander of
munications company.190 Approaching
U.S. Space Command and Chief of Space
satellites in GEO in this manner could al-
Operations of the U.S. Space Force, con-
low for close inspection or potentially in-
firmed the close approach, adding that
terception of their communication links.191
he believed it was intentional.185
In , Luch approached
a third Intelsat satellite.192 The interna-
tional response escalated in September
Figure 8: Orbital Trajectories for Cosmos 2542 and USA 245 on January 23, 2020.
2018, when French Minister of the Armed
Since orbital parameters for classified satellites do not appear in the U.S. Space Com-
Forces Florence Parly accused Russia of
mand’s public catalog of space objects, analysts use observations from amateur astrono-
committing “an act of espionage” after it
mers to calculate USA 245’s orbital trajectory.
approached a French-Italian military sat-
nico janssen / satobs.org ellite “a bit too closely” in .
COSMOS 2542
USA 245
Antarctica

RUSSIA
Luch’s Nearest 75˚E
Neighbors in

70˚E
1 NSS 12 (SES)
Astra 1G (SES) 65˚E
2 Intelsat 33E
3 Intelsat 606
60˚E
4 Raduga 5 (Russia)
5 Intelsat 906
55˚E
6 Intelsat 17
7 Intelsat 20
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
50˚E
8 Eutelsat 70B JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEPT OCT NOV DEC
“We have achieved significant
progress in laser weapons.”
VLADIMIR PUTIN, RUSSIAN PRESIDENT 194
Analysis of Luch’s on-orbit behavior since
its launch in 2014 suggests that the sat-
ellite has approached 11 unique Intelsat
satellites, four Eutelsat satellites, two SES
satellites, and at least nine other satellites
operated by Russia, Turkey, Pakistan, the
United Kingdom, and the European Space
Agency.193 Although Luch appears to be
maneuvering around the GEO belt in a
systematic, deliberate manner, no public
reports suggest it has damaged any of the
neighboring satellites along the way.
Non-Kinetic Physical
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

˚EDUTIGNOL
DATE IN 2019
Figure 9: Luch Continues to Explore In 1962, the Soviet Union detonated
the GEO Belt. The Russian satellite has three nuclear warheads about 400 kilo-
stopped at 19 different positions in the meters above the Earth’s surface—near
geostationary belt since its launch in the altitude of the U.S. Starfish Prime
2014, including those depicted here in test that same year—in a series of tests
2019. Learn more about Luch’s behavior, known as Operation K.195 As suspected
including a list of the satellite’s nearest by the Soviet engineers who planned
neighbors at aerospace.csis.org/luch. the tests, Operation K demonstrated
space-track.org / csis aerospace security the devastating effects of an EMP weap-
on in LEO. Though nuclear warheads
were tested as part of the early Istrebitel
Sputnikov tests, the program’s success-
ful intercepts used conventional war-
heads instead, which lowered the risk
of inadvertently damaging Soviet sat-
ellites on orbit during testing.196 Thirty
years later, Vladimir Lukin, a senior Rus-
sian legislator, reminded the interna-
tional community of Russia’s retained
EMP capabilities when he threatened a
delegation of U.S. congressmen during
an official visit in , saying:
Hypothetically, if Russia really want-
ed to hurt the United States . . . [it]
could fire a submarine launched
Evidence suggests that Russia has both ballistic missile and detonate a sin-
maintained its non-kinetic physical coun- gle nuclear warhead at high-alti-
terspace capabilities from the Soviet era— tude over the United States. The re-
including detonating nuclear weapons at sulting electromagnetic pulse would
high altitudes, using nano-sized obscu- massively disrupt U.S. communica-
rants on orbit, and placing laser weapons tions and computer systems, shut-
on aircraft—and built upon them over the ting down everything. No internet.
past 10 years. Nothing.197

Academic articles, government contracts, ASAT system that would most likely rely
and patent documentation suggest that on a “fundamentally new aircraft [that is]
Russia is sponsoring scientific research not based on the Il-76MD.”203 Regardless
into on-orbit aerosol obscurants—nano- of the aircraft on which the laser weap-
particles that can block radiofrequency on is mounted, such a weapon could be
and optical signals to and from a satel- capable of damaging its targets’ optical
lite—which could be used to hide Russian sensors and solar arrays from anywhere
satellites from space situational aware- in Russia’s vast airspace.
ness sensors on the ground or as part of an
In a presidential address in ,
offensive co-orbital attack.198 According to
Russian President Vladimir Putin an-
analysis published by the website Space
nounced the development of a new di-
Review, Russia’s Scientific Research Insti-
rected-energy weapon.204 Russian news
tute of Applied Chemistry (NIIPKh), known
outlets later reported that the ground-
for its previous work in aerosol particle based laser weapon, known as Peresvet,
development, was awarded a contract was first delivered to Russian troops in
from the previously-discussed Burevest- and had been placed on “ex-
nik program in 2015. Although there is no perimental combat duty” in December
evidence that particle obscurants have 2018.205 A video released by the Russian
been tested on orbit, an article written by Ministry of Defense shows the weapon
NIIPKh affiliates in 2016 suggested that mounted on a trailer, suggesting some
the technology could be installed on sat- degree of mobility.206 Russian officials
ellites, where it could be used to defend told reporters that the system is distrib-
assets from kinetic physical attacks but uted over two platforms, with the second
also for “disabling” satellites from a close responsible for the laser’s power source.
distance.199 If deployed from a nearby sat- Yury Borisov—former Russian deputy
ellite, particle obscurants could be used to minister of defense, now the country’s
temporarily degrade a target satellite by deputy prime minister—commented
obstructing optical sensors or interfering that Peresvet would be made more com-
with radio communications to and from its pact over the next two to three years.207 “GNSS [Global
ground stations. President Putin recently announced that Navigation
the weapon would be placed “on stand-
Leaked photos, statements from Russian Satellite System]
by alert” in .208 Although
defense contractors, and Russian news spoofing
the most critical details about Peresvet
reports suggest that a Soviet-era laser
activities in
remain unknown.209
weapon from 1965 has been revived to
the Russian
target satellites in LEO.200 In 2011, pho- Electronic
Federation,
tos of a modified Ilyushin Il-76MD cargo
its occupied
plane, known as the Beriev A-60, featur- The Russian government has been ac-
ing what appears to be an upward-fac- cused of widespread GPS jamming and territories, and
ing laser on the fuselage and a targeting spoofing since 2014, affecting civilian its overseas
system built into its nose cone, were up- and military vessels near Russian terri- military facilities
loaded to an online forum for Russian tory, commercial and civilian aircraft in are larger in
plane enthusiasts. The system, known as the Arctic Circle, and handheld consum- scope, more
Sokol Eshelon, was likely tested two years er devices in downtown Moscow and St.
geographically
earlier to illuminate a Japanese satellite Petersburg.211 Despite overwhelming
diverse, and
on orbit at an altitude of 1,500 km.201 In
evidence that Russia has employed the
started earlier
2017, the general director of Almaz-An-
use of mobile, ground-based electronic
tey, a weapons manufacturer with ties to than any public
counterspace weapons on a regular ba-
the program, told a Russian news outlet reporting has
sis both within its borders and abroad,
that his company had been ordered to suggested to
the Russian state has repeatedly denied
develop a system capable of “direct func-
any wrongdoing.212 date.”
tional destruction of those elements de-
ployed in orbit.”202 A year later, however, Since the beginning of the 2014 Crimean CENTER FOR ADVANCED
Interfax reported that Almaz-Antey had conflict, Russia has used a variety of jam- DEFENSE STUDIES210
finished work on a new air-based laser ming and radio-monitoring platforms—

RUSSIA
exercises in the region, including a Rus-
sian-Belarusian joint exercise in Russia
in 2017, a NATO exercise in Norway, Swe-
den, and Finland in 2018, and a nearby
British exercise in 2019. After Norway an-
nounced that Russia was responsible for
the regional jamming incidents, the Nor-
wegian Communications Authority made
plans to establish a satellite signal meas-
urement station to better understand the
GPS jamming environment in the region.221
In 2017, over 20 ships operating in the
Black Sea reported gross GPS position
errors as they sailed near the Russian
coast.222 The incidents were first report-
The Trailer-Mounted Peresvet Laser Weapon System. Some observers suspect that the ed by the U.S. Maritime Administration. A
laser’s power levels will allow it to target satellites in LEO. C4ADS report from identified
russian defense ministry hundreds more “denial-of-service” occur-
rences in the region from both before and
after the original report where onboard
GPS devices were calculating false coor-
including the truck-mounted R-330Zh signed for “airspace denial purposes” at
dinates for the vessels.223 In many cases,
jammer and the R-381T2 radio monitor- Khmeimim airbase, a Russian-operated
ing system—to deny Ukrainian forces ac- air base in western Syria.215 GPS devices calculated ships’ positions as
being at a nearby Russian airport, and not
cess to consistent GPS and satellite com-
Russia’s use of electronic counterspace in the Black Sea. The report—a collabora-
munication services.213
weapons is not restricted to conflict tive study between C4ADS, the University
Similarly, Russia reportedly deployed a zones. Starting in late 2017, civilian and of Texas at Austin, and Palantir Found-
Krasukha-4 truck-mounted jamming sys- commercial aircraft operators in the ry—also suggested a specific location for
tem in Syria, another conflict region, and northernmost region of Norway—Fin- at least one of the spoofing devices re-
supplied the Syrian army with R-330P nmark County, which borders Russia’s sponsible: “a multi-million dollar ‘palace,’
radio jammers.214 Using sensor data Murmansk Oblast—began reporting re- formerly owned by family members of
from the International Space Station, curring GPS signal outages during flight.220 senior Federal Protective Service officers
analysts at the Center for Advanced De- Analysis of notice to airmen (NOTAM) and previously reported to be built for
fense Studies (C4ADS) and the University alerts distributed from President Putin.”224 The FSO is the Rus-
of Texas at Austin identified “potential to shows a correlation be-
sian counterpart of the Secret Service in
military-grade EW systems” likely de- tween GPS signal outages and military
the United States, a federal agency re-
sponsible for senior government leaders’
personal security.
A $4,000 Taxi to the Kremlin
The C4ADS report suggests that the FSO’s
relationship with Russia’s use of electron-
IN , visitors to downtown Moscow began noticing a problem with their
ic counterspace weapons does not stop at
mobile devices’ mapping services.216 When driving or walking near the Kremlin, at
the seaside palace. The report identified
the center of the city, users reported being directed to follow implausibly inefficient
12 occurrences in which evidence of one-
routes. In some cases, mapping software suggested a detour of just a few blocks. In
others, mobile device users were directed as far away as the Vnukovo Airport, almost off PNT spoofing events corresponded
50 kilometers southwest of the Kremlin.217 Visitors were particularly affected when with the movements of Russian President
using ride-sharing services, complaining on Twitter about $3,000 to $4,000 fare esti- Vladimir Putin, his senior advisers, or FSO
mates due to the mapping errors.218 officers, suggesting that “some devices
These map users were likely receiving false positioning signals, leading them to specific, used to conduct this activity are mobile
incorrect locations away from the Kremlin. Residents of St. Petersburg began reporting and can be temporarily deployed at a
similar issues during a visit from President Vladimir Putin in .219 location to create local areas of effect.”225
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

Ukraine
Sea of Azov
Crimean Bridge
Crimean
Peninsula
Russia
Kerch Strait
In two of those cases, the Russian presi- Figure 10: Russian President Navy Commander Ihor Voronchenko
dent was visiting the newly-constructed Vladimir Putin Visiting the accused Russia of spoofing GPS signals
Crimean Bridge, which physically con- Newly Constructed Crimean and jamming access to the Iridium sat-
nects Crimea with the Russian mainland. Bridge Connecting Crimea to ellite communications network.226
On May 15, 2018, the second of those two Mainland Russia on May 15,
In 2016, Russia announced plans to
visits, President Putin celebrated the pro- 2018. Denial-of-service reports
install GPS jammers on the country’s
ject’s completion by driving across the from vessels near the bridge
250,000 cell phone towers.227 The sys-
bridge in a motorcade of construction ve- at the time of the visit suggest
tem, called Pole-21, is aimed at provid-
hicles. Based on the locations of the ships that a spoofing device may
ing more widespread GPS jamming to
experiencing GPS spoofing at the time— have been contained in one of
protect Russian assets against cruise
which typically must be within the line of the orange construction trucks
missiles, drones, and precision-guided
sight of the spoofing device feeding them that made up the president’s
munitions. In , the Rus-
false coordinates—it is possible that the motorcade.
sian military confirmed that the first
spoofing device was contained in one of
alexander nemenov / afp / units have been delivered.228
the vehicles in Putin’s motorcade. getty images
Russian electronic counterspace ac-
Several months after Putin’s visit, the tivities may not be limited to ground-
Crimean Bridge was the site of a military based systems. Late last year, Russian
conflict in which Russia was accused of news reports suggested that the Rus-
using electronic weapons. In November sian Aerospace Forces may upgrade its
2018, the Russian Coast Guard opened Porubshchik electronic warfare aircraft,
fire on three Ukrainian Navy ships as which could be used to jam satellite
they attempted to pass underneath the signals across wider regions than a
Crimean Bridge from the Black Sea into truck- or tower-mounted jamming de-
the Sea of Azov, in what became known vice.229 Although there is no evidence in
as the Kerch Strait incident. A month the public domain that Russia employs
after the incident, which injured six space-based electronic counterspace
sailors according to Ukraine, Ukrainian weapons, analysis of Russian procure-

RUSSIA
ment documentation from 2014 points the negative attention “stage-managed
to a new program called Ekipazh that propaganda campaign[s]” and “Western
may feature a nuclear-powered jam- spy mania.”238
ming device on orbit.230 Early reports
from the program’s manufacturers sug-
gest that test flights could begin as early SUMMARY
as 2021.
Cyber While the Soviet Union developed weap-
ons in just two of the four counterspace
Foreign governments regularly accuse
categories—kinetic and non-kinetic
Russia of widespread international cy-
physical weapons—Russia has invested
berwarfare.231 In the space domain, a
in all four over the past 10 years. Evidence
group of hackers with links to the Rus-
suggests that Russia is developing an air-
sian Federal Security Service called
launched direct-ascent ASAT missile, has
Turla has been hijacking the internet
already tested a ground-based direct-as-
services of older commercial satellites
cent ASAT, and is reinvigorating an array
since 2007.232 More recently, from 2017
of co-orbital counterspace technologies
to 2019, Turla infiltrated government
more than 50 years after the Soviet Un-
agencies and private companies in more
ion became the first and only country
than 20 countries according to reports
to successfully destroy a target satellite
from the British National Cyber Secu-
using a co-orbital ASAT weapon. Russia
rity Centre and U.S. National Security
has built off of the Soviet Union’s arsenal
Agency.233 During the attacks, the group
of non-kinetic counterspace weapons
attempted to disguise themselves as
by reviving a Soviet-era air-based laser
an Iranian hacking organization by first
weapon and unveiling a new ground-
gaining access to computer infrastruc-
based trailer-mounted laser weapon.
ture previously associated with Iranian
In just the past few years alone, Russia
cyberattack operations. In , a
has become one of the world’s greatest
French satellite TV network was pulled
perpetrators of electronic counterspace
off the air in an attack linked to another
warfare, jamming and spoofing PNT and
Russian hacker group known as APT 28.234
communications satellite signals in con-
Later that year, APT 28 gained access to a
flict zones, nearby territories, and with-
British television station’s computer net-
in its own borders. Although difficult to
work, but did not tamper with any of its
verify, Russia is also almost certainly ca-
broadcasted programming.235
pable of targeting satellites and associ-
Russian cyberattacks on state govern- ated ground stations through vulnerable
ments and international organizations computer networks. With new weapons
extend well outside of the space domain, added to the Russian counterspace arse-
earning criticisms from Estonia, Ukraine, nal each year since 2018, it is clear that
the United States, the United Kingdom, the country has renewed its focus on
France, Germany, Kyrgyzstan, and the developing and maintaining its ability to
Netherlands.236 In , NATO disrupt, degrade, or destroy adversaries’
Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg spe- assets on orbit.239
cifically addressed Russia’s nefarious
activities in the cyber domain in an edi-
torial about NATO’s renewed cybersecu-
rity efforts. No other state perpetrators
were mentioned.237 Russia’s Ministry of
Foreign Affairs has developed a consist-
ent pattern of denying accusations of
wrongdoing in the cyber domain, calling
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

Number of Successf ul Orbital IRAN
Launches in 2019240

IRAN
“The United OFTEN CITED AS A THINLY VEILED COVER for its ballistic missile
program, Iran’s space capabilities are relatively minimal.242 Iran’s
States will not
space and ballistic missile systems are likely based on Russian
allow Iran to use
and North Korean programs. This analysis is supported by the
its space launch
weak aerospace industrial base in the country, suggesting that Iran is un-
program as cover
likely to have the technical and industrial capability to develop complex
to advance its
launch technology from scratch.243 In 2009, Iran successfully launched its
ballistic missile first domestically-manufactured satellite on a Safir-1 rocket, making it the
programs,” ninth country at the time to have launched an indigenous satellite.244 The
Iranian Space Agency (ISA) continues to claim to have sent various living
MIKE POMPEO, U.S.
creatures into space in the last decade, including a monkey two times in
SECRETARY OF STATE241
2013.245 The agency had previously aimed to put a human in space by 2025,
but human spaceflight aspirations were put on hold in 2017 due to budget
constraints, likely linked to U.S.-imposed sanctions. However, the ISA has
continued to focus on improving its SLVs.246
Iran’s main launch facility, the Imam Khomeini Spaceport, is located in a
larger domestic space facility, the Imam Khomeini Space Center, in the
Semnan Province east of Tehran. The site is also used as one of eight mis-
sile test and launch sites in the country.247 Iran had four successful launch-
es from 2009 to 2015 that put various operational satellites into orbit,
none of which stayed in orbit longer than a few months.248 In 2014, Iran
reportedly signed an agreement with Russia for its assistance in the devel-
opment and launch of Iranian satellites and possibly the training of future
Iranian astronauts.249

IRAN
“Iran recognizes the strategic value of The U.S. Intelligence Community has experts built radars which can monitor
assessed that “Iran recognizes the stra- satellites in LEO.253
space and counterspace capabilities.”
tegic value of space and counterspace
Iran currently has two known launch ve-
U.S. DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY capabilities” and that continued work
hicles, the Safir-1 and Safir-2, the latter
to develop space launch vehicles will
of which is commonly known as the Si-
shorten the timeline to create a suc-
morgh.254 While the Safir-1 has had suc-
cessful ICBM.250 Iran is an unusual case
cessful orbital launches, the Simorgh
as countries have historically construct-
has yet to complete a fully successful
ed space launch capabilities from mili-
mission.255 In , Iran announced
tary ballistic missile programs, not the
a successful test launch of the Simorgh,
other way around.251 In addition to SLVs,
although the success of the test has not
Iran has also developed space capabili-
ties with military applications such as a been confirmed outside of state media.256
space monitoring center announced in For the Iraninan space program, 2019
 that uses radar, electro-opti- proved to be a difficult year, with three
cal, and radio tracking.252 Iran continues failed orbital launches in January, Febru-
to focus on space situational awareness ary, and August, which used alternately
monitoring, announcing in 2018 that the Safir-1 and Simorgh launch vehicles.257
that the space program may be a front
Failed Launch Attempt
for developing Iranian ballistic missiles.261
ON AUGUST 25, 2019, the head of the Iran Days after this third failed launch attempt
Space Agency was quoted in state media of the calendar year, the Trump adminis-
saying that the agency planned to launch tration added the Iran Space Agency, the
three satellites into orbit by March of 2020. Iranian Astronautics Research Institute,
The goal of these three satellites would be and the Iran Space Research Center to the
to help aid civilians through improving U.S. sanctions list.262
navigational, agricultural, and environ- New satellite images surfaced in January
mental monitoring services.258 Four days 2020 which showed the launch pad be-
later, on August 29, satellite imagery from ing repaired, possibly in preparation for
the Earth-imaging company Maxar Tech- another launch attempt with a Simorgh
nologies showed a launch pad at the Imam launch vehicle.263 This timing coincided
Khomeini Space Center that appeared with statements from the Iranian Minis-
to be the aftermath of a failed launch at- ter of Information and Communications
tempt. Satellite imagery analysts were
Technology, who announced that the pro-
able to note that the pad had been recent-
gram had six satellites ready to launch. He
ly painted, likely for the launch itself and
announced that two are communications
to cover up previous damage from failed
satellites, named Zafar-1 and Zafar-2, were
launches, with smoke billowing from the
reportedly ready for a launch in early Feb-
ground, indicative of a failed launch. An
ruary.264 On February 9, 2020, the Simorgh
anonymous Iranian official admitted to
rocket launched with a satellite on board,
Reuters that the incident was caused by
but the satellite did not reach high enough
technical issues but would not go into fur-
velocity to stay in orbit. A spokesman for
ther detail.259
the Iranian defense ministry’s space pro-
President Trump tweeted a high resolu- gram claimed that the Simorgh functioned
tion image of the scarred launch pad, un- properly, calling it a “remarkable” feat for
derscoring that the United States was not the space program. The minister of Infor-
involved.260 Although Iran has continued mation and Communications Technology
to claim its space program is peaceful, that continued by saying the program is “UN-
has not always been the belief of the U.S. STOPPABLE! We have more Upcoming
government, whose officials often remark Great Iranian Satellites!”265
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

space agency had a reported budget of
$1.5 million, which the minister of Com-
munications and Information Technology
enthusiastically reported saying “being in
Smoke
space is one of the key factors in the pow-
er of governments.”272 In 2017, the budget
for the space agency was reported to be
$4.6 million.273 The space agency’s budget
Probably transporter is separate from Iran’s military spending,
erector
which has increased by over 50 percent
Paint burnt off in the last five years, swelling to 7.5 per-
cent of its total national budget for 2018–
2019.274 Though Iranian leadership takes
Likely post-fire runoff steps to obscure the specifics of its mili-
tary budget, priorities include improving
domestic missile production capabilities.
Because of limited domestic capability to
produce reliable components, Iran con-
tinues to rely on imported components
and materials for their missiles. Iran is not
a major space power in terms of proven
space capabilities, but it continues to in-
Fueling trucks vest in and develop significant counter-
space capabilities.
Figure 11: Satellite Image of Iranian Launch Attempt on August 25, 2019.
csis / maxar technologies COUNTERSPACE
WEAPONS
domestic, private, and international co-
SPACE ORGANIZATION
operation in space issues.268 Kinetic Physical
AND DOCTRINE
The Iranian Space Agency also runs the While currently available open-source
Iranian Space Research Center and re- information does not indicate that Iran
Iran was one of the founding members of portedly has planned to establish a “space is attempting to develop either direct-as-
the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of park,” a space-themed center that focus- cent or co-orbital ASAT weapons, Iran has
Outer Space in 1958; however, the coun- es on education, culture, recreation, and some of the ballistic missile technology
try is one of many that has signed but amusement. The park would be run in on which a future direct-ascent kinetic
not ratified the Outer Space Treaty.266 The partnership with the Sharif University of ASAT capability could be based. In ad-
Iranian Space Agency was established in Technology (SUT), a well-known research dition to a diverse set of ballistic missile
2004 ostensibly to coordinate peaceful university that supports the government programs with varied ranges, Iran has
applications of space activities and tech- in ballistic missile-related projects.269 Lit- substantial conventional forces, with
nology development for the country.267 tle is publicly known about Iran’s doctrine an estimated 523,000 active personnel.275
The agency is under the oversight of the for space and counterspace operations, Iran’s ballistic missile capabilities include
Ministry of Information and Communi- but evidence suggests that Iran believes the Shahab-3, which is believed to be de-
cations Technology, but takes direction the capability “to deny the United States rived from the North Korean No Dong-1
from the Supreme Space Council, which the ability to use space in a regional con- missile.276 The Simorgh SLV is similarly
is chaired by the president of Iran. The flict” is critical to its security.270 Although based on the North Korean Taepo Dong-2,
the country often uses aggressive rhetoric
head of the space agency serves as the including modeling No Dong-1 engines.277
when discussing ballistic missile activi-
secretary of the Supreme Space Council, Iran appears to have been able to repro-
ties, Iran consistently claims that its space
which is overseen by the president and duce these missiles in quantity, which led
program is peaceful.271
focuses on making policy for peaceful U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo to
space technologies, approving state and Budgets for the Iranian Space Agency publicly assert that “Iran has the largest
private space programs, and promoting have risen in the last decade. In 2010, the ballistic missile force in the Middle East.”278

IRAN
Iran has demonstrated the rudimentary to steer and focus a laser as (JCPOA).287 The United States pulled out
ability to launch and operate primitive it passes through the Earth’s of the JCPOA in 2018, and after a series of
satellites for short periods of time, and its atmosphere, is quite sophisti- international events which increased ten-
space monitoring center gives it the abil- cated, indicating that Iran may sions between the two nations, Iran also
ity to track objects and have better space have obtained this technology stated it would no longer adhere to the
situational awareness.279 Having a relia- from Russia or China. Its ca- deal.288 The remaining countries involved
ble understanding of where objects are in pabilities in this area remain in the JCPOA, including Russia and Chi-
space is required for targeting many ca- highly uncertain based on the na, hope to reimplement the agreement.289
pabilities. However, there are many oth- limited publicly available infor- Despite pulling out of the JCPOA, Presi-
er technological hurdles to tackle before mation. dent Trump reiterated as recently as Janu-
Iran could field a direct-ascent kinetic ary 2020 that Iran would “never be allowed
If Iran were to continue pursu-
ASAT weapon, such as precise onboard to have a nuclear weapon.”290 However,
ing a breakout nuclear capa-
sensors that could guide a warhead into the aim of Iran’s nuclear program has his-
bility, it is conceivable that it
a target satellite. torically been to develop a nuclear-armed
could launch a nuclear weap-
ICBM to deter the United States, not a nu-
Realistically, Iran could construct a crude on into orbit as a nuclear ASAT
clear counterspace ASAT weapon.
direct-ascent ASAT capability by mod- capability. In the 1990s, Iran
ifying an existing ballistic missile and entered into agreements with Electronic
launching it within the vicinity of a target both China and Russia to help
Jamming and spoofing are regular tools
satellite with an unguided warhead. It jumpstart its nuclear program.
in Iran’s weapons arsenal. In 2003, Voice
would not likely be able to hit a specific China agreed to include the
of America (VOA) broadcasts into Iran be-
satellite but could create a debris hazard training of Iranian personnel
gan to experience interference with its
in the space environment that threatens and contribute various reactor
transmissions over the Telestar-12 sat-
the safety of numerous other satellites in technologies.284 Iran has also
ellite. The uplink jamming of this com-
similar orbits. entered into a bilateral nu-
mercial satellite originated from the area
clear cooperation agreement
During a military parade in late 2019,
around Havana, Cuba. The U.S. State
with Russia to provide nuclear
Iran unveiled a new indigenous ballistic
Department notified Cuba of
experts, information, and aid
missile kit design, the Labbayk-1, which
the issue, and subsequently
in the completion of Iran’s first “We have been
aims to modify unguided short-range
determined that the source of
nuclear power plant. 285 equipped with
Zelzal and Fateh-110 ballistic missiles into
the jamming was from a com-
guided weapons.280 This new capability Recently, the program has electronic
pound belonging to the Irani-
could lead to an increase in accuracy, as leaned most heavily on North warfare sys-
an Embassy. Cuban authori-
demonstrated in recent Iranian surface- Korean cooperation. In 2012, ties promptly shut down the tems in order
to-air and air-to-air missile attacks in the Iran and North Korea signed
facility and issued a note of not to remain
Middle East.281 This increased capability the Civilian Scientific and Tech-
protest to the Iranian govern- just a defending
may pose a threat to space systems by be- nological Cooperation Agree- ment.291 Similar attacks ema-
force, and rather
ing able to more reliably attack satellite ment, which established joint
nated from Bulgaria and Libya
ground stations throughout the Middle facilities and a “transfer [of] become able to
from 2005 to 2006. Though
East and Europe.282 technology” in multiple fields.286 jam the enemy’s
Iran’s role went unconfirmed,
Former Special Coordinator for communication
“international pressure even-
Non-Kinetic Physical
the State Department’s North
tually brought this to a halt systems,”
Korea Group, David Asher, add-
There are few reports of Iranian non-kinet- and satellite jamming against
ed “the last time North Korea BRIGADE GENERAL AH-
ic physical weapons, but the country may Persian-language program-
signed an agreement like this MAD REZA POURDASTAN293
have acquired and used a laser dazzling ming now emanates exclu-
it led to the largest act of nu-
or blinding counterspace system on a U.S. sively from Iranian territory.”292
clear proliferation in modern
satellite. In 2011, an unnamed European
Iran has also jammed several interna-
history.”
intelligence source was quoted stating
tional and regional television broadcasts
that Iran managed to “blind” a U.S. satel- Development of Iranian nucle-
in the Middle East. In 2010, Iran jammed
lite by “aiming a laser burst quite accurate- ar capability was temporarily
BBC and VOA satellite signals transmit-
ly.”283 The technology necessary to do this, slowed in 2015 by the Joint
ting into Iran. At first, the jamming tar-
particularly the adaptive optics needed Comprehensive Plan of Action
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

geted BBC and VOA broadcasts on the Strait of Hormuz with the goal of causing
Hot Bird 6 commercial satellite, but when ships and aircraft to “inadvertently wan-
IRAN HAS
the broadcasts were moved to transmit der into Iranian waters or airspace in
through other commercial satellites, order to justify a seizure.” The warning
DEMONSTRATED
the jamming targeted those satellites as also mentioned instances of “spoofed”
well.294 In the same year, the head of the communications from ships claiming to
ITS CYBER
Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting be U.S. or other countries’ warships. 302
publicly acknowledged that the Iranian Similar GPS interference was reported by
CAPABILITIES BY
government engaged in the jamming of British ships, prompting British media re-
ATTACKING U.S. foreign broadcast satellites.295 ports that intelligence services were con-
cerned that Iran had used Russian GPS
Al Jazeera faced targeted attacks in Janu-
INFRASTRUC- spoofing technology to guide the vessels
ary 2012 after its coverage of the conflict
into Iranian waters.303 In 2019, numerous
in Syria. The origin of the attacks was
TURE. oil tankers from varying regions reported
traced to two locations in Iran.296 Later
seizures in the Strait of Hormuz, followed
that year, Iran was supported by the Syri-
by an Iranian shoot-down of a remotely
an government in a coordinated jamming
piloted U.S. Navy aircraft over the inter-
effort against approximately 25 interna-
national waters in the region.304
tional broadcasters, “including the BBC,
France 24, Deutsche Welle and the Voice Also in 2019, the commander-in-chief of
of America.”297 A similar report in July the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
of 2019 stated Iran International, a Lon- (IRGC) announced the creation of a new
don-based TV station, believed its signals mounted hardware unit called Sepehr
were being blocked via uplink jamming 110 to protect its systems from electronic
originating from Iran.298 warfare.305 State media credits the system
as being developed by IRGC experts and
Iran has publicly claimed the ability to
“invulnerable to hacks, eavesdropping,
spoof GPS receivers. In 2011, Iran claimed
radio jamming, and electromagnetic dis-
to have forced a U.S. RQ-170 drone to
turbance” but there has been no external
land inside its borders by jamming its sat-
verification of the system.306
ellite communications links and spoof-
ing the GPS receiver. An Iranian engineer Later that year, the Research and Self-Suf-
was quoted at the time as saying that the ficiency Jihad Organization of the Iranian
drone landed “where we wanted it to, army unveiled a portable jamming sys-
without having to crack the remote-con- tem attachable to vehicles and report-
trol signals and communications.”299 edly capable of detecting and disrupting
Though a former Pentagon spokesper- drone flights.307 These announced up-
son claimed there was “no indication the grades of counterdrone capabilities, in-
drone was brought down by hostile ac- cluding a system capable of participating
tivity of any kind,” President Obama did in electronic warfare and radar evasion,
acknowledge that Iran had possession of have not been corroborated outside of
the drone.300 If Iran’s claims of electronic state-sponsored media.308
jamming are true, they represent a signif-
Cyber
icant counterspace capability that could
be used to thwart U.S. precision-guided
Iran began developing its cyber capabil-
weapons and aircraft in the future.
ities through independent hackers who
In 2019, there were similar reports of GPS gained notoriety in the early 2000s. The
spoofing of commercial U.S. ships in the Iranian government often encourages its
Gulf of Oman. Several ships reported a hackers through recruiting into its own
loss of GPS signal and were captured in cyber forces or supporting independent
Iranian territorial waters. After 11 report- operations against its enemies, repre-
ed incidents, the U.S. Maritime Adminis- senting a somewhat unique approach.309
tration issued a warning to U.S. vessels Though initially modest, Iranian cyber
to be aware of GPS interference in the ar- capabilities have grown significantly in
ea.301 The advisory warned of Iranian GPS the last decade, becoming “notable play-
jammers operating on an island near the ers” in the cyber realm.310 Iran has devel-

IRAN
oped advanced offensive cyber capabil- to 500 million attempts per day globally.318
ities that could potentially target U.S. Although there are few confirmed in-
space systems in the future. With three stances of Iran using cyberattacks against
separate branches of the Iranian military space systems, Iran’s increasingly sophis-
contributing to cyber infrastructure, Iran ticated cyber capabilities suggest that it
claims over 100,000 cyberwar volunteers could employ such attacks on space sys-
and recently established a Joint Chiefs of tems if needed.
Staff Cyber Command to better organize
its efforts.311
SUMMARY
This increase in cyber activity has been
mirrored in the country’s budget; in 2017,
the budget of the National Center for Cy- Iran is still far from developing direct-as-
berspace reportedly increased by 45 per- cent ASAT weapons, even with its in-
cent in one year, swelling to $1.2 million. creased focus on launch vehicle devel-
312 Iranian willingness to employ cyber- opment and continued development of
attacks against targeted defense compa- ballistic missile capabilities. Similarly,
nies, media conglomerates, and adver- with only four successful satellites that
saries also appears to be increasing.313 have reached orbit and a growing string
Iran has demonstrated its cyber capa- of failed launches, Iran is unlikely to de-
bilities by attacking U.S. infrastructure, velop a co-orbital ASAT capability in the
though it has often targeted private com- near future. To make significant progress
panies as opposed to government sys- on kinetic and non-kinetic counterspace
tems. In 2012, Iran launched a distributed systems, Iran would likely need to ac-
denial of service (DDOS) attack against quire technology and resources from a
U.S. banks and telecommunications com- major counterspace actor, such as Rus-
panies, which resulted in monetary losses sia or China. However, Iran has growing
in the millions.314 This particular incident electronic and cyber counterspace ca-
prompted a public statement by then-Sec- pabilities and continues to demonstrate
retary of Defense Leon Panetta warning successful jamming and hacking attacks
that the imminent threat of a cyberat- against foreign governments and civil-
tack that could cause significant property ian systems.
damage or kill U.S. citizens would be suf-
ficient justification for a pre-emptive mil-
itary strike.315 In 2019, the FBI was made
aware of attempts, likely originating from
Iran, to gain access to the systems of U.S.
satellite technology companies.316
Various malware programs, including
the destructive Shamoon virus with the
ability to fully wipe computer systems,
have been tied to Iranian state-sponsored
hacking groups. The director of the U.S.
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Securi-
ty Agency issued a warning describing a
similar type of destruction, citing a “rise
in malicious cyber activity” from Iranian
actors. 317 As tensions rise worldwide with
Iran, so do hacking attempts. In a 48-hour
time period in , attacks from
Iranian IP addresses were recorded at up
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

Number of Successful Orbital NORTH KOREA
Launches in 2019319

NORTH
KOREA
“North Korea has been NORTH KOREA SUCCESSFULLY ORBITED ITS FIRST SATELLITE
in after three failed attempts in , April
building new missiles,
2009, and . Its fifth attempt, in , success-
new capabilities,
fully placed a second satellite in orbit. Both successful orbital
new weapons as fast
launches from North Korea have been on the Unha-3 SLV, whose milita-
as anybody on the
rized adaptation is likely the same vehicle outfitted with a reentry vehi-
planet,” cle in place of an orbital satellite.321 Like many other spacefaring nations
around the globe, North Korea’s space capabilities are closely tied to its
GENERAL JOHN E. HYTEN
ballistic missile development.
VICE CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT
CHIEFS OF STAFF, UNITED A North Korean law journal referenced the close relationship between
STATES AIR FORCE320 space capabilities and ballistic missiles, stating “it is an undeniable truth
that satellites launched into orbit by many countries around the world were
made possible by rocket propulsion.” While defending the country’s satel-
lite launching program, the article continued to state that the main differ-
ence between a peaceful space launch and a ballistic missile is whether the
launch vehicle is furnished “with a satellite or a bomb.”322
Although reaching orbit is a significant achievement, many experts doubt
that the two successfully launched satellites perform all of the functions
the North Korean government claims.323 In a 2016 interview with the Asso-
ciated Press, the head of the North Korean space agency stated his intent

NORTH KOREA
Satellite Imagery of the Sohae to continue launching Earth
Space Launch Facilities
Satellite Launching Ground observation satellites, and his
After a Test on December 7, aspirations to send a mission NORTH KOREA HAS TWO ESTABLISHED LAUNCHING AREAS for
2019. Differences include scarred to the moon around 2026. He space capabilities: the Tonghae Satellite Launching Ground and
vegetation and the moving of was quoted as saying, “Even the Sohae Satellite Launching Ground. The Tonghae Satellite
equipment. The facility hosted though the U.S. and its allies Launching Ground is North Korea’s oldest ballistic missile and
rocket engine tests on December try to block our space devel- space launch facility, although a successful orbital launch has
7 and December 13, 2019. opment, our aerospace scien- never been achieved at the facility. According to 
satellite imagery, there was increased activity at the site, includ-
planet / beyond parallel tists will conquer space and
ing a group of people and possibly crates, but no sign of major
definitely plant the flag of the
renovations that would have to take place to prepare the facility
DPRK on the moon.”324
for a vehicle test. However, North Korea has used mobile launch-
There is little indication that
ing platforms for all recent land-based ballistic missile tests,
North Korea is making substan- which could be conducted in the grounds of Tonghae.327
tial efforts to build or sustain a
The Sohae Satellite Launching Ground showed initial steps of dis-
space industrial base, but its
assembly in satellite imagery in the summer of 2018, but reassem-
missile program is advancing.
bly began again after U.S - North Korea Summits in Singapore and
There were 11 separate North
Hanoi.328 In late 2019, North Korea conducted two engine tests at
Korean missile tests in 2019
the Sohae Satellite Launching ground, believed to be modified
alone, which involved as many
liquid-fueled engines for long-range missiles.329 While the specif-
as 20 rockets in total.325 Addi- ics of the tests were unconfirmed, KCNA state media referred to
tional satellite footage taken in the successful tests as “defence science achievements” that will
early 2020 showed increased “have an important effect on changing the strategic position” for
activity at a known missile the country.330 Although conducted at a satellite launching pad,
launch site, possibly signaling experts assess that it was likely another missile test or a step to-
more tests in the near future.326 wards ICBM development, rather than a space vehicle launch.331
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

Satellite Imagery of the Tonghae Satellite on Registration of Objects Launched into
SPACE ORGANIZATION
Launching Ground on December 16, 2019. Outer Space of 1974.335 Four years later,
Analysis shows one launch pad, a second un- AND DOCTRINE in , the country’s Supreme Peo-
finished launch pad, and missile storage for ple’s Assembly established the National
the No-dong medium range ballistic missile, North Korea keeps its doctrine and op- Aerospace Development Administration
and Taepo-dong SLV. Both noted missiles are erational concepts largely under wraps, (NADA), the official North Korean space
capable of reaching LEO. including what is released about its coun- agency.336 Additionally, space has often
airbus / beyond parallel terspace capabilities. The absence of been included in five-year plans that the
discussion about counterspace capabili- regime has put forward.337
ties that could threaten the U.S. military In , a delegate to the United
is unusual given the aggressive rhetoric Nations was reported in state media as
used by the regime in touting its nuclear saying “peaceful development of outer
and missile programs.332 The country con- space is actively conducted in accordance
tinues to advocate internationally for its
with the 2016-2020 plan for national out-
right to a sovereign space program.333 er space development.”338 As reported,
When the regime has spoken about its this plan included an aim to launch a ge-
space program at the United Nations, del- ostationary satellite—a much more chal-
egates speak of respect of international lenging feat which would require a more
norms to maintain peaceful development powerful launch vehicle.339 State media
and use of outer space, including the North reported a successful ground test of a
Korean space program’s right to help the new launch vehicle for this purpose, but
country grow economically.334 In March it has not noted any attempts at an actual
2009, North Korea became a signatory to launch.340 The regime hopes to use satel-
two major UN space treaties: the Outer lites to monitor crop and forestry growth
Space Treaty of 1967 and the Convention as well as to improve communication ca-

NORTH KOREA
pabilities.341 The plan expressed a goal to
Non-Kinetic Physical
field a satellite communication system by
The technology necessary to develop di-
2019, though there is no indication that
rected energy weapons, such as lasers that
goal was achieved.342
are able to dazzle or blind the sensors on
satellites, requires a level of sophistication
that North Korea likely does not possess.345
COUNTERSPACE
It is possible, however, that North Korea
WEAPONS could develop a crude EMP weapon for use
against space assets. In 2017, North Korea
successfully tested a hydrogen bomb un-
Kinetic Physical
derground, a claim that was confirmed by
Current space launch vehicles and ballis- South Korea and Japan.346 Officials from
Pyongyang released a photo of the hydro-
tic missiles demonstrated by North Korea
gen bomb and asserted that the bomb is
could serve as the basis for a kinetic ASAT
able to fit on an ICBM.347 Kim Jong-un has
capability, but many technological hur-
called for further improvements in nuclear
dles remain. To date, North Korea has not
bombs similar to this test in the “Songun”
tested, or indicated that it is attempting to
spirit, which places the military first.348 In
develop, a direct-ascent or co-orbital ASAT
, KCNA reported that Kim
capability. It is unlikely that North Korea
Jong-un declared the world would soon
could quickly gain the technology for an
see a new strategic weapon, adding that
effective direct-ascent or co-orbital ASAT
there will never be denuclearization on the
weapon, as it has only succeeded in plac-
Korean peninsula.349
ing two satellites into orbit, the operation
of which are not confirmed outside state A nuclear weapon on a long range missile
media. This additional capability would would theoretically give North Korea the
capability to create a high-altitude EMP
also require onboard sensors (e.g., optical,
effect.350 In 2018, The Daily NK—a South
infrared, radar) and a guidance system to
Korean news site—obtained North Ko-
steer the weapon into a target satellite.
rean internal propaganda documents
It is conceivable that North Korea could
aimed to inform citizens that the country
field a crude direct-ascent ASAT capability
has the capability to damage enemies’
in the near term in the form of an adapt-
military and civilian electronic systems
ed ballistic missile. This would be possible
beyond repair as a result of a nuclear EMP
with the launch of an unguided warhead attack.351 North Korea is not a signatory of
set to detonate in the vicinity of a target the 1963 Partial Test Ban Treaty, and the
satellite. Rather than directly strike a satel- country has not tested a nuclear weapon
lite, it could create a debris field that would at high altitudes.352
complicate future operations for satellites
Electronic
in a similar orbit. For example, the North
Korean No Dong-1 medium-range ballistic
North Korea has acquired and is constant-
missile would likely be able to carry a 1200
ly using electronic forms of attack against
kg payload to a maximum altitude of 600 varying space systems. In 2010, South
to 750 km—well within the LEO regime.343 Korean Defense Minister Kim Tae-young
Missiles launched from North Korean terri- said in a speech to parliament that “North
tory could more easily be used in a conven- Korea has imported vehicle-mountable
tional attack on nearby ground stations devices capable of jamming GPS signals
that support satellite operations, such as from Russia.” These downlink jamming
the U.S.-operated GPS monitoring station systems reportedly have an effective ra-
in South Korea and other ground stations dius of 50 to 100 km. North Korea began
as far away as Guam.344 using this jamming equipment against
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

South Korea in , but South ported goods and revenue. The Tae Yang
Korean forces could not pinpoint the loca- consistently broadcasted a unique identi-
tion of the jammers at that time because fication number assigned to another ves-
NORTH KOREA
the jamming lasted just 10 minutes in sel to disguise its own illicit movements,
HAS BEEN each instance.353 while still transmitting AIS data. Another
report by the UN Panel of Experts has
In the decade since, North Korea has
CARRYING OUT uncovered additional examples of AIS
repeatedly used its GPS jamming capa-
spoofing techniques used by North Kore-
bilities against South Korea. More GPS
CYBERATTACKS an ships to avoid sanctions.359
jamming occurred in 
and again in , which coincid- According to minutes from a 2008 meet-
BY PLACING
ed with a U.S.-South Korean military ex- ing about network surveillance capa-
INDIVIDUALS ercise. Jamming occurred again in April bilities, North Korean officials inquired
2012, disrupting air traffic at Incheon about a satellite jamming system to two
IN SCATTERED and Gimpo international airports, forcing groups of internationally contracted
flights to use alternative navigation sys- engineers. The meeting ended with an
FOREIGN tems.354 In March and , over 250 agreement that “the number of jamming
South Korean fishing boats lost access to systems that prevents interception by sat-
COUNTRIES IN
GPS, forcing them to return to shore.355 A ellite should be increased.” However, ana-
few days later, South Korea complained lysts believe it is possible that the inquiry
AN ATTEMPT TO
to the UN Security Council that North was an excuse to get imported German
Korea was jamming GPS signals across cellular detection equipment, which was
DISGUISE THE
the border, with the jamming coming subsequently used to catch North Korean
ORIGIN OF THE from five areas in North Korea: Pyong- citizens with Chinese cell phones.360
yang, Kaesong, Haeju, Yonan county, and
Cyber
ATTACKS. Mount Kumgang.356 Documents state that
in 2016, 2,143 aircraft disclosed GPS inter-
Under the Kim Jong-un regime, North
ference, likely due to North Korean jam-
Korea has used its cyber forces frequent-
ming operations.357
ly, first launching attacks on South Korea
The South Korean Defense Ministry has and the United States, then branching
said it believes the jamming attacks orig- out to others. According to CrowdStrike,
inate from “a regiment-sized electronic North Korean hackers have the sec-
warfare unit near the North Korean cap- ond-fastest breakout time (the time need-
ital Pyongyang, and battalion-sized units ed for hackers to achieve their objectives
closer to the inter-Korean border.”358 The in an attack) of any hacking organization
jammers are mounted on mobile plat- in the world, behind Russia. North Korea’s
forms and are operated intermittently, malicious cyber activity tends to focus on
which could be difficult to locate and financial targets or inter-Korea issues. A
neutralize in a conflict. North Korea ap- majority of the cyberattacks stemming
pears to be gaining operational experi- from North Korea are “linked to curren-
ence using these systems in peacetime. cy generation and economy-bolstering
Because the GPS jammers were acquired efforts for the Kim regime.”361
from Russia, it is possible that North Ko-
Experts believe there are around 6,000 -
rea could also have acquired other types
7,500 military personnel conducting cy-
of jamming capabilities that can target
ber warfare for the North Korean state.
different satellite systems, such as uplink
Cybersecurity defector and founder of
jammers that can disrupt military satel-
North Korea Intellectuals Solidarity, Kim
lite communications.
Hueng-kwang, said most cyber opera-
Additionally, AIS spoofing has been used tions in the country are organized in a
in shipping vessels during 2019 likely in unit directly under North Korea’s main
an attempt to hide what is assumed to overseas intelligence agency, the Recon-
be coal smuggling operations. A report naissance General Bureau (RGB).362 He
details the suspicious behavior of one of emphasized that North Korea was “in-
North Korea’s largest bulk ships, the Tae spired by the Chinese cyberwar units and
Yang, which North Korea relies on for im- learned from them.”363 According to Kim,

NORTH KOREA
members of an elite North Korean hack- its ICBM-class missiles, its limited num-
ing group go on covert missions overseas, ber of successful orbital launches suggest
generally to places with better internet that the country is far from developing
than the notoriously shielded country, to the capabilities needed to pose a signif-
lower the risk of being caught. South Ko- icant kinetic physical threat to foreign
rea’s vice foreign minister confirmed this satellite systems. The only significant risk
report, telling Reuters that North Korea of non-kinetic physical attack from North
has been carrying out cyberattacks by Korea is high altitude nuclear detonation,
placing individuals in scattered foreign a devastating, irreversible counterspace
countries in an attempt to disguise the or- attack that would indiscriminately affect
igin of the attacks. 364 systems in the target satellite’s orbital re-
gime. Importantly, North Korea is improv-
A leaked report sent to the UN Security
ing its electronic warfare capabilities, as
Council’s North Korea sanctions commit-
demonstrated in continued GPS jamming
tee stated that through 35 separate cyber-
and spoofing operations, and is continu-
attacks, North Korea has stolen over $2
ing to use cyberattacks against a variety
billion, which has likely been used to fund
of targets worldwide.
weapons development.365 Subsequently,
the U.S. Department of the Treasury an-
nounced sanctions for three state-spon-
sored cyber groups from the country,
naming them responsible for malicious
cyber activity on critical infrastructure.366
North Korean hackers have also been tied
to a nuclear power plant in India and pos-
sibly the Indian Space Research Organi-
zation during its Chandrayaan-2 mission,
although Indian space authorities deny
they were compromised. 367 They are also
suspected to have hacked an Israeli aero-
space and defense company.368 Given its
demonstrated cyber capabilities, it is con-
ceivable that North Korea could initiate
a cyberattack against U.S. space systems
or ground stations, although there is no
publicly available information to suggest
this has happened to date.
SUMMARY
North Korea has demonstrated growing
capabilities in two counterspace weapons
categories: electronic and cyber. It is also
developing some of the necessary tech-
nologies to field a non-kinetic physical nu-
clear EMP counterspace weapon through
its nuclear program, but this does not ap-
pear to be the intent of those activities.
Although North Korea has demonstrated
its dedication to increasing the range of
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

Number of Successful Orbital INDIA
Launches in 2019369

INDIA
“When India INDIA JOINED THE WORLD STAGE AS A RISING SPACE POWER by
launching its first satellite from the Satish Dhawan Space Center in 1980.
celebrates [its]
India has since developed highly successful launch vehicles, a range of
75th year of
communications, imaging, and other critical satellites, and is beginning
Independence
serious development of counterspace capabilities. While India has no over-
in 2022, and if
arching national space policy yet, the government of India is in the process
possible even
of creating one.371 Currently, it does have various organizations dedicated to
before, an Indian
the space domain in both the military and civil sectors, each with support-
son or daughter will ing policies and doctrine. Among these organizations is the principal space
undertake a manned organization in India, the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), which
space mission on is responsible for maintaining the SLVs and spaceports of India.
board ‘Gaganyaan’
Currently, India has two operational orbital launch vehicles, the Polar Satel-
carrying the lite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) and the Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle
national flag.” (GSLV). These two vehicles launched six times in 2019, representing only
a small portion of the 67 total Indian launches since 1980 from the Satish
PRIME MINISTER
Dhawan Space Centre.372 India made history in 2017 with the largest num-
NARENDRA MODI370
ber of satellites on any single mission, launching 104 satellites with one
PSLV, breaking the previous record of 37 satellites held by Russia since 2014.
All but three of these satellites were foreign owned.373

INDIA
SUCCESSFUL ORBITAL LAUNCHES PER YEAR BY COUNTRY (1957-2019)

CHINA
INDIA
100 USA THE TOP
RUSSIA
OTHERS
80 PRIORITIES
60 FOR THE
40 ISRO IN 2020
20 ARE A CHAN-
0 DRAYAAN-3
1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2019
MISSION TO THE
Figure 12: Indian Orbital Space Launches (1957 - 2019). LUNAR SURFACE
spacetrack.org / csis aerospace security374
AND THE
GAGANYAAN
The Satish Dhawan Space Center has moon and conduct a hard-landing for HUMAN SPACE-
been India’s only major spaceport since the purpose of targeting and practic-
it began launching in 1980. Howev- ing a future soft-landing.379 In 2019, the FLIGHT
er, due to the anticipated increase in Chandrayaan-2 spacecraft was placed
PROGRAM,
demand for national and commercial on a GSLV and launched into lunar orbit.
space launch in the coming years, the While on approach to the lunar surface
THOUGH IT IS
Indian government has begun the land to attempt a soft-landing, the Vikram
acquisition process for the construction Lander lost contact with the ISRO and
UNLIKELY THAT
of a new spaceport.375 The proposed crashed into the lunar surface.380 After
spaceport, to be located in the south- about a month of attempting to re-es- EITHER WILL
ern state of Tamil Nadu, is planned to tablish contact with the lunar lander,
mainly service India’s newest launch the Indian government made an offi- LAUNCH
vehicle, the Small Satellite Launch cial announcement that they had lost
BEFORE 2021.
Vehicle (SSLV).376 A derivative of the contact and were unable to recover the
PSLV, this new Indian launch vehicle is spacecraft.381 However, this failure has
rated to carry “up to 500 kilograms to only reinvigorated the Indian space pro-
mid-inclination low Earth orbits and gram and public.
300 kilograms to [sun-synchronous or-
In an announcement on January 1, 2020,
bit (SSO)].”377 The location of the pro-
Chief Kailasavadivoo Sivan, head of the
posed spaceport will allow for launch-
ISRO, stated that the top priorities for
ing southward into a polar or near-polar
the ISRO in 2020 are a Chandrayaan-3
orbit, which is difficult from the Satish
mission to the lunar surface and the
Dhawan Space Center due to the need
Gaganyaan human spaceflight pro-
to maneuver around Sri Lanka.
gram, though it is unlikely that either
Only three countries—China, the So- will launch before 2021.382 The Chan-
viet Union, and the United States— drayaan-3 mission will similarly attempt
have ever “soft-landed” on the lunar to conduct a soft-landing on the lunar
surface.378 In 2009, India successfully surface. When asked if a crewed mission
launched the Chandrayaan-1 space- to the moon was in the near future for
craft, which was designed to orbit the India, Sivan said, “definitely, but not im-
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

mediately.”383 Four Indian astronauts will be sent to Vikram Lander and Pragyan Rover. The Vikram lander
Russia for 11 months to receive training in prepa- was launched on the Chandrayaan-2 mission, but it did
ration for the Gaganyaan program. Additional pro- not achieve a successful soft landing on the lunar surface.
gram-specific training will also take place in India.384 isro
ORGANIZATION AND DOCTRINE
ization (DSRO) in late 2019 to further develop and test
counterspace systems and related technologies.387
India does not have an official military department
In late , India’s top strategic planners from
focused on space. It instead created a separate agen- several agencies gathered to begin to establish new
cy, the Defence Space Agency (DSA), to coordinate policies and doctrine for future military and non-mil-
between and command the space assets of the Indian itary uses for space. Called IndSpaceEx, the strategic
Army, Navy, and Air Force, including India’s new di- planners were led through a wargaming simulation
rect-ascent ASAT capabilities.385 According to the two- that was meant to assess military assets of other lead-
star general appointed to head the DSA, “the agency ing space powers—namely the United States, China,
will eventually grow into a full-fledged Space Com- and Russia—to better assess the level to which India
mand in the years ahead.”386 To date, however, there is must counter international space threats.388 The ses-
no confirmed timeline for this growth. Within the DSA, sion’s conclusion was that future wars may be dom-
India established the Defence Space Research Organ- inated by activities in the cyber and space domains,

INDIA
leading to asymmetric advantages or dis- Given these factors, it is likely that the Indi-
Mission Shakti
advantages.389 an government was attempting to limit the
ON MARCH 27, 2019, India successfully potential for long-lasting orbital debris.392
A 2019-2020 annual report released by
launched a Prithvi Delivery Vehicle Mark-II Since the test, a majority of the debris has
the Government of India’s Department of (PDV MK-II) missile defense interceptor at deorbited, and by the end 2019, just 18
Space detailed initial steps of an official one of its own satellites. Launched in late pieces of debris large enough to track re-
space policy for the country. This policy , the target satellite, Micro- mained in orbit.393
will “support the pursuance of space activ- sat-R, was specifically placed in a low-alti- The Indian ASAT test did not receive the
ities by various agencies in India including tude sun-synchronous orbit as the target same level of international outcry as the
private sector and start-up companies in for an ASAT test. After the successful test in Chinese ASAT test, in part because it pro-
March, independent analysts realized that duced much less orbital debris. The United
the aerospace sector.”390 It is clear through
an earlier attempt to intercept the satellite States, for example, only had one govern-
India’s military space reorganization, re- on February 12 of the same year failed.391
ment official speak out against the test.
newed focus on commercial partners, and
What was perhaps most notable about the NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine de-
it’s test of a direct-ascent ASAT in March Indian ASAT test was the muted internation- cried the test because some pieces of debris
2019 that the Indian leadership views al outcry that occurred afterward. This was were pushed to a higher altitude, threat-
space as a key operational domain. likely due in part to the minimal amount ening the astronauts on the International
of orbital debris created—only about 400 Space Station.394 While public international
pieces remained in orbit immediately after outcry was minimal, Pakistan was one of
the test, compared to the over 3,000 pieces few states to openly denounce the test, urg-
COUNTERSPACE of debris created during the 2007 Chinese ing all countries to “condemn India’s action
ASAT test. The Indian ASAT test took place and strengthen international laws regard-
WEAPONS
at a relatively low altitude, and at the time ing the militarization of space.”395 Addition-
of impact, the interceptor was on a down- ally, the Union of Concerned Scientists de-
ward trajectory. This resulted in much of nounced the test, expressing that this test
Kinetic Physical
the debris having a downward trajectory, harmed international efforts to prevent
The Indian government took notice of allowing it to be more quickly deorbited. further weaponization of outer space.396
China’s successful 2007 direct-ascent
ASAT, causing it to shift focus to pro-
tecting its vulnerable space assets from Figure 13: Depiction of Kinetic Physical ASAT Test by India in 2019. Muted international out-
a Chinese threat. As one scholar noted, cry in response to this ASAT test was, in part, due to the low amount of debris created because
“It suddenly reminded them that their of the slight downward trajectory of the missile on impact.
diverse space assets were now at risk, aerospace security project / emily tiemeyer
MICROSAT-R DEBRIS
ASAT
at highest
altitiude
India
Bay of Bengal
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

hostage to the dangers emanating from their most
formidable regional threat.” For years, defense
planners debated the merits of conducting a sim-
ilar kinetic ASAT test to signal to China and other
nations that India had the ability to retaliate in
kind if its space assets were attacked.397 The gov-
ernment eventually concluded that India should
pursue kinetic ASAT weapons.
On March 27, 2019, India became the fourth coun-
try—behind the United States, China, and Rus-
sia—to successfully test a direct-ascent ASAT mis-
sile. Named Mission Shakti, meaning “strength” in
Hindi, the test was conducted with an Indian-pro-
duced ballistic missile which intercepted a small
target satellite in LEO.398 In a tweet, Prime Minister
Narendra Modi said this test will “have a historic
impact on generations to come.”399
“In the journey
India does not have any publicly known co-orbit-
of every nation al ASAT capabilities. However, Defence Research
there are and Development Organization Chief G. Satheesh
moments that Reddy announced in —less than a month
after the success of Mission Shakti—that India was
bring utmost
developing co-orbital ASAT capabilities and that
pride and have a
the details remained classified.401 India is devel-
historic impact
oping, in partnership with France, the technical
PDV-MK II Missile Lifting Off on Track to Intercept
on generations
capabilities to conduct RPO on orbit as part of its Microsat-R on March 27, 2019. The missile used by
to come.”
efforts to develop a national space station.402 RPO India during its first ASAT test was an indigenously
proficiency is a key step toward the fundamental manufactured missile.409
PRIME MINISTER
capabilities of building some types of co-orbital
NARENDRA MODI400 government of india
counterspace weapons.
The Indian military also has the ability to direct-
ly attack satellite ground stations. Indian special
In its 2018 Technology Perspective and Capability
operations units are specially trained to “to carry
Roadmap, India detailed investments in a two-
out crippling attacks against critical enemy targets
phase Tactical High Energy Laser System. The sec-
miles away.”403 The newly created Armed Forces
ond phase of this system is intended to play an
Special Operations Division is designed and mod-
“anti-satellite role from ground & aerial platform.”407
eled off of the United States Joint Special Opera-
Following the Mission Shakti test, DRDO Chief Sath-
tions Command (JSOC).404
eesh Reddy stated that India was in the process of
Non-Kinetic Physical developing different ASAT technologies, including
directed-energy weapons, lasers, and electromag-
Thus far, India does not appear to have developed
netic pulses.408 However, beyond these general
and tested non-kinetic physical counterspace
statements and reports, the government of India
weapons. However, the 2010 Technology Perspec-
has not divulged any details of these activities.
tive and Roadmap released by the Ministry of De-
fense detailed that ASAT weapons “for electronic As a nuclear-armed state, India has the ability to
or physical destruction of satellites (2,000 km al- launch a nuclear warhead into space as a coun-
titude above earth’s surface) and geosynchronous terspace weapon. Theoretically, in addition to
orbits” are a key area of future focus.405 Following the kinetic properties of the nuclear weapon, In-
this, a new Technology Perspective and Capability dia could use the EMP effect from a high-altitude
Roadmap in 2013 noted a focus on developments nuclear detonation to disable satellites. However,
in electronic weapons, specifically miniaturization there is no publicly available indication that India
of EW elements as payloads on satellites.406 is pursuing a nuclear EMP space weapon.

INDIA
Electronic “India has always
been opposed to the
India’s 2018 Technology Perspective and
weaponization of space
Capability Roadmap also shows invest-
ment in an integrated EW system with and an arms race in outer
requirements to “detect, monitor, lo- space, and this test does
cate and jam enemy cellular receivers not in any way change this
and satellite communication receivers.”411
position.”
Another planned system has similar re-
quirements as the integrated system and PRIME MINISTER NARENDRA MODI 410
is intended to also be able to “carry out
jamming & spoofing of satellite based po-
sitioning systems.”412 However, India has
not yet publicly demonstrated its jam-
ming or spoofing capabilities.
Cyber
In 2019, the government of India set up
the Defence Cyber Agency (DCA). Similar
to the Defence Space Agency, the DCA is
meant “to control and coordinate joint
cyber operations.”413 There have been
questions as to whether India may have
some kind of cyber deterrence against
enemy satellites with both space- and
land-based systems; however, Union Min-
ister Shripad Naik has stated that such
information is sensitive and therefore is
unable to be confirmed or denied.414
SUMMARY
Although India has had a recent success-
ful direct-ascent ASAT test, other types of
counterspace weapons are far from devel-
oped. As India focuses more on building
out its space assets, as well as its counter-
space assets, subsequent counterspace
weapons tests may occur. While the 2019
ASAT test has certainly caused great de-
bate in the international space commu-
nity, the muted official international re-
sponse sets a different precedence from
the Chinese 2007 test. With little to no
repercussions, India demonstrated that a
lower-altitude ASAT test may be accepted
by the international community.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

Number of Successful
OTHERS
Orbital Launches in 2019415

OTHERS
WHILE THE PREVIOUS CHAPTERS HAVE BEEN DEDICATED to
“I’m convinced that
the countries making the largest strides in counterspace capa-
in the future, if we
bilities—China, Russia, Iran, North Korea, and India—they are
were to get into
not the only ones thinking strategically about the changing
a conflict with a
space environment. This chapter includes significant discussion and devel-
peer or near-peer opments related to counterspace capabilities in other countries and non-
competitor, we’re state actors.
going to have to
fight for space
FRANCE
superiority.”
GENERAL JOHN RAYMOND,
AS THE THIRD OLDEST SPACE PROGRAM IN THE WORLD, France has ac-
CHIEF OF SPACE OPERA-
TIONS AND COMMANDER OF complished much since it first established its national space agency, the
U.S. SPACE COMMAND416 Centre national d’études spatiales (CNES), in 1961. France launched its first
satellite in 1965, led the development of the Ariane family of launch vehi-
cles, and became one of the foremost European space powers through its
strong relationship with the European Space Agency (ESA).417
In 2018, the CNES was a key partner of NASA’s Mars Discovery Program, pro-
viding the InSight (Interior Exploration using Seismic Investigations, Geod-
esy and Heat Transport) mission. InSight deployed a seismometer, named
SEIS (Seismic Experiment for Interior Structures), which measures “Mars’
tectonic activity to learn more about its structure, for example the size of its
core and the thickness of its mantle.”418 InSight landed on Mars in 2018 for
its planned two-year mission, and in , the SEIS seismometer de-
tected and recorded the first “Marsquake,” allowing scientists to study the
slight tremors detected on the Martian surface.419

OTHERS
Deployment of the SEIS Protection Dome on Mars.
nasa / jpl-caltech
Recent events have triggered changes in France’s fense Strategy in 2019. Among other things, the
overall space policy. In , France French strategy calls for the creation of a Space
publicly charged Russia with interfering with the Command under the Air Force and renaming the
operation of one of its satellites in GEO. The Athe- Air Force to the Air and Space Force. The strategy
na-Fidus, a jointly operated French-Italian military notes that “renewed analysis of the space environ-
satellite, provides broadband military communica- ment and its threats, risks and opportunities, as
tions. France alleged that the Russian satellite, well as the recognition of the strategic nature of
known as Luch or Olymp-K, maneuvered close the space assets for France force our country to re-
enough to Athena-Fidus in 2017 to intercept mili- visit its model in order to remain a leading space
tary communications.420 power.” The Space Defense Strategy further de-
Following this public denunciation of Russian clares that France will establish a “space defense
space activities, France issued a new Space De- capacity” in order to “enable the armed forces to
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

SUCCESSFUL ORBITAL LAUNCHES PER YEAR BY COUNTRY (1957-2019)
Figure 14: Space Orbital Launches from Oth- 120
CHINA
er Nations (1957 - 2019). This figure includes INDIA
orbital launches from nations such as New 100 USA
RUSSIA
Zealand and Japan, as well as the European
OTHERS
Space Agency. 80
spacetrack.org / csis aerospace

security421

1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2019
impose a peaceful use of space, deter dazzle or blind satellites that may be
unfriendly or hostile acts against our threatening French assets.
space assets, and be able, as the case
A laser mounted on satellites is theoret-
may be, to defend our space-based in-
ically possible but faces some techno-
terests.”422 France has also committed
logical hurdles. Laura Grego from the
to increasing its military space budget
Union of Concerned Scientists ex-
by 700 million euros between 2019 and
plained that “dazzling from accompa-
2025 to support the creation of Space
nying satellites (probably not ‘nano’
Command and pursue “active defense”
satellites unless that definition is very
satellite technologies.423 The defense of
generous) or onboard might stop other
space assets appears to be in response
slow moving proximity operations sat-
to the interference France felt was
ellites from observing their satellite
caused by Luch.
[targets] or to make it hard for them to
In a speech announcing the new strate- use lidar for getting really close.” Dr.
gy, French Minister of the Armed Forces Grego went on to assert that it would be
Florecne Parly spoke at length about hard to use lasers on cross-orbit attacks
the changes. In some of the most direct or direct-ascent ASAT weapons.425
and specific language by a government
France’s public posture toward protect-
official from any nation on space de-
ing its space capabilities is shifting. The
fense, the defense minister said, “I want
country’s leaders are indicating a move
to be precise: active defence is not an
toward active defense in space, which
offensive strategy, what it is about is
has contributed to a broader public de-
self-defence.” She went on to add that,
bate on the proper use and develop-
“If our satellites are threatened, we will
ment of counterspace weapons. While
consider dazzling those of our oppo-
countries like China and Russia have
nents. We reserve the time and means
been extensively developing offensive
of the response: this may involve the
counterspace weapons, such as jam-
use of high-power lasers deployed from
ming and spoofing capabilities, France
our satellites or from our patrol na-
no-satellites.”424 Through these remarks seems to be considering a different
strategy: defensive capabilities on or-
Parly sheds further light on France’s
plans to develop and deploy “body- bit. However, the country’s policies ap-
guard” or “patrol” satellites to protect pear to be in flux, and there is little pub-
its space assets, as well as its plans to lic indication of how quickly France
mount lasers on satellites in order to plans to pursue this new direction.

OTHERS
by using GPS and Google Maps technolo- Israeli Missile Interceptor, Arrow-3, was
ISRAEL
gy. The spoofing targeted the relation- tested out of the Pacific Spaceport in
ship between the Tesla Model 3’s NOA Alaska.431 Designed to intercept medium-range
In , the United States and Isra- system and the GPS it relied on to main- ballistic missiles, the Arrow-3 system has been
el jointly tested the Arrow-3 missile in- tain autopilot. The test itself took place speculated to also be capable of performing
terceptor. While not publicly listed as a on an interstate and made the car be- direct-ascent anti-satellite operations.432
direct-ascent ASAT weapon, “the Ar-
lieve it was further along on the route, missile defense agency
row-3 interceptor successfully demon-
causing it to make an incorrect turn into
strated an engagement capability
a rest stop instead of the planned exit
against the exo-atmospheric target
further down the road.429 In response to
during the test.”426 Speculation of the
these claims, Tesla stated that the test
Arrow-3 system being used as an ASAT
was only a promotional stunt and that
weapon began in 2009 when leading
they have no safety concerns with the
space military experts pointed out that
Tesla-3’s NOA.430
“Israel’s planned Arrow-3 high-altitude
ballistic missile defense system could Israel has also begun development of a
relatively easily be adapted to destroy ground-based and plane-mounted high-en-
Iranian spy satellites if and when Tehran ergy laser defense system designed to tar-
manages to deploy high-resolution or- get threats in the air. Currently it has no stat-
biting vehicles.”427 ed counterspace implications, but the
The Israeli company Regulus claims to technology could be adapted to perform
have spoofed a Tesla Model 3 using the some counterspace operations. With a
Navigate on Autopilot (NOA) system.428 power level of 50-100kW, this airborne laser
The purpose of the NOA system is to fol- could be capable of daZzling or even
low a predetermined route maintained blinding satellites in LEO.433
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

stations necessary to conduct these de-
JAPAN
fense operations.437
THE JAPANESE
Japan is also reportedly considering the
In the past year, Japan has made progress
toward setting up a new Space Domain development of active defenses to protect GOVERNMENT
its space systems. Using robotic arm tech-
Mission Unit, a military organization
nology developed by JAXA, the Japanese IS DEBATING
meant to protect Japanese space assets
as more countries are moving to further government is debating options to devel-
OPTIONS TO
weaponize space through the testing and op a co-orbital satellite defense system to
development of kinetic and non-kinetic deter attacks on Japanese satellites. This
DEVELOP A
weapons.434 Citing Japan’s need “to pro- system, which would intercept an attack-
tect itself from potential threats as rivals ing satellite in order to defend another CO-ORBITAL
develop missiles and other technology,” Japanese space asset, could be launched
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe said this new as early as the mid-2020s.438 The govern- SATELLITE
organization will work closely with its ment is also reportedly considering op-
American counterpart, the United States tions to disable hostile satellites through DEFENSE
Space Force. The Space Domain Mission electronic and cyber means.439
SYSTEM.
Unit will also cooperate with the newly
In April of 2019, Japan deployed a Hayabu-
re-established U.S. Space Command and
sa-2 probe system to an asteroid, Ryugu,
Japan’s own civil space agency, the Japan
which contained a small carry-on impac-
Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA).435
tor (SCI). The SCI is an explosive projectile
With a small core established in 2020, the
Space Domain Mission Unit plans to be able to be launched at the asteroid to form
fully operational in 2022 to “bolster capa- an artificial crater. This explosive, which
bility and system[s] in order to secure created rubble for Hayabusa-2 to collect
space superiority.”436 After its establish- and bring back to Earth as samples, could
ment, the Space Domain Mission Unit will be placed on a satellite and be used as a
be responsible for operating the ground co-orbital anti-satellite weapon.440
Spoofing in the Mediterranean Sea
CIVIL AND COMMERCIAL MARINE GPS USERS reported consistent loss of GPS signal in
the Mediterranean Sea and surrounding areas throughout 2019. These outages ranged
from the coast of Libya to Greece and Egypt’s Suez Canal. The U.S. Maritime Administra-
tion issued alerts that specifically mention the possibility of GPS interference in the East-
ern and Central Mediterranean regions.441 The increased instances of GPS jamming have
led captains to suppress their AIS data and switch to receive only. This has led to a de-
crease in situational awareness on the sea.442
Greece
Turkey
Pireaus
East of Malta
Valletta
Larnaca
Sabratha Field
Tripoli Mediterranean Sea
Damietta
El Shaikh Mobarak
Misurata Port Said
Alexandria
Port Suez
Libya Egypt
u.s. coast guard navigation center / emily tiemeyer

OTHERS
HAMBURG

EUROPE
ASIA
Pacific
AFRICA Ocean
SINGAPORE
Arabian Sea 
Atlantic
Ocean
Route of the container ship used
to detect and record interference
to GPS and other satellite
OCEANIA
navigation systems
United Kingdom is developing its own Figure 15: The Journey of the
UNITED
high-energy laser for anti-drone and mis- Basle Express. The Basle Ex-
KINGDOM press was a cargo ship outfitted
sile defense. These lasers, while not di-
with GPS receivers designed to
rectly cited as counterspace weapons, track and collect GPS interfer-
The United Kingdom has be- have the potential to be further devel- ence. The ship travelled from
gun restructuring its military oped into counterspace capabilities.445 Germany to Singapore tracking
and detailing many instances of
space organization, although
GPS interference.
it does not plan to create a
german aerospace center
separate military service for NON-STATE ACTORS
space. The current restructur-
ing effort should result in a
In 2019, reports emerged of position,
two-star major general be-
navigation, and timing (PNT) jamming in
coming the director of Space
northeastern China, disrupting civilian
within the Ministry of Defence,
aircraft flying over the area. Authorities
supported by policy and capa-
were able to trace the jamming origin to
bilities teams.443 This comes
a farm in Heilongjiang province near the
after the U.K. government de-
city of Harbin. Frustrated by a local
clared space as part of its criti-
gang’s hijinks of using drones to suppos-
cal national infrastructure in
2015 and more recently as a edly infect local farmers’ pigs with Afri-
warfighting domain.444 While can swine fever—a disease deadly to
the UK has not explicitly en- pigs, but harmless to humans—the farm-
dorsed the development of er used PNT signal jamming to protect
space defense systems and his herd. The gangs were infecting local
counterspace weapons, the pigs to force farmers to lower the prices
requisite technology is within and then would resell the pork to the
its reach. For example, the public as “healthy” for the full price.446
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

In 2018, at Hong Kong’s 10-year celebra-
tion of the Wine and Dine Festival, a
drone light show over Victoria Harbor
was disrupted by GPS jamming, which
caused 46 drones to fall from the sky, re-
sulting in $127,500 in damages.447 In re-
sponse to questions about the incident,
the board’s executive director, Anthony
Lau Chun-hon, said that “the [jamming]
signals were so strong that many of them
just dropped from the air.”448
In April of 2017, a commercial container
ship, the Basle Express, left Hamburg,
Germany on a research mission equipped
with receivers designed to pick up on in-
terference. The Basle Express mission
was designed to sense levels of jamming
and spoofing in different areas of the
world.449 While travelling around Europe,
the Middle East, Africa, and Asia, the
ship’s crew detected strong interference
“at some of the world’s largest seaports,
including Jeddah in Saudi Arabia, Singa-
pore, Hong Kong, and Shanghai, and less
often, on the open sea.”450 With many
commercial vessels poorly suited to op-
erating in a world where GPS is not guar-
anteed, some experts are recommend-
ing that new anti-jamming systems will
need to be created to ensure that com-
mercial shipping can continue unthreat-
ened in an increasingly technology-de-
pendent world.451
SUMMARY
In the last year, more states are consider-
ing the development of offensive and de-
fensive counterspace capabilities to pro-
tect space systems from attacks. Nations
are moving to reorganize their national
security space enterprise, as the United
States did in 2019, to better address the
growing uncertainty and threats in the
space domain. Jamming and spoofing
technologies are also being used around
the world by non-state actors in both
conflict zones and thriving seaports, to
gain military and economic advantage.
Collectively, these developments are
making the space environment more dy-
namic and uncertain—a trend that is
likely to continue in the coming years.

WHAT TO WATCH
WHAT TO
WATCH
THIS YEAR’S EDITION OF THE CSIS SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT
finds that threats to space systems are growing as more countries
and non-state actors acquire counterspace capabilities and, in
some cases, employ them in more ways. While this report primari-
ly details the developments in counterspace weapons that have occured in
the last year, some of these developments have been ongoing for several
years. This section highlights the types of threats and counterspace activi-
ties where more developments are expected to occur in the coming months
and years.
Electronic counterspace weapons continue to proliferate at a rapid pace in
both how they are used and who is using them. Satellite jamming and spoof-
ing devices are becoming part of the every-day arsenal for countries that
want to operate in the gray zone—i.e., below the threshold of overt conflict.
The jamming and spoofing of satellites has become somewhat common,
and without strong repercussions these adverse activities could gradually
become normalized. The fact that Russian President Vladimir Putin appears
to travel with GPS jamming devices in his motorcade and that China ap-
pears to be spoofing GPS signals to conceal illicit activities in its own ports
demonstrate how important and integrated these capabilities have become
at all levels. One should expect that the rate of satellite jamming and spoof-
ing incidents will only increase as these capabilities continue to proliferate
and become more sophisticated in the coming years.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

One of the most significant counterspace as an independent military service for
developments in the past year was the In- space, many things are in flux within the
dian test of a direct-ascent ASAT weapon. military space community. While there is
This incident proved that a kinetic test great opportunity in this reorganization
done in a way that minimizes orbital de- process, there are many risks as well. A
bris may not generate the same degree of chief concern is that an excessive focus
diplomatic backlash as the Chinese ASAT on building bureaucracy (and attempts
test in 2007. Moreover, the Indian test to limit bureaucracy) could distract sen-
and how it was received could incentivize ior leaders’ attention from the evolving
other nations, such as Pakistan, to devel- threats to space systems and the U.S.
op and demonstrate ASAT capabilities of military’s efforts to counter these threats.
their own. Key developments to watch within the
United States are updates to space doc-
Russia also continued to step up its co-or-
trine, strategy, and policy and invest-
bital activities in the past year. The Rus-
ments in new space capabilities and
sian Luch satellite continued its close
missions. Developments in these areas
inspection of satellites in geostationary
would be a clear indication that the reor-
orbit, despite international denuncia-
ganization efforts put in place in 2019 are
tion of its activities. Russia also placed a
part of a fundamental shift in the U.S. mil-
widely-reported inspector around a clas-
itary’s overall approach to making space
sified U.S. Government satellite in low
more defendable.
Earth orbit. Both the Indian ASAT test and
Russia’s co-orbital activities may provide
further incentive for nations to develop
and deploy defensive counterspace capa-
bilities of their own, as France announced
it intends to do. Nations may also seek to
draw distinctions between offensive and
defensive counterspace weapons in order
to justify the latter while delegitimizing
the former.
As nations reevaluate the threats to their
space systems, some have moved to reor-
ganize existing space organizations or cre-
ate new military organizations to better
focus on space as a warfighting domain.
France is creating a Space Command
within its military and renaming its Air
Force the Air and Space Force, while the
United Kingdom may not be far behind in
reorganizing its space forces. In the com-
ing years, more nations may continue to
reorganize and elevate space forces with-
in their militaries both to focus attention
internally and to signal externally.
A final area to watch in the coming year is
how the United States continues to adapt
to face threats in the space domain. The
U.S. military is in the midst of what is ar-
guably the most significant reorganiza-
tion since the Goldwater-Nichols Act of
1986. With the re-establishment of United
States Space Command as a geographic
combatant command for space and the
new establishment of the Space Force

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
TODD HARRISON is the director of the Aerospace Security Project and the director of
Defense Budget Analysis at CSIS. As a senior fellow in the International Security Program,
he leads the Center’s efforts to provide in-depth, nonpartisan research and analysis of
space security, air power, and defense funding issues. Mr. Harrison joined CSIS from the
Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, where he was a senior fellow for de-
fense budget studies. He previously worked at Booz Allen Hamilton where he consulted
for the U.S. Air Force on satellite communications systems and supported a variety of
other clients evaluating the performance of acquisition programs. Prior to Booz Allen, he
worked for a small startup (AeroAstro Inc.) developing advanced space technologies and
as a management consultant at Diamond Cluster International. Mr. Harrison served as a
captain in the U.S. Air Force Reserves. He is a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology with both a BS and an MS in aeronautics and astronautics.
KAITLYN JOHNSON is an associate fellow and associate director of the CSIS Aerospace
Security Project. Ms. Johnson manages the team’s strategic planning and research
agenda. Her research specializes in topics such as space security, military space sys-
tems, commercial space policy, and U.S. air dominance. Previously, Ms. Johnson has
written on national security space reorganization, threats against space assets, the
commercialization of space, escalation and deterrence dynamics, and defense acqui-
sition trends. Ms. Johnson holds an MA from American University in U.S. foreign policy
and national security studies, with a concentration in defense and space security, and
a BS from the Georgia Institute of Technology in international affairs.
THOMAS G. ROBERTS is an adjunct fellow with the CSIS Aerospace Security Project, a
graduate researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Space Systems
Laboratory, and an SM candidate in MIT’s Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
and Technology and Policy Program. His research interests include orbital mechanics,
astrodynamics, and international space policy. Previously, Mr. Roberts has written on
space-based missile defense, threats against space-based assets, and human space-
flight programs. His work has appeared in The Atlantic, War on the Rocks, The Bulletin of
the Atomic Scientists, and other publications. Mr. Roberts holds a BA in astrophysical
sciences with honors and an undergraduate certificate in Russian studies from Prince-
ton University. In 2015, he was named a Harry S. Truman Scholar.
TYLER WAY is a research intern for the CSIS Aerospace Security Project. His research
focuses on the applications of space within national security as well as the role of
space in socioeconomic development. He is currently a graduate student at George
Washington University’s Elliott School, pursuing an MA in International Science and
Technology Policy in the Space Policy Institute. Tyler holds a BA in International Stud-
ies from Bowling Green State University in Bowling Green, Ohio.
MAKENA YOUNG is a research associate with the CSIS Aerospace Security Project. Her
research interests include international collaboration, space security, and orbital de-
bris. Prior to joining CSIS, Ms. Young worked for the Federal Aviation Administration as
an aerospace engineer, focusing on automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast cer-
tification and integration in small aircraft. She holds a BS in aeronautical and astronau-
tical engineering from Purdue University with minors in international relations and
environmental engineering.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

APPENDIX I
LIST OF ACRONYMS USED
A2/AD Anti-Access/Area Denial
AEHF Advanced Extremely High Frequency
AIS Automatic Identification System
APT 28 Russian Hacker Group
ASAT Anti-Satellite
BBC British Broadcasting Corporation
C4ADS Center for Advanced Defense Studies
C4ISR Command, Control, Communications, Computers (C4), Intelligence, Surveil-
lance, and Reconnaissance (ISR)
CASC China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation
CHEOS China High-resolution Earth Observation System
CNES National Centre for Space Studies (France)
CNSA China National Space Administration
CSS Chinese Space Station
DCA Defence Cyber Agency (India)
DDOS Distributed Denial of Service
DIA Defense Intelligence Agency
DoD U.S. Department of Defense
DPRK Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
DSA Defence Space Agency (India)
DSN Deep Space Network
DSRO Defence Space Research Organization (India)
EMP Electromagnetic Pulse
ESA European Space Agency
EW Electronic Warfare
FSO Federal Protective Service
GBS Global Broadcast Service
GEO Geosynchronous Orbit
GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System (Russia)
GPS Global Positioning System
GSLV Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle
HPM High Powered Microwave
ICBM Intercontinental Ballistic Missile
IRGC Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
IS Istrebitel Sputnikov (Russia)
ISA Israel Space Agency
ISRO Indian Space Research Organization
ISS International Space Station

JAXA Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency
JCPOA Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
JPL Jet Propulsion Laboratory
JSOC Joint Special Operations Command
KCNA Korean Central News Agency (North Korea)
LEO Low Earth Orbit
MEO Medium Earth Orbit
MMW Millimeter Wave
NADA National Aerospace Development Administration (North Korea)
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NIIPKh Scientific Research Institute of Applied Chemistry (Russia)
NOA Navigate on Autopilot
NOAA National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration
NOTAM Notice to Airmen
NRO U.S. National Reconnaissance Office
PDV-Mk II Prithvi Delivery Vehicle Mark-II (India)
PLA People’s Liberation Army (China)
PNT Positioning, Navigation, and Timing
PSLV Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle
RF Radio Frequency
RGB Reconnaissance General Bureau (North Korea)
RPO Rendezvous and Proximity Operations
State Administration for Science, Technology, and Industry
SASTIND
for National Defense
SATCOM Satellite Communications
SCI Small Carry-On Impactor
SEIS Seismic Experiment for Interior Structures
SLV Space Launch Vehicle
SSF Strategic Support Force (China)
SSLV Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (India)
SSO Sun-Synchronous Orbit
TEL Transporter erector-launcher
UH Ultra High Frequency
UK United Kingdom
VOA Voice of America
WGS Widespread Global SATCOM (Satellite Communications)
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

ENDNOTES
TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
1 Office of the President of the United States, National Security Strategy (Washington, DC: ), 31, 
wp-content/uploads/2017/12/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf.
2 Office of Technology Assessment, Anti-Satellite Weapons, Countermeasures, and Arms Control (Washington, DC: Government Printing
Office, ), 7, 
3 Brian Garino and Jane Gibson, “Space System Threats,”. in AU-18 Space Primer (Maxwell Air Force Base: Air University Press, ), 277, 
4 David Wright, Laura Grego, and Lisbeth Gronlund, The Physics of Space Security: A Reference Manual (Cambridge, MA: American Acad-
emy of Arts and Sciences, 2005), 131-132, 
Secur ity.pdf.
5 Steven James Lambakis, On the Edge of Earth: The Future of American Space Power (Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky, 2001), 123.
6 Garino and Gibson, “Space System Threats,” 274-275.
7 Sydney J. Freedberg, Jr., “US Jammed Own Satellites 261Times; What If Enemy Did?,” Breaking Defense, December 2, 2015, http://
break ingdefense.com/2015/12/us-jammed-own-satellites-261-times-in-2015-what-if-an-enemy-tried/.
8 Richard B. Langley et al., “Innovation: GNSS Spoofing Detection,” GPS World, June 1, 2013, 
-spoofing-detection-correlating-carrier-phase-with-ra pid-antenna-motion/.
9 Allie Sanchez, “Cyber Attacks Available for Hire,” Insurance Business America, April 3, 2017, 
com/us/ news/cyber/cyber-attacks-available-for-hire-64287.aspx.
CHINA
10 “Space Environment: Total Launches by Country,” Aerospace Security Program, last updated January 2, 2020, 
data/space-environment-total-launches-by-country/.
11 Dave Makichuk, “China’s Bold Space Program Flourishing: Article,” Asia Times, November 5, 2019, 
article/chinas-bold-space-program-flourishing.
12 “Space Environment: Total Launches by Country,” Aerospace Security Program.
13 “China reveals space plan for 2020,” Xinhua News Agency, January 17, 2020, 
14 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military Power of the People’s Republic of China 2019 (Washington, DC: U.S. De-
partment of Defense, ), 49, 
15 Andrew Jones, “China’s First Mars Spacecraft Undergoing Integration for 2020 Launch,” SpaceNews, May 29, 2019, 
chinas-first-mars-spacecraft-undergoing-integration-for-2020-launch; Andrew Jones, “Rocket Nears Spaceport for Chinese Space Station
Test Launch,” SpaceNews, January 31, 2020, 
16 Xinhua News Agency “China’s Long March-5B carrier rocket arrives at launch site,” China.org, February 6, 2020, 
china/2020-02/06/content_75677139.htm.
17 Jones, “Rocket Nears Spaceport for Chinese Space Station Test Launch.”
18 Namrata Goswami, “China’s Future Space Ambitions: What’s Ahead?,” Diplomat, November 4, 2019, 
nas-future-space-ambitions-whats-ahead/.
19 “Space Environment: Total Payloads Launched by Country,” accessed February 12, 2020.
20 “What’s driving China’s race to build a space station?,” ChinaPower, CSIS, December 7, 2016, 
21 Andrew Jones, “Chinese Space Station Core Module Passes Review but Faces Delays,” SpaceNews, September 12, 2019, 
com/chinese-space-station-core-module-passes-review-but-faces-delays/.
22 Ibid.; Yamei Liwei Yang, “China readying for space station era,” Xinhua News Agency, July 8, 2018, 
glish/2018-07/08/c_137310103.htm.
23 Ludovic Ehret, “China Unveils New ‘Heavenly Palace’ Space Station as ISS Days Numbered,” Phys.org, November 6, 2018, 
news/2018-11-china-unveils-heavenly-palace-space.html.
24 Office of Outer Space Affairs, “The United Nations/China Cooperation on the Utilization of the China Space Station,” United Nations, June
19, 2020, 
25 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2019 Report to Congress of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Com-
mission” (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office, 2019), 368, 
Annual%20Report%20to%20Congress.pdf; Andrew Jones, “China, Russia to Cooperate on Lunar Orbiter, Landing Missions,” Space News,
September 19, 2019, 
26 Thomas G. Roberts, Spaceports of the World, Aerospace Security Project, CSIS, accessed February 12, 2020, 
spaceports-of-the-world/.
27 Andrew Jones, “China Creates Commercial Space Alliance, Expands Launch Complex,” SpaceNews, December 20, 2019, 
com/china-creates-commercial-space-alliance-expands-launch-complex/.

28 Roberts, “Spaceports of the World.”
29 Meng Jing, “China Rolls out Rules on Commercial Space Rocket Development,” South China Morning Post, June 12, 2019, 
scmp.com/tech/science-research/article/3014157/china-rolls-out-rules-guide-development-spacex-style.
30 Jing, “China Rolls out Rules on Commercial Space Rocket Development”; Andrew Jones, “Chinese Commercial Launch Sector Regulations
Released, New Launch Vehicle Plans Unveiled,” SpaceNews, July 2, 2019, 
lations-released-new-launch-vehicle-plans-unveiled.
31 Marco Aliberti, When China Goes to the Moon... (Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2015), 7-19, 
content/document/cda_downloaddocument/9783319194721-c1.pdf?SGWID=0-0-45-1513274-p177396349.
32 Dennis J. Blasko, “Steady as She Goes: China’s New Defense White Paper,” War on the Rocks, August 9, 2019, 
com/2019/08/steady-as-she-goes-chinas-new-defense-white-paper.
33 Li Jiayao, ed., “China’s National Defense in the New Era,” Ministry of National Defense of the People’s Republic of China, Xinhua News Agen-
cy, July 24, 2019, 
34 Ibid.
35 The State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s Military Strategy (Beijing, China: People’s Republic of China,
), 
36 Kevin Pollpeter, Michael Chase, and Eric Heginbotham, The Creation of the PLA Strategic Support Force and Its Implications for Chinese Mili-
tary Space Operations (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2017), 3-4, 
RR2000/RR2058/RAND_RR2058.pdf.
37 Ibid., 7.
38 Office of the Secretary of Defense, “Annual Report to Congress: Military Power of the People’s Republic of China 2019,” 13.
39 United States Congress, U.S. - China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Military Reforms and Modernization:
Implications for the United States, 115th Cong., 2nd sess., February 15, 2018, 40, 
ing%20Transcript%20-%20February%2015%2C%202018.pdf.
40 National Air and Space Intelligence Center, Competing in Space (Wright Patterson Air Force Base: Ohio, ), 21, 
defense.gov/2019/Jan/16/2002080386/-1/-1/1/190115-F-NV711-0002.PDF.
41 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2019 Report to Congress, 375.
42 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military Power of the People’s Republic of China 2019, 49.
43 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2015 Report to Congress of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission” (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office, 2015), 294,
ports/2015%20Annual%20Report%20to%20Congress.PDF.
44 Independent analysis by Kaitlyn Johnson; data from “Space-Track,” Space-Track, 
45 Brian Weeden and Victoria Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities: An Open Source Assessment (Broomfield, Colorado: Secure
World Foundation, 2018), 1–11, 
46 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, China Military Power: Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win, (Washington, DC: 2018), 43, 
Portals/27/Documents/News/Military%20Power%20Publications/China_Military_Power_FINAL_ 5MB_20190103.pdf.
47 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 294.
48 “SC-19 Anti-Ballistic Missile Interceptor,” GlobalSecurity.org, last updated July 25, 2016, 
na/sc-19-abm.htm.
49 Li Bin, “What China’s Missile Intercept Test Means,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, February 4, 2013, 
ment.org/2013/02/04/what-china-s-missile-intercept-test-means-pub-50833.
50 Brian Weeden, “Anti-Satellite Tests in Space - The Case of China,” Secure World Foundation, updated May 18, 2015, 
media/115643/china_asat_fact_sheet_may2015.pdf.
51 “China Tests Missile Intercept System,” Nuclear Threat Initiative, January 28, 2013, 
cept-system; Bin, “What China’s Missile Intercept Test Means.”
52 Mike Gruss, “Pentagon Says 2013 Chinese Launch May Have Tested Antisatellite Technology,” SpaceNews, May 14, 2015, 
com/pentagon-says-2013-chinese-launch-may-have-tested-antisatellite-technology.
53 Weeden, “Anti-Satellite Tests in Space - The Case of China.”
54 Gruss, “Pentagon Says 2013 Chinese Launch May Have Tested Antisatellite Technology.”
55 Mike Gruss, “U.S. State Department: China Tested Anti-Satellite Weapon,” SpaceNews, January 30, 2015, 
com/41413us-state-department-china-tested-anti-satellite-weapon.
56 Bill Gertz, “China Tests Anti-Satellite Missile,” Washington Free Beacon, November 9, 2015, 
na-tests-anti-satellite-missile/.
57 Ibid.
58 Bill Gertz, “China Carries Out Flight Test of Anti-Satellite Missile,” Washington Free Beacon, August 2, 2017, 
al-security/china-carries-flight-test-anti-satellite-missile.
59 Ankit Panda, “Revealed: The Details of China’s Latest Hit-To-Kill Interceptor Test,” Diplomat, February 21, 2018, 
com/2018/02/revealed-the-details-of-chinas-latest-hit-to-kill-interceptor-test.
60 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2019 Report to Congress, 382.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

61 Ibid.
62 Brian Weeden, “China’s BX-1 microsatellite: a litmus test for space weaponization,” The Space Review, October 20, 2008, 
pacereview.com/article/1235/1.
63 Weeden and Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities, 1-2.
64 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 295.
65 Brian Weeden, “Dancing in the dark: The orbital rendezvous of SJ-12 and SJ-06F,” The Space Review, August 10, 2010, 
cereview.com/article/1689/1.
66 Pollpeter, et al., The Creation of the PLA Strategic Support Force, 10.
67 “China Successfully Launches Three Satellites,” Economic Times, July 20, 2013, 
ly-launches-three-satellites/articleshow/21187532.cms.
68 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 295; Weeden and Samson, eds., Global Counterspace
Capabilities, 1-2.
69 Ibid.; “China’s new Orbital Debris Clean-Up Satellite raises Space Militarization Concerns,” Spaceflight 101, June 29, 2016, 
flight101.com/long-march-7-maiden-launch/aolong-1-asat-concerns/.
70 Stephen Chen, “How China’s Scavenger Satellites Are Being Used to Develop AI Weapons,” South China Morning Post, April 22, 2019, https://

71 “China announces success in technology to refuel satellites in orbit,” Xinhua News Agency, June 30, 2016, 
english/2016-06/30/c_135479061.htm.
72 Internal CSIS analysis by Thomas G. Roberts; data from “Space-Track,” 
73 Stephen Chen, “How China’s Scavenger Satellites Are Being Used to Develop AI Weapons.”
74 SJ-17 is estimated to have a mass around 4,000kg. Gunter Dirk Krebs, “SJ 17,” Gunter’s Space Page, last updated July 21, 2019, https://
space.skyrocket.de/doc_sdat/sj-17.htm.
75 International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance 2017 (London: Routledge, 2017), 19-26, 
the-military-balance/the-military-balance-2017.
76 Aaron Mehta, “Chinese Threats Necessitate New Space Structures, Shanahan Warns,” Defense News, April 9, 2019, 
news.com/space/2019/04/09/chinese-threats-necessitate-new-space-structures-shanahan-warns.
77 Daniel R. Coats, “Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community,” Office of the Director of National Intelligence, February
13, 2018, 13, 
78 Vago Muradian, “China Tried to Blind U.S. Sats with Laser,” Defense News, September 25, 2006, 
na_Tried_To_Blind_U_S__Sats_With_Laser/5-501978/.
79 Andrea Shalal-Esa, “China Jamming Test Sparks U.S. Satellite Concerns,” Reuters, October 5, 2006, as quoted in Yousaf Butt, “Effects of
Chinese Laser Ranging on Imaging Satellites,” Science & Global Security, 17:1, 2009, 20-35.
80 Edwin Cartlidge, “Physicists are planning to build lasers so powerful they could rip apart empty space,” Science, January 24, 2018, http://

81 Timothy Grayson, “Prepared Statement of Dr. Timothy Grayson,” Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commis-
sion, Hearing on China’s Advanced Weapons, February 23, 2017, 70, 
Advanced%20Weapons.pdf.
82 John J. Raymond, (remarks, Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies, Washington, DC), reported by Mandy Mayfield, “JUST IN: Space Com-
mander Warns Chinese Lasers Could Blind U.S. Satellites,” National Defense Magazine, September 27, 2019, 
semagazine.org/articles/2019/9/27/space-commander-warns-chinese-lasers-could-blind-us-satellites.
83 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space, (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, ), 20,

84 David D. Chen, “Opening Statement of Mr. David Chen,” Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Feb-
ruary 23, 2017, 75, 
85 Mark Stokes, “Prepared Statement of Mark A. Stokes,” Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, April
25, 2019, 4, 
86 Dylan Malyasov, “China Discloses New Directed-Energy Weapon Development,” Defence Blog, April 4, 2019,
87 Liu Xuanzun, “Arms Firm Makes Artificial Diamonds That Could Be Used in Laser Weapons,” Global Times, December 4, 2019, 
globaltimes.cn/content/1172265.shtml.
88 Vinayak Bhat, “These Futuristic Chinese Space Denial Weapons Can Disable or Destroy Opposing Satellites,” The Print, March 23, 2019,

89 Bill Gertz, “Satellite Photos Show Chinese Anti-Satellite Laser Base,” Washington Free Beacon, March 31, 2019, 
national-security/satellite-photos-show-chinese-anti-satellite-laser-base/.
90 Liu Zhen, “Chinese Military Hints at Plans for Airborne Laser Attack Weapon,” South China Morning Post, January 7, 2020, 
scmp.com/news/china/military/article/3045066/chinese-military-hints-plans-airborne-laser-attack-weapon.
91 Richard D. Fisher, Jr., “China’s Progress with Directed Energy Weapons,” Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, February 23, 2017, 9, 
92 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 298.

93 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space, 20.
94 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military Power of the People’s Republic of China 2018 (Washington, DC: U.S. De-
partment of Defense, ), 21, 
PDF.
95 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 297-298.
96 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space, 20; Lin Jinshun et al., “Study on Countermeasure against Satellite
Adaptive Null-Steering Technique,” Aerospace Electronic Warfare 26, no. 3 (): 1-4, 
Total-HTDZ201003000.htm; and H. Wang, “Analysis on Anti-jamming Measures of Mobile User Objective System,” Radio Communica-
tions Technology 35, no. 2 (2009): 46-49.
97 Lin Jin-shun, et al., “Countermeasure Technology for MMW Satellite Links,” Aerospace Electronic Warfare, , 20–22, http://
en.cnki.com.cn/Article_en/CJFDTotal-HTDZ201205006.htm, as quoted in David D. Chen, “Opening Statement of Mr. David Chen,” 82.
98 Bill Gertz, “Inside the Ring: China targets Global Hawk drone,” Washington Times, December 11, 2013, 
com/news/2013/dec/11/inside-the-ring-china-targets-global-hawk-drone/.
99 Liu Xuanzun, “China Capable of Defending against Deadly Drone Attacks: Experts,” Global Times, January 5, 2020, 
cn/content/1175804.shtml.
100 Michael R. Gordon and Jeremy Page, “China Installed Military Jamming Equipment on Spratly Islands, U.S. Says,” Wall Street Journal, April
9, 2018, 
101 “Vietnam Demands That China Remove Military Jamming Equipment from Spratly Islands,” VnExpress International, April 26, 2018, 
vnexpress.net/news/news/vietnam-demands-that-china-remove-military-jamming-equipment-from-spratly-islands-3741545.html.
102 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, China Military Power: Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win, 23 and 49.
103 Sebastien Roblin, “Why China’s J-16D Electronic Warfare Plane Is a Really Big Deal,” National Interest, November 20, 2019, 
alinterest.org/blog/buzz/why-chinas-j-16d-electronic-warfare-plane-really-big-deal-97677.
104 Dana Goward, “GPS Jamming and Spoofing Reported at Port of Shanghai,” Maritime Executive, August 13, 2019, 
ecutive.com/editorials/gps-jamming-and-spoofing-at-port-of-shanghai; Mark Harris, “Ghost Ships, Crop Circles, and Soft Gold: A GPS
Mystery in Shanghai,” MIT Technology Review, November 20, 2019, 
and-soft-gold-a-gps-mystery-in-shanghai; Joseph Trevithick, “New Type Of GPS Spoofing Attack In China Creates ‘Crop Circles’ Of False
Location Data,” The Drive, November 18, 2019, 
creates-crop-circles-of-false-location-data.
105 “GPS Problem Report Status,” U.S. Coast Guard Navigation Center, accessed February 13, 2020, 
ReportStatus#definition.
106 Harris, “Ghost Ships, Crop Circles, and Soft Gold: A GPS Mystery in Shanghai.”
107 Tyler Rogoway, “China’s Mysterious Spoofed GPS ‘Crop Circle’ Has Something Interesting At Its Center,” The Drive, November 19, 2019,

108 Harris, “Ghost Ships, Crop Circles, and Soft Gold: A GPS Mystery in Shanghai.”
109 Bjorn Bergman, “Systematic GPS Manipulation Occuring at Chinese Oil Terminals and Government Installations,” SkyTruth, December 16,
2019, 
110 Ibid.
111 Harris, “Ghost Ships, Crop Circles, and Soft Gold: A GPS Mystery in Shanghai.”
112 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space, 21.
113 Ibid., 20-21.
114 The State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s Military Strategy (Beijing, China: People’s Republic of China,
), 
115 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 296.
116 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, China Military Power, 46.
117 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 296.
118 Sui-Lee Wee, “China Denies It Is behind Hacking of U.S. Satellites,” Reuters, October 31, 2011, 
us-china-us-hacking/china-denies-it-is-behind-hacking-of-u-s-satellites-idUSTRE79U1YI20111031.
119 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 296.
120 NASA Office of the Inspector General, Cybersecurity Management and Oversight at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory Washington, DC: 2019), 8-9,

121 Ibid.
122 Mary Pat Flaherty, Jason Samenow and Lisa Rein, “Chinese hack U.S. weather systems, satellite network,” Washington Post, November 12,
2014, 
65cea7903f2e_story.html.
123 Yatish Yadav, “Hackers from China Break into Secret Indian Government Video Chat,” New Indian Express, November 19, 2017, 
newindianexpress.com/nation/2017/nov/19/hackers-from-china-break-into-secret-indian-government-video-chat-1705010.html.
124 Chris Bing, “Chinese Hacking Group Resurfaces, Targets U.S. Satellite Companies and Systems,” Cyberscoop, June 19, 2018, 
cyberscoop.com/symantec-thrip-satellite-hacking-trojans/.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

125 Joel Schectman and Christopher Bing, “UAE Used Cyber Super-weapon to Spy on IPhones of Foes,” Reuters, January 30, 2019, https://

1PO1AN.
126 Sean O’Kane, “Chinese Hackers Charged with Stealing Data from NASA, IBM, and Others,” The Verge, December 20, 2018, 
theverge.com/2018/12/20/18150275/chinese-hackers-stealing-data-nasa-ibm-charged.
127 Internal CSIS analysis by Thomas G. Roberts; data from “Space-Track,” Space-Track, 
RUSSIA
128 “Orbital Launches of 2019,” Gunter’s Space Page, February 11, 2020, 
129 “О Развитии Государственной Корпорации По Космической Деятельности «Роскосмос»,” Правительство России, Translated by
Thomas G. Roberts, June 13, 2019, 
130 Maxim V. Tarasenko, “Transformation of the Soviet Space Program after the Cold War,” Science & Global Security 4, no. 3 (1994): 339-361,
 346).
131 Thomas G. Roberts, Spaceports of the World (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), “UCS
Satellite Database,” Union of Concerned Scientists, accessed February 10, 2020, Simon
Seminari, “Op-Ed: Global Government Space Budgets Continues Multiyear Rebound,” SpaceNews, November 24, 2019, 
com/op-ed-global-government-space-budgets-continues-multiyear-rebound/; and Laurence Peter, “Russia Corruption: Putin’s Pet Space
Project Vostochny Tainted by Massive Theft,” BBC News November 19, 2019, 
132 “Space Environment: Total Payloads Launched by Country,” Aerospace Security Project, CSIS, accessed February 28, 2019, 
space.csis.org/data/space-environment-total-launches-country/.
133 “Partners Sign ISS Agreements,” NASA, October 23, 2010, 
html.
134 Thomas G. Roberts, “International Astronaut Database,” Aerospace Security Project, CSIS, accessed February 10, 2020, 
csis.org/data/international-astronaut-database/.
135 Anatoly Zak, “Russian space program in the 2010s: decadal review,” Russian Space Web, February 11, 2019, 
russia_2010s.html#2019; Mike Wall, “Here’s How Much NASA Is Paying Per Seat on SpaceX’s Crew Dragon & Boeing’s Starliner,” Space.com, No-
vember 16, 2019, 
136 NASA Office of the Inspector General, ‘“NASA’s Commercial Crew Program: Update on Development and Certification Effort,” September
1, 2016, 27, and Christian Davenport, “SpaceX Completes Key Test of Its Dragon Capsule. Its First
Human Spaceflight Might Come in Spring,” Washington Post, January 19, 2020, 
spacexemergencyabortttest/.
137 Andrew Jones, “China, Russia to Cooperate on Lunar Orbiter, Landing Missions,” SpaceNews, September 20, 2019, 
china-russia-to-cooperate-on-lunar-orbiter-landing-missions/.
138 Roberts, Spaceports of the World, 21.
139 Jeff Foust, “Space agencies endorse continued cooperation in lunar exploration,” SpaceNews, October 21, 2019, 
space-agencies-endorse-continued-cooperation-in-lunar-exploration/.
140 “‘No End in Sight’ to Fraud in Russia’s Space Agency, Top Investigator Says,” Moscow Times, May 17, 2019, 
times.com/2019/05/17/no-end-in-sight-russias-space-agency-top-investigator-says-a65618.
141 Victoria Loguinova-Yakoleva, “Russian space sector plagued by astronomical corruption,” Space Daily, May 28, 2019, 
ly.com/reports/Russian_space_sector_plagued_by_astronomical_corruption_999.html.
142 Madeline Roache, “Putin’s Vostochny Project Meant to Reestablish Russia as a Space Superpower. Now It’s Plagued by Corruption,” TIME,
November 19, 2019, 
143 “‘No End in Sight’ to Fraud in Russia’s Space Agency, Top Investigator Says,” Moscow Times.
144 Eric Berger, “How Russia (yes, Russia) plans to land cosmonauts on the Moon by 2030,” Ars Technica, May 28, 2019, 
com/science/2019/05/how-russia-yes-russia-plans-to-land-cosmonauts-on-the-moon-by-2030/.
145 Michael Kofman, “Russian defense spending is much larger, and more sustainable than it seems,” Defense News, May 3, 2019, 
defensenews.com/opinion/commentary/2019/05/03/russian-defense-spending-is-much-larger-and-more-sustainable-than-it-seems/.
146 Note: Included in the Russian Federal Space Agency’s inheritance from the Soviet Union was an active crewed mission—the Mir space
station—with a Soviet cosmonaut still in orbit when the Russian Federation was founded; Elizabeth Howell, “Roscosmos: Russia’s Space
Agency,” Space.com, January 29, 2018, and Eric Betz, “The Last Soviet Citizen,” Discover
Magazine, December 19, 2016, 
147 “Roscosmos General Information,” Roscosmos, n.d., accessed February 5, 2020, and “International Coopera-
tion,” NASA, February 28, 2019, 
148 “Space Environment: Total Payloads Launched by Country,” accessed February 12, 2020.
149 Matthew Bodner, “As Trump Pushes for Separate Space Force, Russia Moves Fast the Other Way,” Defense News, June 22, 2018, https://

150 Matthew Bodner, “Russia Merges AF with Missile Defense, Space Commands,” Defense News, August 8, 2015, 
com/2015/08/08/russia-merges-af-with-missile-defense-space-commands/; and Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, “Aerospace
Defence Forces,” Russian Federation, n.d., accessed February 7, 2019, 

151 The Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation,” Embassy of the Russian Federation to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, press release, December 25, 2014, 
152 “Militarization, Weaponization, and the Prevention of an Arms Race,” Reaching Critical Will, 
fact-sheets/critical-issues/5448-outer-space.
153 Dipanjan Roy Chaudhury, “Russia Puts Onus on US for Early Outer Space Rules after India’s Test,” Economic Times, March 29, 2019, https://
economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/defence/russia-puts-onus-us-for-early-outer-space-rules-after-indias-test/articleshow/68626644.
cms?from=mdr.
154 Dara Massicot, “Anticipating a New Russian Military Doctrine in 2020: What It Might Contain and Why It Matters,” War on the Rocks, September 9,
2019, 
155 “Рогозин: Россия не использует спутники для повреждения космических аппаратов других стран,” TASS, October 1, 2018, https://
tass.ru/kosmos/5624853.
156 Jason Lemon, “Russia Will ‘Respond’ to ‘New Threats’ Created by Trump’s Space Militarization, Russian Army Official Warns,” Newsweek,
March 4, 2019, 
157 “Putin Urges Greater Attention to Strengthening Orbital Group of Satellites,” TASS, December 4, 2019, 
158 Asif A. Siddiqi, “The Soviet Co-Orbital Anti-Satellite System: A Synopsis,” Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 50, no. 6 (1997): 225-
40, 
159 Anatoly Zak, “IS Anti-Satellite System,” Russian Space Web, July 31, 2017, 
160 Anatoly Zak, “Naryad Anti-Satellite System (14F11),” Russian Space Web, November 30, 2017, 
161 Ibid.
162 Note: “PL-19” is a Western identifier (corresponding to the 19th system in its category observed from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome), while
“Nudol” is a Russian identifier; Amanda Macias and Michael Sheetz, “Russia Conducted Another Successful Test of and Anti-satellite Mis-
sile, According to a Classified US Intelligence Report,” CNBC, January 18, 2019, 
bile-anti-satellite-missile-test-us-intelligence-report.html.
163 Bill Gertz, “Russia Flight Tests Anti-Satellite Missile,” Washington Free Beacon, December 2, 2015, 
ty/russia-conducts-successful-flight-test-of-anti-satellite-missile/.
164 “Russia’s ASAT Development Takes Aim at LEO Assets,” Jane’s Intelligence Review, 2018, 1 
sets/591/81591/Russias_ASAT_development_takes_aim_at_LEO_assets.pdf.
165 Ibid.
166 “S-500 Prometheus,” Missile Threat, CSIS, September 28, 2017, 
167 Mark B. Schneider, “Russian Nuclear Weapons Policy,” RealClearDefense, April 28, 2017, 
russian_nuclear_weapons_policy_111261.html.
168 Steve Lambakis, Foreign Space Capabilities: Implications for U.S. National Security (Fairfax, VA: National Institute Press, National Institute
for Public Policy, 2017), “Russia Tests S-500
Air Defense System,” Missile Threat, CSIS, September 28, 2017, 
system/; and Leonid Khayremdinov, “Обрести Навык Атак в Стратосфере,” Красная Звезда, March 1, 2019, 
vyk-atak-v-stratosfere/, quoted in Julian Cooper, “Russia’s ‘Invincible’ Weapons: An Update,” Changing Character of War Centre, March 27,
2019, 
169 “Russia’s ASAT Development Takes Aim at LEO Assets,” Jane’s Intelligence Review, 1.
170 “Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-31BM Foxhound,” JetPhotos, September 14, 2018, Amanda Macias, “A
Never-before-seen Russian Missile Is Identified as an Anti-satellite Weapon and Will Be Ready for Warfare by 2022,” CNBC, October 25, 2018,

171 James R. Clapper, “Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community,” Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Febru-
ary 9, 2016, 10, 
172 Alexander Zudin, “Russia to Deploy Anti-satellite Weapon on MiG-31BM,” IHS Jane’s Missiles and Rockets, February 22, 2017.
173 “Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-31BM Foxhound,” JetPhotos; and Amanda Macias, “A Never-before-seen Russian Missile Is Identified as an Anti-sat-
ellite Weapon and Will Be Ready for Warfare by 2022.”
174 Mike Wall, “‘Very Abnormal’ Russian Satellite Doesn’t Seems So Threatening, Experts Say,” Space.com, August 16, 2018, 
com/41511-weird-russian-satellite-not-so-abnormal.html.
175 Jonathan McDowell, “International Space Station,” Jonathan’s Space Report, No. 752, August 17, 2018, 
back/news.752.txt.
176 Bart Hendrickx, “Russia Develops Co-orbital Anti-satellite Capability,” Jane’s Intelligence Review, September 27, 2018, 2.
177 Sandra Erwin, “Raymond calls out Russia for ‘threatening behavior’ in outer space,” SpaceNews, February 10, 2020, 
com/raymond-calls-out-russia-for-threatening-behavior-in-outer-space/.
178 Hendrickx, “Russia Develops Co-orbital Anti-satellite Capability,” 3.
179 Bart Hendrickx, “OSINT Snapshot: New Russian satellites likely to have inspection role,” Jane’s Intelligence Review, July 25, 2019, 1; Bart
Hendrickx, “Russia’s Secret Satellite Builder,” Space Review, May 6, 2019, 
180 “Orbital Launches of 2019,” Gunter’s Space Page, 2020, and Ministry of Defence of the
Russian Federation, “Russian Aerospace Forces successfully launches Soyuz-2 lanch vehicle from Plesetsk Cosmodrome,” Russian Federa-
tion, November 26, 2019, 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

181 Anatoly Zak, “Soyuz-2-1v Launches Classified Payload,” Russian Space Web, January 29, 2020, accessed on February 2, 2020, 
russianspaceweb.com/cosmos-2542.html.
182 Ibid.
183 Jonathan McDowell, Twitter post, January 31, 2020, 8:37 p.m., 
184 Michael Thompson, Twitter post, January 31, 2020, 11:40 p.m., 
185 Erwin, “Raymond calls out Russia.”
186 Hendrickx, “Russia Develops Co-orbital Anti-satellite Capability,” 1.
187 Ibid., 6.
188 Hendrickx, “Russia’s Secret Satellite Builder.”
189 “Космический аппарат ‹Луч› выведен на расчетную орбиту,” Aviation Explorer, September 29, 2014, 
news/2014/9/29/125060/.
190 Brian Weeden, “Dancing in the dark redux: Recent Russian rendezvous and proximity operations in space,” Space Review, October 5, 2015,

191 Ibid.; Laurence Peter, “Russia Shrugs off US Anxiety over Military Satellite,” BBC News, October 20, 2015, 
world-europe-34581089.
192 “Luch (Olimp-K),” Gunter’s Space Page, 2019, 
193 Thomas G. Roberts, “Unusual Behavior in GEO: Luch (Olymp-K),” Aerospace Security Project, CSIS, accessed March 01, 2020, 
csis.org/data/unusual-behavior-in-geo-olymp-k/.
194 Vladimir Putin, “Presidential Address to the Federal Assembly,” (speech, Manezh Central Exhibition Hall, Moscow, Russia, March 1, 2018),

195 Asif A. Siddiqi, “The Soviet Co-Orbital Anti-Satellite System: A Synopsis,” Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 50, no. 6 (1997), 225-
40, 
196 William R. Graham and Peter Vincent Pry, “Statement for the Record,” U.S. Congress, House, Committee on Homeland Security, Subcom-
mittee on Oversight and Management Efficiency, October 12, 2017, 6, 
115-HM09-Wstate-PryP-20171012.pdf; Jerry Emanuelson, “Soviet Test 184: The 1962 Soviet Nuclear EMP Tests over Kazakhstan,” FutureM-
science LLC, and ibid., 230.
197 “Transcript On Vienna Conference,” House Armed Services Committee, U.S. Congress, May 2, 1999, quoted in Peter Vincent Pry, “Nuclear
EMP Attack Scenarios and Combined-Arms Cyber Warfare,” Commission to Assess the Threat to the United States from Electromagnetic
Pulse (EMP) Attack, , 3, 
tack-Scenarios-and-Combined-Arms-Cyber-Warfare.pdf.
198 Bart Hendrickx, “Self-Defense in Space: Protecting Russian Spacecraft from ASAT Attacks,” Space Review, July 16, 2018, 
pacereview.com/article/3536/1.
199 A. Antonov et al., “История и перспективы развития низкотемпературных пиротехнических генераторов,” Известия Тульского
государственного университета, 2016, 
nicheskih-generatorov, quoted in ibid.
200 “Наука и Техника: Россия Создаст Лазер Для Подавления Разведки Противника,” Lenta.ru, August 8, 2010, 
news/2010/08/19/laser.
201 Pavel Podvig, “Russia Has Been Testing Laser ASAT,” Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces, October 8, 2011, 
blog/2011/10/russia_has_been_testing_laser.shtml.
202 “В РФ Разрабатывается Противоспутниковая Система РЭБ,” Военное Обозрение, April 25, 2017, 
tyvaetsya-protivosputnikovaya-sistema-reb.html, quoted in Patrick Tucker, “Russia Claims It Now Has Lasers To Shoot Satellites,” Defense
One, February 26, 2018, 
203 Patrick Tucker, “Russia Claims It Now Has Lasers To Shoot Satellites,” Defense One, February 6, 2018, 
technology/2018/02/russia-claims-it-now-has-lasers-shoot-satellites/146243/; “Источник узнал о перспективах создания в РФ нового
самолета с лазерным оружием,” Interfax, February 25, 2018, translation by author, 
204 Vladimir Putin, “Presidential Address to the Federal Assembly.”
205 Anton Nikitin, “Боевые Лазеры «Пересвет» Заступили На Опытно-Боевое Дежурство,” Взгляд, December 5, 2018, 
news/2018/12/5/953800.html.
206 “Peresvet combat laser system,” Russian Ministry of Defense, YouTube video, 0:42, Russian Ministry of Defense, July 19, 2018, 
youtube.com/watch?v=ghDvDFb3lM0.
207 Iskander Batyrov, “Добьет Ли «Пересвет» До Цели,” Независимая, December 5, 2018, 
target.html.
208 Vladimir Putin, “Presidential Address to the Federal Assembly,” (speech, Gostiny Dvor, Moscow, Russia, February 20, 2019), 
lin.ru/events/president/news/59863.
209 Julian Cooper, “Russia’s ‘Invincible’ Weapons: An Update,” Changing Character of War Centre, March 27, 2019, 
blog/2019/3/27/russias-invincible-weapons-an-update-by-julian-cooper.
210 Center for Advanced Defense Studies (C4ADS), Above Us Only Stars (Washington, DC: ), 3, 
211 Dana Goward, “Mass GPS Spoofing Attack in Black Sea?” Maritime Executive, July 11, 2017, 
mass-gps-spoofing-attack-in-black-sea#gs.QGC4kZ8; Alexandra Coultrup, “GPS Jamming in the Arctic Circle,” Aerospace Security Project,

CSIS, April 4, 2019, and ibid., 14.
212 “Russia Denies Role in Israeli Airport GPS Jamming,” BBC News, June 27, 2019, Thomas
Nilsen, “Norway Tired of Russia’s Electronic Warfare Troubling Civilian Navigation: ‘Unacceptable and Risky’,” Barents Observer, January
20, 2019, 
and “Russia Denies Disrupting GPS Signals during Nato Arctic Exercises,” Guardian, November 12, 2018, 
world/2018/nov/12/russia-denies-blame-for-arctic-gps-interference.
213 Sergey Sukhankin, “Russian Electronic Warfare in Ukraine: Between Real and Imaginable,” RealClearDefense, May 26, 2017, 
realcleardefense.com/articles/2017/05/26/russian_electronic_warfare_in_ukraine_111460.html; “It is official, Russian army deployed
R-330Zh jammer in the battle of Debaltseve,” Inform Napalm, May 14, 2016, 
seve/; and “Russian R-330Zh jammer detected 7 km from the contact line in Donbas,” Inform Napalm, November 16, 2017, 
napalm.org/en/russian-r-330zh-jammer-detected-7-km-from-the-contact-line-in-donbas/.
214 Elias Groll, “Spy Planes, Signal Jammers, and Putin’s High-Tech War in Syria,” Foreign Policy, October 6, 2015, 
com/2015/10/06/spy-planes-signal-jammers-and-putins-high-tech-war-in-syria; and David Stupples, “How Syria is becoming a test bed for
high-tech weapons of electronic warfare,” The Conversation, October 8, 2015, 
bed-for-high-tech-weapons-of-electronic-warfare-48779.
215 C4ADS, Above Us Only Stars, 3.
216 Ibid., 14.
217 Dmitry Krilov, “Кремль Продолжит Искажать,” Газета.ru, December 19, 2016, 
shtml.
218 “Moscow Taxi Users Confusion amid GPS Meddling Claims,” BBC News, January 10, 2018, 
219 “St. Petersburg Drivers Report Strange GPS Problems in City Center,” Moscow Times, December 27, 2016, 
com/2016/12/27/drivers-in-st-petersburg-report-gps-problems-in-city-center-a56653.
220 Coultrup, “GPS Jamming in the Arctic Circle.”
221 Mark Episkopos, “Russia Jammed GPS Signals During a NATO Military Exercise. That’s a Really Big Deal.”, National Interest, December 1,
2018, and
Harald Tomassen and Allan Klo, “Monterer Målestasjon for å Oppdage GPS-Jamming,” NRK, March 11, 2019, 
monterer-malestasjon-for-a-oppdage-gps-jamming-1.14467017.
222 “Ships Fooled in GPS Spoofing Attack Suggest Russian Cyberweapon,” New Scientist, August 10, 2017, 
cle/2143499-ships-fooled-in-gps-spoofing-attack-suggest-russian-cyberweapon/.
223 C4ADS, Above Us Only Stars, 20.
224 Ibid., 3.
225 Ibid., 18, 23.
226 Patrick Tucker, “US and Russia Regard Each Other Warily in the Baltic and Black Seas,” Defense One, January 24, 2019, 
defenseone.com/threats/2019/01/us-and-russia-eye-each-other-warily-baltic-and-black-seas/154404/; and Andrew Roth, “Kerch strait con-
frontation: what happened and why does it matter?,” Guardian, November 27, 2018, 
kerch-strait-confrontation-what-happened-ukrainian-russia-crimea.
227 Brian Wang, “Russia will place GPS jammers on 250,000 cellphone towers to reduce enemy cruise missile and drone accuracy in the event
of large scale conventional war,” Next Big Future, October 18, 2016, 
mers-on-250000.html.
228 “Latest jamming system arrives for electronic warfare troops in central Russia,” TASS, November 13, 2019, 
fense/1088451.
229 Michael Peck, “Why Russia’s New Anti-Satellite Plane Is Very Bad Idea,” National Interest, October 20, 2019, 
blog/buzz/why-russias-new-anti-satellite-plane-very-bad-idea-89716.
230 Bart Hendrickx, “Ekipazh: Russia’s top-secret nuclear-powered satellite,” Space Review, October 7, 2019, 
com/article/3809/1.
231 James Landale, “Russia Cyber-Plots: US, UK and Netherlands Allege Hacking,” BBC News, October 4, 2018, 
world-europe-45746837.
232 Estonian Foreign Intelligence Service, International Security and Estonia (Tallinn: 2018), 53, 
2018-ENG-web.pdf; Ellen Nakashima, “Russian hacker group exploits satellites to steal data, hide tracks,” Washington Post, Septem-
ber 9, 2015, 
tracks/2015/09/08/c59fa7cc-5657-11e5-b8c9-944725fcd3b9_story.html?utm_term=.43d8b0ed4c7f; and “Turla: Spying tool targets
governments and diplomats,” Symantec Security Response, August 7, 2014, 
ing-tool-targets-governments-and-diplomats.
233 Jack Stubbs and Christopher Bing, “Hacking the Hackers: Russian Group Hijacked Iranian Spying Operation, Officials Say,” Reuters, Octo-
ber 21, 2019, 
cials-say-idUSKBN1X00AK.
234 Gordon Corera, “How France’s TV5 Was Almost Destroyed by ‘Russian Hackers’,” BBC News, October 10, 2016, 
technology-37590375.
235 Natasha Lomas, “UK Says Russia’s GRU Was behind a Spate of Chaotic Cyber Attacks between 2015 and 2017,” TechCrunch, October 4,
2018, 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

236 Damien McGuinness, “How a cyber attack transformed Estonia,” BBC News, April 27, 2017, Sergey
Sukhankin, “Russian Electronic Warfare in Ukraine: Between Real and Imaginable,” RealClearDefense, May 26, 2017, 
cleardefense.com/articles/2017/05/26/russian_electronic_warfare_in_ukraine_111460.html; David E. Sanger, “Putin Ordered ‘Influence
Campaign’ Aimed at U.S. Election, Report Says,” New York Times, January 6, 2017, 
russia-hack-report.html; and James Landale, “Russia Cyber-Plots: US, UK and Netherlands Allege Hacking,” BBC News, October 4, 2018,

237 Jens Stoltenberg, “Nato Will Defend Itself,” Prospect Magazine, December 27, 2019, 
to-will-defend-itself-summit-jens-stoltenberg-cyber-security; and Michael Imeson, “Russia Cyber Aggression Fuels Tensions with West,”
Financial Times, October 14, 2019, 
238 James Landale, “Russia Cyber-Plots: US, UK and Netherlands Allege Hacking,” BBC News, October 4, 2018, 
world-europe-45746837.
239 Todd Harrison, Kaitlyn Johnson, and Thomas G. Roberts, Space Threat Assessment 2018 (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), https://
aerospace.csis.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Harrison_SpaceThreatAssessment_FULL_WEB.pdf; Todd Harrison, Kaitlyn Johnson,
and Thomas G. Roberts, Space Threat Assessment 2019 (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 
loads/2019/04/SpaceThreatAssessment2019-compressed.pdf.
IRAN
240 Thomas G. Roberts, Spaceports of the World (Washington, DC: CSIS, ) 
241 Mike Pompeo, “United States Imposes New Sanctions Designations on Iran’s Space Program as Tehran Continues to Use Civilian Space
Agencies to Advance Its Ballistic Missile Programs,” U.S. Department of State, press release, September 13, 2019, 
united-states-imposes-new-sanctions-designations-on-irans-space-program-as-tehran-continues-to-use-civilian-space-agencies-to-ad-
vance-its-ballistic-missile-programs/.
242 David E. Sanger and William J. Broad, “U.S. Accuses Iran of Using Space Launch as Cover for Missile Program,” New York Times, January 4,
2019, 
243 Kevjn Lim and Gil Baram, “Iran Is Mastering the Final Frontier,” Foreign Policy, March 14, 2019, 
is-mastering-the-final-frontier/.
244 Fredrik Dahl, “Iran Launches Satellite; U.S. Expresses Concern,” Reuters, February 3, 2009, 
lite-idUSTRE5120NN20090203.
245 “Iran ‘Sends Monkey to Space for Second Time’,” BBC News, December 14, 2013, 
246 Farzon Nadimi, “Iran’s Space Program Emerges from Dormancy,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, August 1, 2017, 
washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/view/irans-space-program-emerges-from-dormancy.
247 “Iran Missile Sites,” CIA, n.d. 
sile_sites.pdf.
248 “Iran,” Zarya, February 11, 2012, 
249 “Russia Signs Deal to Build & Launch Iran Satellites,” Iran Times, May 14, 2014, 
iran-satellites/.
250 Defense Intelligence Agency, Iran Military Power (Washington, DC: 2019), 
Power Publications/Iran_Military_Power_LR.pdf; and Daniel R. Coats, “Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Communi-e
ty,” Office of the Director of National Intelligence, February 13, 2018, p. 10, 
nies/2018-ATA---Unclassified-SSCI.pdf.
251 Stephen M. McCall, “Iran’s Ballistic Missile and Space Launch Programs,” Congressional Research Service, January 9, 2020, 
sgp/crs/nuke/IF10938.pdf.
252 “Iran Announces Security-Oriented ‘Space Tracking Center’,” RT International, June 9, 2013, 
ing-center-429/.
253 “Iran Claims To Have SSA Radar Capable of Detecting Satellites in LEO,” Spacewatch, 2018, 
to-have-ssa-radar-capable-of-detecting-satellites-in-leo/.
254 “Missiles of Iran,” Missile Threat, CSIS, Accessed February 5, 2020, 
255 “Simorgh,” Missile Threat, CSIS, June 15, 2018, 
256 Tyler Rodgers, “Iran’s Simorgh Rocket Test in Perspective,” Arms Control Association, January 17, 2017, 
blog/2017-07-27/iran-simorgh-rocket-test-in-perspective.
257 Geoff Brumfiel, “Iranian Rocket Launch Ends In Failure, Imagery Shows,” NPR, August 29, 2019, 
org/2019/08/29/755406765/iranian-rocket-launch-ends-in-failure-images-show; Stephen Clark, “Second Iranian Satellite Launch Attempt
in a Month Fails,” Spaceflight Now, February 11, 2019, 
a-month-fails/; and Geoff Brumfiel, “Satellite Imagery Suggests 2nd Iranian Space Launch Has Failed,” NPR, February 6, 2019, 
npr.org/2019/02/06/692071812/satellite-imagery-suggests-second-iranian-space-launch-has-failed.
258 “Iran Space Agency to Launch Three Satellites by ,” Financial Tribune, August 25, 2019, 
tech/99569/iran-space-agency-to-launch-three-satellites-by-march-2020.
259 Geoff Brumfiel, “Iranian Rocket Launch Ends In Failure, Imagery Shows.”
260 Geoff Brumfiel, “Trump Tweets Sensitive Surveillance Image Of Iran,” NPR, August 30, 2019, 

president-trump-tweets-sensitive-surveillance-image-of-iran; and Donald Trump, Twitter Post, August 30, 2019, 1:44 pm, 
com/realDonaldTrump/status/1167493371973255170
261 Matthew Lee, “US Hits Iran Space Agency with Sanctions over Missile Work,” Associated Press, September 4, 2019, 
com/99a41d1896c94d9e967e581b3c2e2d83.
262 “Iran-related Designations; Non-proliferation Designations; Kingpin Act Designations Update,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, September
3, 2019, 
263 MJ Azari Jahromi, Twitter Post, January 29, 2020, 1:26 am, 
264 2379, “Iran Makes Six Satellites to Put into Orbit,” IRNA English, January 26, 2020, 
lites-to-put-into-orbit.
265 Amir Vahdat and Jon Gambrell, “Iran Again Fails to Put Satellite into Orbit amid US Worries,” Associated Press, February 9, 2020, https://
apnews.com/7c8247674c294c23d408b034e9d4ee5a?utm_campaign=SocialFlow&utm_source=Twitter&utm_medium=AP.
266 “Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space: Membership Evolution,” United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs, 
unoosa.org/oosa/en/ourwork/copuos/members/evolution.html; and “Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Ex-
ploration and Use of Outer Space, Including the Moon and Other Celestial bodies,” U.S. Department of State, Accessed February 5, 2020,

267 Parvis Tarikhi, “More Significant Role for Iran’s Space Administration,” Parviztarikhi’s Blog, November 22, 2010, 
press.com/features-2/more-significant-role-for-iran’s-space-administration/.
268 “نامزاس ییاضف ناریا,” Iranian Space Agency, July 9, 2016, and “Space Industry Development
Requires National Willpower: Minister,” Tehran Times, May 26, 2018, 
ment-requires-national-willpower-minister.
269 “Iran Space Research Center,” Iran Watch, October 31, 2019, and
“Sharif University of Technology,” Iran Watch, November 18, 2019, 
and “Iran Enjoys High-Tech in Building Space-Based Parks,” IRNA English, September 29, 2019, 
joys-high-tech-in-building-space-based-parks.
270 Stephen Lambakis, Foreign Space Capabilities: Implications for U.S. National Security (Fairfax, VA: National Institutes Press, ),
31, 
271 Geoff Brumfiel, “Iran Is Preparing A Launch. But Is It For A Space Rocket Or A Missile?” NPR, January 14, 2019, 
org/2019/01/14/684467347/iran-is-preparing-a-launch-but-is-it-for-a-space-rocket-or-a-missile.
272 “ ناریا ییاضف نامزاس یارب ناموت درایلیم ۹۶۰ و رازه ۳ صاصتخا” .رابخا باتفآ,” Aftabir.com, March 26, 2010, 
feb/20/c2c1203499802_economy_marketing_business_information_technology_mobile.php.
273 “Cuts and Extensions in Iran’s ICT 2017/18 Budget,” Financial Tribune, December 13, 2016, 

274 Jennifer Chandler, “Decoding Iran’s defence spending: pitfalls and new pointers,” International Institute for Strategic Studies, November
13, 2018, 
275 “Iran Attack: How Strong Is Iran’s Military?” BBC News, January 9, 2020, 
276 “Shahab-3,” Missile Threat, CSIS, August 9, 2016, 
277 Robert Einhorn, Vann H Van Diepen, and Kate Hewitt, Constraining Iran’s Missile Capabilities (Washington, DC: Brookings, ),

278 Tom O’Connor, “U.S. Warns ‘Iran Has the Largest Ballistic Missile Force in the Middle East’ and Can Target Europe,” Newsweek, December
13, 2018, 
279 “Iran Opens New Space-Tracking Center,” RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty, June 9, 2013, 
ter/25011651.html.
280 Michael Peck, “Bad News for Israel: Iran Has a New Missile,” National Interest, November 1, 2019, 
bad-news-israel-iran-has-new-missile-92556; and Jeremey Binnie, “Iran displays guidance for artillery rockets,” Jane’s Defence Weekly,
October 4, 2019, 
281 Ian Williams, “When Iran Attacks,” Missile Threat, CSIS, February 4, 2020, 
282 “Missiles of Iran.” Missile Threat, CSIS, Accessed February 5, 2020. 
283 Scott Peterson and Payam Faramarzi, “Exclusive: Iran hijacked U.S. drone, says Iranian engineer,” Christian Science Monitor, December 15,
2011, 
284 “Iran’s Nuclear Program Timeline and History,” Nuclear Threat Initiative, last updated , 
iran/nuclear/
285 Ibid.
286 United Against a Nuclear Iran, Iran & North Korea - Nuclear Proliferation Partners (New York, NY: ), 
stnucleariran.com/north-korea-iran; and Josh Rogin and Eli Lake, “Iran and North Korea: The Nuclear ‘Axis of Resistance’,” The Daily Beast,
January 31, 2014, 
287 Zachary Laub and Kali Robinson, “What Is the Status of the Iran Nuclear Agreement?” Council on Foreign Relations, last updated January 7,
2020, 
288 John Haltiwanger, “Here’s What’s in the 2015 Nuclear Deal with Iran That the Country Withdrew from amid Heightened Tensions with the
US,” Business Insider, January 14, 2020, 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

289 Holly Ellyatt, “Europe Stands by Iran Nuclear Deal for Now, Defying US Calls to Abandon It,” CNBC, January 13, 2020, 
com/2020/01/13/jcpoa-europe-stands-by-iran-nuclear-deal.html.
290 Uri Friedman, “A New Nuclear Era Is Coming,” The Atlantic, January 9, 2020, 
mani-iran-north-korea-new-nuclear-age/604618/.
291 Safa Haeri, “Cuba blows the whistle on Iranian jamming,” Asia Times, August 22, 2003, 
EH22Ak03.html.
292 Small Media Foundation, Satellite Jamming in Iran: A War Over Airwaves (London, UK: Small Media Foundation, 2012), 21, 
dia.org.uk/sites/default/files/Satellite%20Jamming.pdf.
293 Yeganeh Torbati, “Iran says capable of jamming foes’ communication systems,” Reuters, January 15, 2013, 
iran-military/iran-says-capable-of-jamming-foes-communication-systems-idINDEE90E0DF20130115.
294 Michel de Rosen, “Letter to Eutelsat Regarding Iranian Government’s jamming of satellite broadcasts,” Human Rights Watch, June 25, 2010,

295 Ibid.
296 Regan Doherty, “Iran Jamming Al Jazeera Broadcasts: Document,” Reuters, January 10, 2012, 
zeera/iran-jamming-al-jazeera-broadcasts-document-idUSTRE80918520120110.
297 Robert Briel, “Syria in Frame on Eutelsat Jamming,” Broadband TV News, October 22, 2012, com/2012/10/22/
syria-believed-to-jam-eutelsat/.
298 “London-Based Persian TV To Lodge Complaint Against Iran For Satellite Jamming.” Radio Farda, November 23, 2019, 
da.com/a/london-based-persian-tv-to-lodge-complaint-against-iran-for-satellite-jamming-/30288280.html.
299 Peterson and Faramarzi, “Exclusive: Iran hijacked U.S. drone, says Iranian engineer.”
300 Lee Feeran, “Obama: Hey Iran, Can We Get Our Drone Back?” ABC News, December 12, 2011, 
iran-rq-170-sentinel-drone-back/story?id=15140133.
301 “2019-012-Persian Gulf, Strait of Hormuz, Gulf of Oman, Arabian Sea, Red Sea-Threats to Commercial Vessels by Iran and Its Proxies.”
MARAD, July 8, 2019, 
commercial-vessels.
302 Reuters and Haaretz, “Iran Reportedly Jamming Ships’ GPS in Attempt to Trick Them Into Iranian Waters for Seizure,” Haaretz, August 8,
2019, 
ters-1.7652352.
303 Tzvi Joffre,“U.S. Warns of GPS Interference, Communications Spoofing in Persian Gulf.” Jerusalem Post, August 8, 2019, 
com/Middle-East/US-warns-of-GPS-interference-communications-spoofing-in-Persian-Gulf-597998.
304 Tracy Cozzens, “Iran jams CPS on ships in Strait of Hormuz,” GPS World, August 9, 2019, 
ships-in-strait-of-hormuz/.
305 Seth J. Frantzman, “Iran Claims to Pioneer New Electronic Warfare Unit,” Jerusalem Post, July 7, 2019, 
Iran-claims-to-pioneer-new-electronic-warfare-unit-594858.
306 “IRGC Unveils Military Communication System - Defense News,” Tasnim News Agency, July 7, 2019, 
news/2019/07/07/2048683/irgc-unveils-military-communication-system.
307 Alain Henry de Frahan, “Iran unveiled armored vehicle, jamming system, drones, smart robot and more,” Army Recognition, October 4,
2019, 
jamming_system_drones_smart_robot_and_more.html; and Shi Yinglun, “Iran Unveils New Homemade Military Gears: Report,” Xinhua,
October 3, 2019, 
308 “New Prototype ‘Farpad’ UAV given to Military Units,” IRNA English, October 30, 2019, 
Farpad-UAV-given-to-military-units; and “Iran’s New Hand-launched Drone has Electronic Warfare Capability,” DefenseWorld.net, October
31, 2019, 
KiRu.
309 Dorothy Denning, “Iran’s Cyber Warfare Program Has Reached a Critical Point,” Newsweek, December 12, 2017, 
com/irans-cyber-warfare-program-now-major-threat-united-states-745427.
310 Keith Breene, “Who Are the Cyberwar Superpowers?” World Economic Forum, May 4, 2016, 
who-are-the-cyberwar-superpowers/.
311 James A. Lewis, “Iran and Cyber Power,” CSIS, Commentary, June 25, 2019, and Seth
G. Jones, Containing Tehran, (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 
Jones_ContainingIran_WEB_v2.pdf?MiOEbYgRpCYPIeM5sivMoNWJIhFDxrN5.
312 Ibid
313 Collin Anderson and Karim Sadjadpour, Iran’s Cyber Threat: Espionage, Sabotage, and Revenge (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace, January 4, 2018) 47, 
314 “The Invisible U.S.-Iran Cyber War,” U.S. Institute for Peace, The Iran Primer, updated January 7, 2020, 
blog/2019/oct/25/invisible-us-iran-cyber-war.
315 Elisabeth Bumiller and Thom Shanker, “Panetta Warns of Dire Threat of Cyberattack on U.S.,” New York Times, October 11, 2012, https://

316 “The Invisible U.S.-Iran Cyber War,” U.S. institute for Peace.

317 “CISA Statement on Iranian Cybersecurity Threats,” Department of Homeland Security, October 30, 2019, 
news/2019/06/22/cisa-statement-iranian-cybersecurity-threats.
318 Brian Fung, “Hacking Attempts Originating in Iran Nearly Triple Following Soleimani Strike, Researchers Say,” CNN, January 9, 2020,

NORTH KOREA
319 Thomas G. Roberts, Spaceports of the World (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 
320 “A Conversation with General John Hyten, Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff” (public event, CSIS, Washington, DC, January 17,
2020), Filmed [January 17, 2020]. Youtube
video, 18:38. Posted [January 17, 2020], 
321 “Taepodong-2 (Unha-3),” Missile Threat, CSIS, August 8, 2016, last modified June 15, 2018, 
taepodong-2/.
322 Elizabeth Shim, “North Korea Defends ‘‘Peaceful’’ Satellite Launches, Report Says,” UPI, January 6, 2020, 
World-News/2020/01/06/North-Korea-defends-peaceful-satellite-launches-report-says/7681578311980/.
323 Robert E. Mccoy, “What are the real purposes of Pyongyang’s new satellites?” Asia Times, December 19, 2017, 
cle/real-purposes-pyongyangs-new-satellites/.
324 Eric Talmadge, “AP Exclusive: North Korea Hopes to Plant Flag on the Moon,” Associated Press, August 4, 2016, 
76909dec40b299658a34b489dc1a/AP-Exclusive:-North-Korea-hopes-to-plant-flag-on-the-moon.
325 “North Korean Missile Launches & Nuclear Tests: 1984-Present,” Missile Threat, CSIS, December 3, 2019, 
north-korea-missile-launches-1984-present/.
326 Barbara Starr and Zachary Cohen, “Satellite Imagery Shows Activity at Critical North Korean Missile Site,” CNN, January 26, 2020, https://

327 Joseph Bermudez, Victor Cha, and Dana Kim, “ Update: Tonghae Satellite Launching Ground,” Beyond Parallel, CSIS, De-
cember 17, 2019, 
328 Alex Ward, “Why North Korea’s restored rocket site isn’t cause for worry — yet,” Vox, March 7, 2019, 
com/2019/3/7/18254589/north-korea-rocket-site-launch-space-trump-vietnam.
329 “North Korea’s Sohae Satellite Launching Station: Post-Engine Test Activity Observed,” 38 North, December 17, 2019, 
org/2019/12/sohae121619/.
330 Spokesman for Academy of Defence Science of DPRK Issues Statement,” KCNA Watch, December 15, 2019, 
stream/1576486826-622749970/spokesman-for-academy-of-defence-science-of-dprk-issues-statement/; “Statement of Spokesman for
Academy of National Defence Science Issued,” KCNA Watch, December 9, 2019, 
statement-of-spokesman-for-academy-of-national-defence-science-issued/.
331 Heekyong Yang, “North Korea Conducts New Test at Rocket Site, Aims to ‘Overpower U.S. Nuclear Threats’,” Reuters, December 14, 2019,

threats-idUSKBN1YI05E.
332 Weeden and Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities (Washington, DC: Secure World Foundation, ), 5–1, 
org/media/206408/swf_global_counterspace_april2019_web.pdf.
333 “North Korea Finishes Advanced Recon Satellite,” Space Daily, December 27, 2017, 
ishes_advanced_recon_satellite_999.html.
334 “Stronger Rules Must Guarantee Outer Space Remains Conflict-Free, First Committee Delegates Stress, Calling for New Laws to Hold Perpe-
trators Accountable,” United Nations, October 17, 2017, 
335 “KCNA Report on DPRK’s Accession to International Space Treaty and Convention,” KCNA Watch, March 12, 2009, 
newstream/1451888128-747969205/kcna-report-on-dprks-accession-to-international-space-treaty-and-convention/.
336 “Seventh Session of 12th SPA of DPRK Held,” KCNA, April 1, 2013, 
source=web&cd=1&ved=2ahUKEwj-3cPX3dnnAhVDKH0KHffLCg0QFjAAegQIARAB&url=http%3A%2F%2F
jp%2Fitem%2F2013%2F201304%2Fnews01%2F20130401-23ee.html&usg=AOvVaw10gT0npAmRPomIQ9hBgp6b.
337 Sofia Lotto Persio, “North Korea Is Reaching for the Stars with Plans to Conquer Space,” Newsweek, October 30, 2017, 
week.com/star-wars-north-koreas-unveils-5-year-plan-conquer-space-695896Y.
338 “DPRK Delegate Speaks at UNGA Session.” KCNA Watch, October 21, 2017, 
delegate-speaks-at-unga-session/.
339 Morris Jones, “North Korea’s Space Program Aims Higher,” Lowy Institute, Interpreter, October 31, 2017, 
the-interpreter/north-korea-space-program-aims-higher.
340 “Space Will Bring Greater Well-Being to Mankind: Minju Joson,” KCNA Watch, April 12, 2017, 
space-will-bring-greater-well-being-to-mankind-minju-joson/.
341 “‘Sanctions Won’t Stop Our Space Race’: North Korea Sets Sights on the Moon,” Guardian, August 4, 2016, 
world/2016/aug/04/sanctions-wont-stop-our-space-race-north-korea-sets-sights-on-the-moon.
342 Ibid.; Persio, “North Korea Is Reaching for the Stars with Plans to Conquer Space.”
343 “No Dong 1,” Missile Threat, CSIS, June 15, 2018, and Wright, Grego, and Gronlund, The
Physics of Space Security, 77.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

344 National Coordination Office for Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, “Control Segment.”
345 Wright, Grego, and Gronlund, The Physics of Space Security, 125-130.
346 Elise Hu, “North Korea Claims Successful Hydrogen Bomb Test.” NPR, September 3, 2017, 
wo-way/2017/09/03/523913820/north-korea-possibly-conducts-sixth-nuclear-test-south-korea-says.
347 Emma Bowman, “North Korea Brandishes What It Says Is A Missile-Ready H-Bomb.” NPR, September 3, 2017, 
tions/thetwo-way/2017/09/03/548201793/north-korea-brandishes-what-it-says-is-a-missile-ready-h-bomb.
348 “Kim Jong Un Advances Tasks for Effecting Drastic Turn in Implementing Decision of 7th Congress of WPK,” KCNA Watch, January 1, 2017,

sion-of-7th-congress-of-wpk/.
349 “Report on 5th Plenary Meeting of 7th C.C., WPK,” KCNA Watch, January 1, 2020, 
stream/1577869229-462791867/report-on-5th-plenary-meeting-of-7th-c-c-wpk /.
350 Commission to Assess the Threat to the United States from Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP) Attack,“Assessing the Threat from Electromagnetic
Pulse (EMP)” (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, ), 
utive_report_on_assessing_the_threat_from_emp_-_final_april2018.pdf.
351 Mun Dong Hui, “North Korean Propaganda Promotes EMP Attacks Using Nuclear Weapons,” Daily NK, January 17, 2020, 
lynk.com/english/north-korean-propaganda-promotes-emp-attacks-using-nuclear-weapons/.
352 Bureau of Arms Control, Verification and Compliance, “Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under
Water,” U.S. Department of State, 
353 “N. Korea’s jamming of GPS signals poses new threat: defense minister,” Yonhap News Agency, October 5, 2010, 
news.co.kr/national/2010/10/05/67/0301000000AEN20101005005900315F.HTML.
354 Choe Sang-Hun, “South Korea: North accused of sending jamming signals to disrupt GPS,” New York Times, May 3, 2012, 
times.com/2012/05/03/world/asia/south-korea-accused-north-accused-of-jamming-signals.html.
355 Ian Wood and Stella Kim, “North Korea Jams GPS Signals to Fishing Boats: South,” NBC News, April 1, 2016, 
news/world/north-korea-jams-gps-signals-fishing-boats-south-n548986.
356 “South Korea tells U.N. that North Korea GPS jamming threatens boats, planes,” Reuters, April 11, 2016, 
us-northkorea-southkorea-gps/south-korea-tells-u-n-that-north-korea-gps-jamming-threatens-boats-planes-idUSKCN0X81SN.
357 Mun Dong Hui, “North Korean Propaganda Promotes EMP Attacks Using Nuclear Weapons,” Daily NK, November 23, 2018, 
dailynk.com/english/north-korean-propaganda-promotes-emp-attacks-using-nuclear-weapons/.
358 “Massive GPS Jamming Attack by North Korea,” GPS World, May 8, 2012, 
359 Catherine Dill et all., “On the Trail of the Tae Yang,” Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies and Middlebury Insti-
tute of International Studies at Monterey, James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies, 2019, 
ect_sandstone_on_the_trail_of_the_tae_yang_final_for_web_4.pdf.
360 Benjamin Katzeff Silberstein, Tereza Novotna, and Kenneth B. Dekleva, “North Korea’s Koryolink: Built for Surveillance and Control” 38
North, August 12, 2019, 
361 CrowdStrike. 2019 Global Threat Report: Adversary Tradecraft and the Importance of Speed (Sunnyvale, CA: 2019), 
wp-content/uploads/2019/06/CrowdStrike_GTR_2019.pdf.
362 Kim Jaewon, “A Cybersecurity Defector Warns of North Korea’s ‘Hacker Army’,” Nikkei Asian Review, May 25, 2017, 
Politics/A-cybersecurity-defector-warns-of-North-Korea-s-hacker-army.
363 Steve Miller, “Where Did North Korea’s Cyber Army Come From?” Voice of America, November 20, 2018, 
east-asia-pacific/where-did-north-koreas-cyber-army-come.
364 Ju-min Park, “Exclusive: North Korea’s Unit 180, the Cyber Warfare Cell That Worries the West,” Reuters, May 22, 2017, 
reuters.com/article/us-cyber-northkorea-exclusive/exclusive-north-koreas-unit-180-the-cyber-warfare-cell-that-worries-the-west-
idUSKCN18H020.
365 “North Korea ‘Stole $2bn for Weapons via Cyber-Attacks’,” BBC News, August 7, 2019, 
366 “Treasury Sanctions North Korean State=Sponsored Malicious Cyber Groups,” Department of the Treasury, press release, September 13,
2019, 
367 Elizabeth Shim, “North Korean Hackers Suspected in India Space Agency Cyberattack,” UPI, November 7, 2019, 
Top_News/World-News/2019/11/07/North-Korean-hackers-suspected-in-India-space-agency-cyberattack/7371573053505/.
368 Sean Lyngaas, “Lazarus Rises in Israel with Attempted Hack of Defense Company, Researchers Say,” CyberScoop, June 7, 2019, 
cyberscoop.com/lazarus-rises-israel-attempted-hack-defense-company-researchers-say/.; and Sherisse Pham, “Here’s a new North Korean
hacking threat to worry about,” CNN Business, February 20, 2018, 
ers-reaper-fireeye/index.html.
INDIA
369 “Orbital Launches of 2019,” Gunter’s Space Page, February 11, 2020, 
370 Chethan Kumar, “India to launch first manned space mission by 2022: PM Modi,” Times of India, August 15, 2018, 
times.com/india/india-to-launch-first-manned-space-mission-by-2022-pm-modi/articleshow/65410373.cms.
371 Indian Space Research Organization, “Annual Report 2019-2020,” Department of Space, 2020, 94, 

files/flipping_book/annual_report_2019-20_english/files/assets/common/downloads/Annual%20Report%202019-20%20(English).pdf.
372 Note: Data limited to total launches from 1980 to 2019; Thomas G. Roberts, Spaceports of the World (Washington, DC: CSIS, ),

373 “India launches record 104 satellites in single mission,” BBC News, February 15, 2017, 
dia-38977803.
374 “Space Environment: Total Payloads Launched by Country,” accessed February 12, 2020.
375 Staff Writers, “ISRO’s Second Spaceport, for New SSLV Rocket, to Come up in Tamil Nadu,” The Wire, December 1, 2019, 
space/isro-kulasekarapattinam-thoothukudi-sdsc-sriharikota-sslv-pslv-gslv-antrix.
376 Surendra Singh, “India to get its second spaceport, and acquisition work begins in Tamil Nadu,” Times of India, December 2, 2019, 
sofindia.indiatimes.com/india/india-to-get-its-second-spaceport-land-acquisition-work-begins-in-tamil-nadu/articleshow/72323869.cms.
377 Jeff Foust, “Spaceflight purchases first commercial flight of new Indian small launcher,” SpaceNews, August 6, 2019, 
com/spaceflight-purchases-first-commercial-flight-of-new-indian-small-launcher/.
378 Connor Simpson, “China Becomes Third Country to Ever ‘Soft-Land’ on the Moon,” The Atlantic, December 14, 2013, 
tic.com/international/archive/2013/12/china-becomes-third-country-ever-soft-land-moon/356151/.
379 Elizabeth Howell, “Chandrayaan-2: India’s Orbiter-Lander-Rover Mission,” Space.com, October 8, 2019, 
com/40136-chandrayaan-2.html.
380 Ibid.
381 Chelsea Gohd, “India Admits Its Moon Lander Crashed, Cites Problem with Breaking Thrusters,” Space.com, November 25, 2019, https://

382 Jeff Foust, “India confirms plans for a second lunar lander mission,” SpaceNews, January 1, 2020, 
plans-for-second-lunar-lander-mission/.
383 Staff Writers, “Indian astronauts to begin training in Russia for country’s first manned space mission,” SpaceDaily, January 23, 2020, http://

384 Ibid.
385 Vivek Raghuvanshi, “India to launch a defense-based space research agency,” Defense News, June 12, 2019, 
com/space/2019/06/12/india-to-launch-a-defense-based-space-research-agency/?utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_
campaign=Socialflow+DFN.
386 Rajat Pandit, “India to hold first simulated space warfare exercise next month,” Times of India, June 8, 2019, 
times.com/india/india-to-hold-first-simulated-space-warfare-exercise-next-month/articleshow/69697289.cms.
387 Raghuvanshi, “India to launch a defense-based space research agency.”
388 Pandit, “India to hold first simulated space warfare exercise next month.”
389 Ajay Banerjee, “India plans policy to tackle space threats,” Tribune, July 29, 2019, 
policy-to-tackle-space-threats-809330.
390 Indian Space Research Organization, “Annual Report 2019-2020,” 94.
391 Ashley J. Tellis, “India’s ASAT Test: An Incomplete Success,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, April 15, 2019, 
ieendowment.org/2019/04/15/india-s-asat-test-incomplete-success-pub-78884.
392 Ibid.
393 Jonathan McDowell, Twitter Post, December 27, 2019, 8:54 PM, 
394 Sarah Lewin, “India’s Anti-Satellite Test Created Dangerous Debris, NASA Chief Says,” Space.com, April 1, 2019, 
nasa-chief-condemns-india-anti-satellite-test.html.
395 Chitranjan Kumar, “India tests ASAT: China calls for peace, Pakistan urges international community to condemn,” Business Today, March 27,
2019, 
munity-to-condemn/story/331703.html.
396 Doris Elin Urrutia, “India’s Anti-Satellite Missile Test Is a Big Deal. Here’s Why.,” Space.com, March 30, 2019, 
dia-anti-satellite-test-significance.html.
397 Tellis, “India’s ASAT Test.”
398 Shaan Shaikh, “India Conducts Successful ASAT Test,” Missile Threat, CSIS, March 28, 2019, 
ducts-successful-asat-test/.
399 Narendra Modi, Twitter Post, March 27, 2019, 12:08 AM, 
400 Ibid.
401 Rajat Pandit, “Satellite-killer not a one-off, India working on star wars armoury,” Times of India, April 7, 2019, 
times.com/india/satellite-killer-not-a-one-off-india-working-on-star-wars-armoury/articleshow/68758674.cms.
402 Pearl MAria D’Souza, “French Agency CNES to aid ISRO’s space station project,” New Indian Express, January 27, 2020, 
ianexpress.com/nation/2020/jan/27/french-agency-cnes-to-aid-isros-space-station-project-2094922.html.
403 Snehesh Alex Philip, “India gets new Special Ops Division that can cripple targets miles inside enemy territory,” ThePrint, May 15, 2019,

404 Amrita Nayak Dutta, “New tri services special ops division, meant for surgical strikes, finishes 1st exercise today,” ThePrint, September 28,
2019, 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

405 Rajat Pandit, “After Agni-V Launch, DRDO’s New Target Is Anti-satellite Weapons,” Times of India, April 20, 2012, 
times.com/india/After-Agni-V-launch-DRDOs-new-target-is-anti-satellite-weapons/articleshow/12763074.cms.
406 Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff, Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR) (New Delhi: India Ministry of Defence, ), 6-7, 32-33, 
407 Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff, Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR) - 2018 (New Delhi: India Ministry of Defence,
2018), 21-22, 
408 Rajat Pandit, “Satellite-killer not a one-off, India working on star wars armoury,” Times of India, April 7, 2019, 
times.com/india/satellite-killer-not-a-one-off-india-working-on-star-wars-armoury/articleshow/68758674.cms.
409 Brian Weeden and Victoria Samson, “India’s ASAT test is a wake-up call for norms of behavior in space,” SpaceNews, April 8, 2019, https://
spacenews.com/op-ed-indias-asat-test-is-wake-up-call-for-norms-of-behavior-in-space/.
410 Daniel Oberhaus, “India’s Anti-Satellite Test Wasn’t Really About Satellites,” Wired, March 27, 2019, 
ti-satellite-test-space-debris/.
411 Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff, Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR) - 2018, 63.
412 Ibid., 64.
413 PTI, “Govt approves setting up of defence cyber agency,” Times of India, November 27, 2019, 
govt-approves-setting-up-of-defence-cyber-agency/articleshow/72264836.cms.
414 Ibid.
415 “Orbital Launches of 2019,” Gunter’s Space Page, February 11, 2020, 
416 John Raymond and Kathleen Hicks, “A Conversation with General Raymond” (public event, Center for Strategic and International Studies,
Washington, D.C.: ) 18, 
417 Louis de Gouyon Matignon, “The Birth of the French Space Program,” Space Legal Issues, February 2, 2019, 
com/space-law-the-birth-of-the-french-space-program/.
418 “Insight,” CNES, November 27, 2018, 
419 “World First French SEIS Instrument Detects ‘Marsquake’,” CNES, April 23, 2019, 
ment-detects-marsquake.
420 Kyle Mizokami, “France Accuses Russia of Space Satellite Espionage,” Popular Mechanics, September 10, 2018, 
chanics.com/military/a23067892/france-charges-russia-with-space-satellite-espionage/.
421 Space Environment: Total Payloads Launched by Country,” accessed February 12, 2020.
422 “Defense Space Strategy Summary,” French Ministry of Defense, DICoD Publishing Office, , 
download/563617/9727377/synthe%CC%80se%20strate%CC%81gie%20spatiale%20de%20de%CC%81fense.pdf.
423 Theresa Hitchens, “Space Lasers for Satellite Defense Top New French Space Strategy,” Breaking Defense, July 26, 2019, 
defense.com/2019/07/france-envisions-on-orbit-lasers-for-satellite-defense/.
424 Florence Parly, “Presentation of the Defense Space Strategy,” SatelliteObservation.net, July 25, 2019, English translation from: 
elliteobservation.net/2019/07/27/frances-new-space-defense-strategy/.
425 Hitchens, “Space Lasers for Satellite Defense Top New French Space Strategy.”
426 Jen Judson, “US, Israel’s Arrow-3 missile put to the test in Alaska,” Defense News, July 28, 2019, 
gon/2019/07/28/us-israels-arrow-3-missile-put-to-the-test-in-alaska/.
427 Ibid.
428 “Tesla Model 3 Spoofed off the highway - Regulus Navigation System Hack Causes Car to Turn On Its Own,” Regulus, n.d., 
regulus.com/blog/tesla-model-3-spoofed-off-the-highway-regulus-researches-hack-navigation-system-causing-car-to-steer-off-road/.
429 Ibid.
430 Josh Petri, “How Hackers Can Take Over Your Car’s GPS,” Hyperdrive, June 19, 2019, 
cles/2019-06-19/threat-of-gps-spoofing-for-autonomous-cars-seen-as-overblown.
431 Ibid.
432 “Arrow 3 (Israel),” Missile Threat, CSIS, August 11, 2016, last modified June 15, 2018, 
433 “2020: The Year of Sustainability,” AviationWeek & Space Technology, , 17, 
files/2020-01/AW_200113_0.pdf.
OTHERS
434 Mari Yamaguchi, “Japan reveals plan for space defense unit,” Defense News, January 21, 2020, 
space/2020/01/21/japan-reveals-plan-for-space-defense-unit/.
435 Mari Yamaguchi, “Abe says new unit will defend Japan from space tech threats,” MSN, January 20, 2020, 
news/world/abe-says-new-unit-will-defend-japan-from-space-tech-threats/ar-BBZ8kfk#image=BBZ8kfk_1|2.
436 Yamaguchi, “Japan reveals plan for space defense unit.”
437 Yomiuri Shimbum, “Satellite interceptor sought by mid-2020s,” Japan News, August 19, 2019, 
cle/0005948349.
438 Ibid.

439 Ibid.
440 Euan McKirdy, “Hayabusa mission: Japanese space probe attempts to ‘bomb’ asteroid,” CNN, April 5, 2019, 
com/2019/04/05/asia/hayabusa-crater-operation-sci-intl/index.html.
441 Allied Maritime Command, “Electronic Interference in Mediterranean,” December 12, 2019, 
news/2019/electronic-interference-in-mediterranean.
442 Ibid.
443 Alexandra Sticklings, “UK Ministry of Defence Announces Ambitious Plans for Space,” Royal United Services Institute, July 30, 2019, https://
rusi.org/commentary/uk-ministry-defence-announces-ambitious-plans-space.
444 Sandra Erwin, “As satellites become targets, UK military seeks closer ties with space industry,” SpaceNews, November 6, 2018, 
cenews.com/as-satellites-become-targets-u-k-military-seeks-closer-ties-with-space-industry/.
445 Andrew Chuter, “UK shoots for new laser weapons against drones, missiles,” Defense News, July 9, 2019, 
global/europe/2019/07/09/uk-shoots-for-new-laser-weapons-against-drones-missiles/.
446 Mandy Zuo, “China flight systems jammed by pig farm’s African swine fever defences,” South China Morning Post, December 20, 2019,

447 Editor, “GPS Signal Jamming Destroys China Drone Show - Again,” Resilient Navigation and Timing Foundation, November 1, 2018, https://
rntfnd.org/2018/11/01/gps-jamming-destroys-china-drone-show-again/.
448 Simone McCarthy, William Zheng, and Denise Tsang, “HK$1 million in damage caused by GPS jamming that caused 46 drones to plummet
during Hong Kong show,” South China Morning Post, October 29, 2018, 
cle/2170669/hk13-million-damage-caused-gps-jamming-caused-46-drones.
449 Katherine Dunn, “The long ocean voyage that helped find the flaws in GPS,” Fortune, January 24, 2020, 
gps-disruption-test-voyage/.
450 Ibid.
451 Ibid.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020

1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202 887 0200 |