Sus tainable Finance Outlook Sustainability and Security

Research reports

In this issue
Sustainability and Security
Letter to the reader ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3
Transition update .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4
It is now clear that Europe will pursue geopolitical independence. This means that security is now at the top of all policy
priorities. An independent and secure energy system will require big investments, but it can be done.
Sustainable finance market update .................................................................................................................................................... 8
The sustainable debt market is contracting, with new labeled bond and loan volumes declining across almost all categories
and markets. This decline in sustainable debt is particularly challenging for Europe, which needs to raise significant capital
to strengthen its security.
Regulatory update ................................................................................................................................................................................ 11
Europe faces major challenges—from rising geopolitical tensions, cyber-attacks, declining competitiveness to the climate
crisis. In response, the European Commission is aligning key policies to strengthen security.
Intersection between sustainability and security ......................................................................................................................... 13
Security today goes beyond military defence, requiring an integrated approach to interconnected risks like climate change,
resource scarcity, and infrastructure vulnerabilities. This perspective is sparking new dialogue on the links between
security and sustainable finance.
Europe’s energy pivot: A strategic blueprint for a prosperous and secure energy future ................................................... 17
Europe’s energy future hinges on large-scale renewable energy investments, system integration, and grid expansion,
according to a white paper by Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners. The report calls for ambitious action to secure energy
security, economic competitiveness, and climate goals, with a vision of delivering over 90% of Europe’s energy from clean
sources by 2050.
Treading the path to Lithuania’s energy independence and security: the role of EPSO-G .................................................... 20
Over the past decades, Lithuania has cut its reliance on Russian energy, led by state-owned EPSO-G through strategic grid
expansions and investments. Looking ahead, the country aims for 10 GW of solar and wind by 2030, with EPSO-G focusing
over half its investments on modernizing the electricity network to support this transition.
Cybersecurity for a sustainable future ............................................................................................................................................ 23
Despite rising investment in cybersecurity, cyber threats are growing more complex. This paper outlines five key trends:
increased EU targeting amid geopolitical tensions, spillover effects, cyberattacks triggering kinetic escalation, cybercrime
used for warfare, and the unclear role of non-state actors. While the EU has strengthened regulations to protect critical
infrastructure and digital products, true resilience requires deeper public–private collaboration beyond compliance.
The Sustainable Finance Outlook Editorial Team........................................................................................................................... 26
Contacts at SEB ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 27

Letter to the reader
Dear reader,
For the past 6 years, we have provided readers of the The supply of solar and wind power has continued to rise
publication formerly known as ‘The Green Bond’, which beyond even the most optimistic expectations, and
going forward will be called the ‘Sustainable Finance batteries have evolved to the point where they can
Outlook’, with regular updates on the state of the clean compensate for intermittent supply. The transition is now
energy transition. underway, and the discussion has turned from whether it
would happen to how we will achieve it.
When we started writing the Transition Update in 2019,
there were still doubts about global warming and many saw Meanwhile, political priorities have changed. The pandemic,
the clean energy transition as a costly political crusade. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the US election of President
However, we started with two strong convictions. The first Trump have combined to put security at the top of the
was that the link between emissions and global warming agenda – ahead of climate risks, social concerns and pretty
was already proved beyond reasonable doubt. The second much all other political objectives. The path forward for the
was that renewable energy was exhibiting all the hallmarks energy transition will be shaped by a new set of guidelines.
of past technology revolutions like the automobile and the
Consequently, the focus of energy transition analysis is
microprocessor, which meant that accelerated deployment
evolving. Instead of predicting a transformation driven by
would come with positive feedback effects in the shape of
technological development, it now centres on evaluating
falling costs.
how the rollout of relatively well-understood new energy
In 2019, our assessment was that both renewable energy systems is influenced by, and in turn influences, competing
and electrified transportation were close to the tipping point socioeconomic priorities. This also means that it feels like a
where they no longer needed subsidies. Developments over natural time to change the analysis we present in SEB’s
the past six years have proven both our convictions right. flagship sustainable finance report.
Sadly, global warming is already a reality after the first year We hope you will continue to enjoy the insights and analysis
of 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial era levels. More from SEB’s experts in this report and will continue to
encouragingly, renewable energy is now undisputedly provide occasional updates on the developments of the
cheaper than fossil energy and electric vehicles have transition both here and in SEB’s Equity Strategy
started outperforming internal combustion engine vehicles publications. And thanks for sharing the journey until now!
without subsidies.
.
Enjoy your reading,
Thomas Thygesen & Elizabeth Mathiesen
SEB Equity Strategy and Sustainability Research

Transition update
A holistic approach to energy security in Europe
It is now clear that Europe will pursue geopolitical independence. This
means that security is now at the top of all policy priorities. An independent
and secure energy system will require big investments, but it can be done.
Figure 1 Security is Europe’s top priority – multifaceted
Source: SEB
Geopolitical fragmentation now a reality The first objective is to increase the supply of locally
Since the last issue of this report was published in produced energy to secure access in a geopolitical crisis.
February, it has become increasingly clear that the US and This provides a strong argument for investment in
Europe are no longer playing on the same geopolitical renewable energy. Securing stable output in an energy
platform. The heavy-handed US attempt to end the war in system with more intermittent energy output also requires
Ukraine, keeping the possibility of military intervention in substantial investments in grids and storage systems.
Greenland open and the general deterioration of economic
However, energy security also means making sure that this
relations after Trump’s tariff shocks, have all combined to
new energy system is protected from other threats like
trigger a monumental change in Europe’s political climate.
hybrid warfare in the shape of both physical attacks and
As a result, security in the broadest sense, has become the cyber-attacks. An independent European AI platform would
top priority in European policy. This is not just about require a substantial increase in electricity supply, but
reducing the dependence on the US for military protection, would also open for using AI to improve energy efficiency,
by spending more on military equipment. If Europe is to
Finally, access to key resources required for electrification
carve out an independent path as a major geopolitical
must be secured. Today China controls the supply of most
actor, it must be independent of foreign powers in a whole
key inputs. Increased mining investment coupled with
range of areas including technology, resources and energy.
recycling of batteries and other energy equipment.
However, after 30 years of relying on the US for security,
In this Transition Update, we outline how a security-
this will require large and fast investments across all these
oriented energy policy with higher priority on guaranteeing
areas. From an energy perspective, the focus on security
supply is likely to turn out. We do not pass judgment on
also changes some important priorities, but the case for
whether the policy is optimal but only focus on the
rapid transition still stands.
probable outcome.
Thomas Thygesen Elizabeth Mathiesen Mads Bossen
thomas.thygesen@seb.dk elizabeth.mathiesen@seb.dk mads.bossen@seb.dk

Energy: Europe is still in the race Figure 3 Renewable fraction of primary energy
The first priority is to increase the supply of locally
produced energy. There are strong geopolitical as well as
economic arguments for focusing on renewable energy.
The geopolitical argument is a) that renewable energy
deploys faster than any other type of electricity generation,
and b) that once it is installed it does not require any input
from abroad to generate electricity. This latter argument is
most likely also an important driver for China’s decision to
accelerate the transition, while the US, with domestic oil &
gas supply, is under less pressure.
Figure 2 LCOE benchmarks
Source: BP, SEB
Electrified transportation is key to the success of an
approach that limits dependence on imported fossil energy.
China is also far ahead in this respect with total EV sales of
more than 7 million, compared to 1.8 million in Europe and
just 1.2 million in the US.
According to data from BNEF, battery EV sales as a % total
of all vehicles sold in Q1 2025 increased to 25% in China.
However, Western Europe is not that far behind with a BEV
share rebounding from 18.5% at the end of Q4 to 20.4% in
Q1 while the development in the US remains relatively
modest with BEV sales as % of total at 7.9%.
Source: BloombergNEF (forecast), SEB
Data from BNEF continue to highlight the economic Figure 4 BEV sales
argument with renewable energy offering a levelized cost
of electricity that is almost 50% below that of gas and coal
(Figure 2). However, it is also becoming clear that the cost
of generating electricity is not the only parameter.
The Spanish blackout this spring was not directly caused by
renewable energy, but by the inability of the grid to cope
with the intermittent nature of the supply from wind and
solar. Storage is also crucial to avoid excess supply and
negative prices when the sun is shining, and the wind is
blowing. The good news is that the LCOE of utility-scale
batteries has decline almost 40% in the last two years.
Building an independent energy supply with a high degree
of reliability and the lowest cost possible will require
significant investment in both primary energy supply, grids
and storage. It is important to note that Europe still has a
relatively strong starting point due to its early lead. China Source: BloombergNEF, SEB
invested almost twice as much as Europe in clean energy in This was caused by a major rebound in European BEV sales,
2024, but Europe has a head start and invested a lot more which had declined 25% over the course of 2024, but
than China in the years before 2015. While China’s jumped 50% to a new all-time high in Q1 2025. This was
transition curve is steeper, Europe still has a higher share of not the result of subsidies but mainly reflects another step
renewable energy in the total energy mix (Figure 3). forward in the price/quality of electric vehicles.

Defence needs energy, energy needs defence potentially reduce emissions by 1400 Mt CO 2 by 2035 if AI
It is not only technical factors that can lead to blackouts. In is used to improve energy efficiency in sectors like industry,
a more geopolitically fragmented world with more military transportation and buildings. As energy is likely to remain a
threats it is also crucial to protect the energy supply from scarce resourced in the early stages of transition, investing
disruptions that stem from foreign powers. in energy efficiency is likely to be an integral part of
building a secure energy system.
Critical infrastructure such as cables, power plants and IT
systems are at risk from hybrid warfare. We have already Figure 6 AI, datacentres and emissions by 2035
seen examples of physical damage to sub-sea cables and
pipelines. However, energy companies are also increasingly
subject to cyber-attacks, which according to the IEA have
quadrupled since 2020 (Figure 5). As IT will increasingly
be used to optimize the energy system, the risk of
disruption from cyber-attacks will also increase, unless
security is improved at the same pace.
Figure 5 Weekly cyber-attacks on energy organisation
Source: IEA, SEB
Critical minerals and circularity
The final key component in a more security-oriented energy
system is to secure the physical resources needed for both
energy production and electrification. Today, China
controls access to many key inputs. For example, most of
the refined production of key minerals is produced in China,
particularly when it comes to graphite, rare earths and
Source: IEA, SEB
manganese. This both means lower prices in China and a
Furthermore, increased military readiness also requires a
risk of supply disruptions in the rest of the world.
certainty that resources are available when needed. With
Figure 7 Geographical distribution of refined material
most military equipment still running on fossil energy,
production for key minerals (2024 data)
maintaining and adequate local supply of e.g. diesel oil to
drive tanks and other moving equipment and jet-fuel for
airplanes also is a security obligation.
Technology: AI is a double-edged sword
AI is the key to both growth and military power. This means
that Europe must develop its own independent AI
capability, which will require the construction of a
significant amount of energy intensive infrastructure. This
increased demand for electricity will increase emissions.
According to IEA, the electricity demand for data centres
will increase to 1.5-2.5% of global energy consumption by
2035 and this will increase emissions by 200-500 Mt CO

depending on the speed of adoption (Figure 6).
However, the IEA also tried to quantify the potential
positive effects from AI on emissions if it is used to improve
energy efficiency. According to the IEA this could
Source: IEA, SEB

rebmuN

2 0 2 0 2 0 2 1 2 0 2 2 2 0 2 3 2 0 2 4
2OCtM
1 0

-5
-1 0
-1 5

WC
a
id e sp re a d A d o p tio
se in e n d -u se se cto
nrs E mc
e
issio n s fro m d
n tre s (b a se ca
a ta
se )
E m issio n s fro m d a ta
c e n tre s (lift o ff)

%50

China Rest of Asia South America DRC Finland Canada Belgium US RoW

According to the IEA, the levelized cost of battery cell The change in focus from emission reduction to resilience
production is 40% higher outside of China and if graphite as the policy driver will have an impact on Europe’s energy
becomes more expensive levelized costs are 70% higher in mix going forward. Renewable energy will remain the
US and Europe. This makes it hard for the US and Europe to fastest growing segment, providing more than 50% of all
compete in electrification technology – and gives China the energy by 2050, while oil will play a less dominant role
possibility to hurt their economies in a crisis by withholding from the onset as electrification reduces the use of oil for
supplies altogether. transportation.
Given the relative scarcity of critical minerals like lithium, There are limits to the speed with which renewable energy
cobalt, and nickel in Europe, recycling used energy may be deployed and also questions about the
equipment like batteries can contribute to a domestic intermittency of supply. To guarantee the security of
supply of these materials. We expect both significant supply, natural gas is initially likely to remain a key part of
investment in mining and circularity, with the recycling the energy mix in the early stages of an accelerated
ultimately becoming a regulatory issue. transition until nuclear power can provide an alternative
base load. After 2035, new, safer and more efficient types
Conclusion: a new transition path
of nuclear power are likely to replace natural gas at the
Europe has embarked on a structural transformation to
base of the electricity infrastructure.
take back control over its geopolitical destiny. In the energy
The stylized scenario presented here is one possible future.
space, this is likely to involve not only a significant increase
Energy technology is still evolving rapidly, and the
of investment in renewable energy, but also in grids,
technological constraints we see today may ultimately
storage, AI, security/cybersecurity and resources. It will be
ease faster than expected. However, the chart below is in
expensive and difficult to achieve, but Europe has a big
our view the most likely outcome given what we know
saving surplus to tap into for funding, and the starting point
today about the energy opportunity set
is not as bad as many appear to believe.
Figure 8 A stylized scenario for European energy consumption in a security-based framework
Source: BP, SEB

Sustainable finance market update
Drop in new transactions across market segments
The sustainable debt market is contracting, with new labeled bond and
loan volumes declining across almost all categories and markets. This
decline in sustainable debt is particularly challenging for Europe, which
needs to raise significant capital to strengthen its security.
Figure 9 Sustainable debt transaction moving average
Source: BloombergNEF, SEB
the volume for the first five months of 2025 still represents
Broad decline across market segments
the second highest ever recorded.
In the first five months of 2025, the sustainable finance
Figure 10 Sustainable debt transactions by type YTD
market registered USD 628 billion in new transactions,

marking a 17% year-over-year decrease. This downturn
affected all categories of labelled debt except for
sustainability bonds, which notably saw a 5%increase in
new issuances.
Overall, new sustainable bond issuance fell by 7%. This
downturn was significant enough to impact green bonds,
which experienced their first decline in new issuance for the
January-May period since the early stages of the global
pandemic in 2020. Adding to the notable shifts in the bond
market, new transition bond issuance was halved compared
to the first five months of last year.
The sustainable loan market faced even steeper challenges,
suffering a 44 %year-over-year contraction. Sustainability-
linked loan transactions plummeted by half to just over USD
60bn. Although green loans also saw significant declines,
Source: BloombergNEF, SEB
Gregor Vulturius, PhD Alison Mariko Rhatigan
gregor.vulturius@seb.se alison.rhatigan@seb.no

1 8
1 6
1 4
1 2
1 0

,0 0
,0 0
,0 0
,0 0
,0 0
,0 0
,0 0
,0 0
,0 0
-
2 0 1 9 -0 5 -0 1 2 0 2 0 -0 5 -0 1 2 0 2 1 -0 5 -0 1 2 0 2 2 -0 5 -0 1 2 0 2 3 -0 5 -0 1 2 0 2 4 -0 5 -0 1 2 0 2 5 -0 5

--0

0 ,0
0 ,0
0 ,0
0 ,0
0 ,0
,0 0
,0 0
,0 0
,0 0

M
o n
ht
M
A
U ,
S
D
b
n
nb
DSU
,AM
htnoM

S u s ta in a b le d e b t a ll ty p e s S u s ta in a b le b o n d s S u s ta in a b le lo a n s

-10% YOY 300

n b
D
S U 150
+5% YOY

-8% YOY -54% YTD
-26% YTD
50 -54% YTD
0% YOY
-

Sustainable debt contracted across all global markets, with Sustainable bond market struggling
the sole exception of Asia and Oceania. Europe (including The market share of sustainable bonds has stagnated,
the Nordics) bore the brunt of this decline, seeing new maintaining 2.6% and 4.8% globally and in Europe (excl.
sustainable bond and loan transactions drop by USD 45 Nordics), respectively. The Nordics saw a decline in
billion. The Americas experienced the steepest relative sustainable bond market share.
decline, as conditions for sustainable debt soured after
Figure 13 Sustainable bond market share
several large financial institutions pulled back from their
climate ambitions since the Trump administration took
office. On a slightly brighter note, sovereigns and
supranational institutions witnessed a less severe decline in
sustainable debt transactions than initially feared.
Figure 11 Sustainable debt transactions by region YTD

Source: Bloomberg, SEB
Looking at the 12-month moving average reveals a similar
picture. Europe (incl. Nordics) has seen no increase in new
sustainable bond issuance since summer of 2022. Growth
has been subdued globally and in the Nordics.
Figure 14 Sustainable bond issuance moving average
Source: BloombergNEF, SEB
Corporates saw the biggest decline in sustainable
borrowing. Surprisingly, sustainable debt raised by financial
institutions saw year-over-year rise.
Figure 12 Sustainable debt by sector YTD 2025
Source: SEB, EPFR, and Bloomberg as of 2 
A drop in both the share and volume of sustainable bonds
has impacted the investment-grade market. In the first six
months of 2025, sustainable bonds made up less than 20
percent of EUR-denominated bonds in this sector, a low not
seen since 2020. With June's numbers yet to be finalized,
Source: BloombergNEF, SEB

nb
DSU

+ 1 % Y
A sia
O
-2 4 % Y O Y
Y
-3 1 % Y O Y
E u ro p e N o rd ics
(e x cl.
N o rd ics)
-4 4 % Y O
N o rth
A m e rica
Y
-5
A
-1
2 % Y T D
S o u th
m e rica
1 %
S S
Y
A
T D
+ 2 %
O ce
Y T D
a n ia
-3 4 %
M id
E a
Y T
d le
st
D
14%
12% 11,8 %
10%
8%
6%
4,8 %
4%
2,6 %
2%
0%
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 YTD

-10% YOY

n
b
D150
S
U
+15% YOY
-21% YOY

+7% YOY

ABS/MBS/Project Corporate Financial SSA
erahs
tekraM
Global Europe (excl Nordics) Nordics
120 6
100 5
80 4
60 3
40 2
20 1
0 0

Month
MA,
USD
bn
n
b
D S
U
,A
M h
tn o
M
2 1
Global (lhs) Europe (lhs) Nordics (rhs)

we expect that EUR-denominated investment-grade Drop in sustainable finance also visible in the
sustainable bond issuance for the first half of 2025 will be secondary market
roughly EUR 15bn less than the first half of 2024. The secondary market for equity and bonds has been in
decline even longer than the primary sustainable debt
Figure 15 Sustainable bonds among EUR denominated IG
market. With a few exceptions, inflows in Article 8 and 9
bond issuance
funds according to SFDR have been negative since the start
of 2024.
Figure 17 Sustainable fund flows according to SFDR
Source: SEB, EPFR, and Bloomberg as of 2 
On a brighter note, the new issuance premium (NIP)—the
extra yield a newly issued bond provides over similar,
already-trading bonds from the same issuer in the
secondary market—has been in steady decline since Source: Factset, Morningstar, SEB
inflation peaked in 2022. Despite this, sustainable bond
Contraction in sustainable debt spells trouble
issuers haven't seen any more benefit from the shrinking
for EU security
new issue concessions than regular bond issuers.
The sharp decline in sustainable debt is especially troubling
Figure 16 NIP of sustainable and non-sustainable EUR for Europe, which urgently needs more investment to tackle
denominated IG bond issuance its deteriorating geopolitical, economic, and climate-related
challenges. Sustainable finance clearly has a part to play in
building a more integrated security framework. Promisingly,
recent moves by the EU and its member states are now set
to better align sustainable finance regulation with current
political priorities including defence, competitiveness and
self-reliance (see chapters Regulatory update and Interaction
of sustainability and security for more information).
Source: SEB, EPFR, and Bloomberg as of 2 

%
%
%
%
%
%
%
M
a
kr
e
s
t
h a
er
deussi
nb
RUE
N
%
o n
S
-s u sta
u sta in
in a b
a b le
le b o n d s S u sta in a b le b o n d s

s p 15 b
;m
u im 10
e
rp
e u 5
s
s
i w
e N 0
-5
-10
Sustainable bonds NIP 180d MA
Non-sustainable bonds NIP 180d MA
nb
RUE

-1
-2

2 0 2 3
A rticle 8 A
2 0 2 4
rticle 9
2 0 2 5

Regulatory update
Sustainable finance regulations face new political realities
Europe faces major challenges—from rising geopolitical tensions, cyber-
attacks, declining competitiveness to the climate crisis. In response, the
European Commission is aligning key policies to strengthen security.
Defence investments and the EU Sustainable number of initiatives to boost financing of the defence
Finance Framework sector. EIB, which historically has been avoiding defence,
In 2023, an EU Commission notice on the EU Taxonomy will reduce the scope of its defence exclusions.
clarified whether the recent sustainable finance regulations
The Commission highlights the announced Savings and
imposed any hurdles to defence investments1. Generally,
Investments Union (SIU) as a tool to support mobilization of
the position of the Commission was that the frameworks
capital to MidCaps and SMEs in the context of ReArm
apply horizontally across all industries equally and do not
Europe. However, the SIU will be horizontal and support
single out any specific sector. There was however a
financing of productive investments across industries. The
reference to a Principal Adverse Impact (PAI) indicator on
Commission also communicates that it will provide more
controversial weapons in the Sustainable Finance
clarification on the relationship between defence and the
Disclosure Regulation (SFDR), which is only a disclosure
investment goals of the sustainable finance framework in
requirement. Although not mentioned in that specific
the review of the SFDR that is taking place in autumn 2025.
clarification, the Benchmark Regulation (BMR) in fact
requires exclusion of companies involved in controversial Action on cybersecurity ramping up
weapons (which have also been banned by EU Member In February, the EU Commission published its Action Plan on
States). the Cybersecurity of Hospitals and Healthcare Providers.4
This action plan sets out a series of EU-level actions to
In the 2024 “A new European Defence Industrial Strategy”2,
better protect the healthcare sector from cyber threat. Key
the Commission provided further elaboration on the EU
elements include addressing the rising number of
Sustainable Finance Framework in relation to defence. The
ransomware attacks targeting healthcare, establishing a
Commission stated that “the EU sustainable finance
European Cybersecurity Support Centre for hospitals and
framework is fully consistent with the Union’s efforts to
healthcare providers within the EU Agency for
facilitate the European defence industry’s sufficient access
Cybersecurity (ENISA).
to finance and investment. It does not impose any
limitations on the financing of the defence sector.” The Commission went a step further in by
presenting its ProtectEU Strategy.5 This strategy positions
The strategy also clarified that since no social taxonomy
safeguarding critical infrastructure from physical, cyber,
exists and no defence activities are included in the EU
and hybrid threats, positioning cybersecurity at the heart of
Taxonomy, access to finance by defence companies could
European resilience. The Commission is also expected to
not be affected by the EU Taxonomy.
present a revision of the EU Cybersecurity Act in Q4 2025.
Mobilizing capital to strengthen European
Competitiveness and decarbonisation as
defence capabilities
security imperatives
Moving to 2025 and in the new geopolitical landscape vis-s-
The Clean Industrial Deal (CID) was published in late
vis the US, the Commission initiatives around defence have
, and lays out a plan aiming to accelerate
accelerated. The ReArm Europe Plan or formally “White
decarbonisation, reindustrialisation, and innovation
Paper for European Defence –Readiness 2030”3 sets a
1 Commission Notice C/2023/267 4 European action plan on the cybersecurity of hospitals and healthcare
2 European Defence Industrial Strategy 2024 providers - European Commission
3 Introducing the White Paper for European Defence and the ReArm 5 Commission presents ProtectEU Internal Security Strategy - European
Europe Plan- Readiness 2030 - European Commission Commission
Karl-Oskar Olming Anna Douglas Gregor Vulturius, PhD
karl-oskar.olming@seb.se anna.douglas@seb.se gregor.vulturius@seb.se

simultaneously across Europe, reinforcing resilience. A EUR 480bn compared to the previous decade. The CID aims
central goal of the CID is to make the EU the world leader on to mobilise over EUR 100bn to improve the business case
circular economy by 2030, reducing dependencies and for EU-made clean manufacturing, including EUR 1bn in
increasing resilience. We have covered the CID in our most guarantees under the current MFF. EU-level funding will be
recent report.6 strengthened, notably through the Innovation Fund and the
proposed Industrial Decarbonisation Bank, aiming for EUR
Increasing EU resilience against climate-related
100bn in funding. Private investment is a priority,
extreme events
leveraging tools like an amended InvestEU regulation to
In March, the European Commission presented its
mobilise around EUR 50bn additional financing. Simplified
Preparedness Union Strategy which aims to enhance the
state aid rules and tax incentives are also part of the
EU's civilian and military preparedness and readiness for
financial toolkit outlined.
future crises.7 The strategy takes a whole-of-society
approach, involving citizens and the private sector. An The European Water Resilience Strategy highlights an
accompanying action plan sets out 30 key actions with estimated annual investment gap of around EUR 23bn
timelines up to 2028, addressing foresight and anticipation, required to implement existing water legislation effectively.
resilience of vital societal functions, population It stresses the need for significant additional public and
preparedness, public-private cooperation, civil-military private investments across all stages of water
cooperation, and crisis response coordination. management. Financing will be supported by encouraging
member states and regions to reorient cohesion policy funds
The European Water Resilience Strategy (EWRS) published
for water resilience, potentially with up to 100% EU
in addresses the increasing pressures on water
financing. Cooperation with the European Investment Bank
resources due to climate change impacts like droughts and
(EIB) is central, with the EIB Water Programme planning
floods, overexploitation, and pollution.8 It highlights that
over EUR 15bn in financing during 2025-2027 as is
water resilience is a matter of security and crisis
leveraging private investment.
preparedness for the EU. The EWRS aims for a water
resilient EU by 2050, with objectives to restore and protect In conclusion, all recently announced policies underscore
the water cycle, build a water-smart economy, and secure the need for significant investment and highlight efforts to
clean and affordable water for all. Water resilience is mobilise public and private finance, including through EU
outlined as important to support the clean industrial and instruments like InvestEU, the EIB and joint borrowing.
digital transformation, as key sectors like battery
production, semiconductors, and data centres rely on large
volumes of water.
Significant financing is needed to achieve
integrated security in the EU
Considerable resources are needed to achieve the EU’s aim
of a more integrated security that includes defence
capabilities, greater competitiveness in clean technologies,
self-reliance on materials and energy, and resilience against
natural hazards.
Rearm Europe aims to mobilize EUR 800bn for defence-
related investments. Of this amount, EUR 150bn will be
raised through joint borrowing, while the remaining EUR
650bn is expected to come from national budgets, made
possible by activating the escape clause in the Stability and
Growth Pact. This allows member states to temporarily
exceed deficit limits due to increased defence spending.
Achieving the clean transition requires significant financial
effort, with annual investments in energy, industrial
innovation, and transport needing to increase by around
6 TheGreenBond_20250305.pdf 8 Water Resilience Strategy - European Commission
7 Preparedness Union Strategy - European Commission

Intersection between sustainability and security
Exploring broader dimensions and potential synergies
Security today goes beyond military defence, requiring an integrated
approach to interconnected risks like climate change, resource scarcity,
and infrastructure vulnerabilities. This perspective is sparking new
dialogue on the links between security and sustainable finance.
Sustainable finance facing a brave new world spending on defence could crowd out investments in other
Sustainable finance aims to direct capital toward activities areas including those related to sustainable development.
that foster long-term sustainable development. Historically,
Figure 18 shows by how many percent a given public
investments in security, and in particular defence, have
budget category changes when defence spending increases
been excluded from this framework. However, considering
by 1 percent historically. This analysis is based on a
rising global instability, there is now a conversation about
comparison of public budgets from 1995 to 2023 of each
whether certain security investments could be aligned with
EU member country, accounting for cross-country
sustainable finance goals and practices.
differences and the varying economic, political, and
In this article, we discuss the intersection between institutional characteristics of EU member state.
sustainable finance and investments in security. Here we
Figure 18 Public spending change from 1 percent
follow a broader definition of security, outlined below,
increase in defence spending
which envisions a broader concept of long-term state of
well-being at individual, societal, national, and global levels
Pollution abatement
in the face of interconnected socio-economic and
R&D Health
environmental threats. Our intent is to contribute to ongoing Protection of biodiversity and …
discussion about the role of sustainable finance in holistic Religious and other …
and long-term security. Cultural services
Health
Increased defence spending comes with trade-
Recreation, culture and religion
offs and synergies for sustainable development Environmental protection
Following Russia’s full invasion of Ukraine in 2022, security Old age
has re-emerged as a critical concern for EU member states. Social protection
Public debt transactions
Whilst the political will to increase defence budgets
Water supply
remained limited at first, this dynamic shifted dramatically
Civil defence
after the installation of Donald Trump’s administration,
Military defence
which has repeatedly questioned the security umbrella Foreign military aid
provided by NATO and the United States. R&D Defence
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5
To address these challenges, the EU has launched ReArm
Europe, outlining a plan to mobilize €800 billion for security- Source: Eurostat, SEB
related purposes. Higher security spending will increase Our analysis indicates that an increasing defence budget
economic activity, by stimulating manufacturing and could risk displacing environmental and health spending. A
increasing employment, with exporting countries like one percent increase in defence spending is linked to a more
Sweden and Germany, standing to benefit from “Made in than three percent decline in public funding on pollution
EU” regulation regarding defence material purchases. reduction. The data also suggests that there are some
synergies between defence spending and other areas that
On the other hand, defence spending has a low fiscal
directly or indirectly, support national security objectives.
multiplier, meaning that increasing spending on defence
For example, a greater defence spending can be associated
would not significantly contribute to GDP growth over time
with greater budget for civil defence and water supply.
whilst potentially increasing debt servicing costs for many
governments. Another concern is that larger public
Samantha Arpas Gregor Vulturius, PhD Malte Meuller
samantha.arpas@seb.se gregor.vulturius@seb.se malte.meuller@seb.se

Sustainability critical for integrated security investing is a more proactive and intentional approach that
For much of the 20th century, security has mainly been aims to create long-term financial returns while actively
understood in military terms, focused on using armed force contributing to positive sustainable outcomes.12
to defend territories and national borders9– which could
This distinction may allow for responsible defence
affect other social and environmental objectives. But in
investments without diluting the meaning of sustainable
today’s complex world, we have been reminded that this
finance. In a position paper by the CEO of Mirova, an asset
narrow view is no longer adequate.
manager specializing in sustainable investing, the firm
In the 21st century, lasting security is not just about defence; advocates for leveraging insights from sustainable finance
it is about creating conditions for people and societies to to structure responsible defence financing. This approach
thrive in the face of interconnected threats like climate ensures that funds are directed towards defence-related
change, resource scarcity, social polarization, global purposes while meeting ethical and responsibility criteria.
pandemics or hybrid attacks on critical infrastructure.10 Only Mirova also refrains from labelling the financing as
by looking at security in this integrated way can we respond ‘sustainable,’ opting instead for the term ‘responsible’ to
effectively to the main threats of today. more accurately reflect the nature of the investment.13
Sustainability plays an important role in this integrated Dual-use technologies
understanding of security. As outlined below, sustainable A significant area where defence-related activities are
technologies, optimized resource utilization, and strategic increasingly being framed within a sustainability context is
risk mitigation—whether through climate resilience or through the development and promotion of dual-use
digital safeguards—can collectively foster more secure and technologies, which have both military and civilian
resilient societal systems over time. applications. The EU defines dual use as “goods, software
and technology that can be used for both civilian and
Figure 19 Evolution of security
military applications.”14
Figure 20 Dual-use technologies
Source: Friedrich Ebert Foundation, SEB
Responsible defence finance
A growing trend in defence and ESG discussions is the
Source: SEB
distinction between "responsible" and "sustainable"
Examples of dual-use technologies relevant to
investment. Responsible investment is a broader approach
sustainability, non-exhaustively, include advancements in
that involves “considering environmental, social and
artificial intelligence, cybersecurity, the development of
governance (ESG) issues in investment decisions and
advanced and lightweight materials for energy efficiency,
ownership, complementing traditional financial analysis and
and autonomous systems that can be used for both defence
portfolio management11. In comparison, sustainable
9 Mearsheimer, JJ (2001). The tragedy of great power politics. 12 Categorisation of products under the SFDR: Proposal of the Platform
10 LSE-IDEAS-Human-Security-Background.pdf on Sustainable Finance
11 An introduction to responsible investment | PRI 13 Position-Paper-Defence_EN.pdf
14 Exporting dual-use items - European Commission

T
P
C
P

im e p e rio d
re -C o ld W a r
o ld W a r
o st-C o ld W a r
1 s t C e n tu ry
D o m in a n t
S e c u rity
P a ra d ig m
S ta te -C e n tric
R e a lis m
B a la n c e o f
P o w e r
C o m p re h e n s iv
S e c u rity
In te g ra te d
S e c u rity
e
K e y F o c u s
S ta te s u rv iv a l,
in te g rity
D e te rre n c e ,
m ilita ry
s tre n g h th ,
id e o lo g ic a l
c o n flic t
H u m a n w e ll-
b e in g ,
e n v iro n m e n ta l
s ta b ility , s o c ie ta l
re s ilie n c e
In te rc o n n e c te d n
e s s o f a ll
d im e n s io n s,
re s ilie n c e ,
s u s ta in a b ility
M a in T h re a ts
In te rs ta te c o n flic t
N u c le a r w a r, p ro x y
c o n flic ts , s u p e rp o w e r
riv a lry
T e rro ris m ,
e n v iro n m e n ta l
d e g ra d a tio n , e c o n o m ic
in s ta b ility
H y b rid th re a ts ,
c y b e ra tta c k s , c lim a te
c h a n g e , re so u rc e
s c a rc ity , s o c ia l
p o la riz a tio n
In n o v a tiv
B iotechnology
Sensing,
connectivity and
cybersecurity
e
D u a l u s e te c h n o lo g y :
p ro d u c ts a n d s e rv ic e s in th e fo rm o f g o o d s , s o ftw
te c h n o lo g y , th a t h a v e a m ilita ry a n d c iv ilia n u s e
A dvanced
Q uantum m aterials & Space
m anufacturing
Energy A dvanced Sem iconductors
generation and com puting and &
storage softw are m icroelectronics
a re , a n d
H um an m achine
interfaces
A utonom ous
system s

and environmental monitoring, These technologies are often which was the main supplier of petroleum oils and natural
more appealing to venture capital investors, including those gas to the EU until 2022, has proven expensive. In 2024,
with ESG mandates, as they offer potential for both financial the EU still spent on average 5 billion euros more a month on
returns in the defence market and positive social or fossil fuel imports than before Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
environmental impact through their civilian applications.15
Figure 22 EU fossil fuel import dependency
Civil preparedness against climate extremes

An emerging area where sustainable investments and
security intersect is investments in disaster prevention and

response. While primarily focused on increasing spending
for defence, infrastructure, and climate protection, the 80
recent cross-political agreement to partially lift the German

debt break does explicitly include civil defence and
protection.

Figure 21 Growing number of military interventions in

climate change related disasters

EU BG DK EE GR FR IT LV LU MT AT PT SI FI

-20
-40
Source: Eurostat, SEB
Lack of domestic fossil fuel resources and increasing import
costs mean that renewables are no longer valued solely for
being clean— but also because they offer substantial
advantages in terms of energy security and superior
economics. Solar and wind power projects have a mean cost
overrun of 1% to 8%, compared to nuclear power, oil and
gas projects that on average exceed their initial budget by
120% and 34%, respectively17.Furthermore, the average
Source: Bloomberg, SEB
net present cost of new-build new solar projects is around
Recently, Spain has allocated 17% of its military spending
half the cost of new gas plant in many EU countries like
towards natural disaster relief, where the country plans to
Germany. And once installed, renewables generate energy
use the budget for expanding rescue fleets, bridge-
without any foreign inputs and minimal operational costs.
launching vehicles, and airtankers to extinguish fires. This
The strategic advantages of the energy transition were also
comes after a year of significant flooding events in Spain,
highlighted by the Draghi report, which views clean
which required significant relief.16
domestic energy as a strategic tool to bolster energy
Energy security and climate change
resilience and economic competitiveness. This combination,
Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022, and its use of
reducing reliance on potentially hostile energy providers
energy as a political tool, has made it clear that energy
while building a sustainable economy, is making a strong
security is not just about economics; it is a core part of
case for significant investments in renewables, energy
national security. This is particularly important for the EU,
efficiency, diverse energy sources, and modernizing power
which imports almost two thirds of the fuels it consumes. By
grids. As a result, energy security and sustainability are no
sharply cutting natural gas deliveries to Europe, Russia
longer just environmental or economic issues, they have
showed how reliance on a single energy supplier can be become key priorities in European defence planning18.
used for political pressure and how it can put the prosperity
of the entire region at risk. Finding an alternative to Russia,
15 Why VCs Are Investing in Dual-Use Military/Civilian Technology 17 Flyvbjerg and Gardner (2023): How Big Things Get Done.
16 Spain Is Using Defence Budgets to Combat Climate Change Effects | 18 Enhancing National Security and Climate Resilience Through Energy
BloombergNEF Sovereignty – FP Analytics

ygrene
elbaliava
ssorg
ni
stropmi
ten
fo
% # of times military aid has been used
2003 2023

Cybersecurity and digital sovereignty A less well-understood area where cybersecurity and
Increasing digitalization of critical infrastructure including sustainable finance interconnect is digital sovereignty.
energy, health services and food and agriculture systems Digital sovereignty refers to a nation's ability to control its
creates numerous benefits but also potential entry points digital infrastructure, data, and technological capabilities.
for cyberattacks19. cybersecurity is crucial for ensuring Having control over digital infrastructure and technologies
societal resilience and maintaining investor confidence. can enhance a nation's ability to respond to and recover
from cyberattacks or other disruptions.
Figure 23 Most challenging issue to manage as a firm,
cyber attack Ensuring that the digital systems controlling energy and
food infrastructure are under local control reduces
dependence on foreign technology providers and the
associated risks. This includes hardware, software, and data
storage which – like the modern energy system – are
increasingly decentralized.
Conclusion
In conclusion, defining security solely through the lens of
military defence is no longer adequate to confront the
multifaceted challenges of today’s world. A more
comprehensive approach is required—one that goes
beyond traditional defence to encompass the
interconnected risks posed by non-military threats such as
climate change, resource scarcity, and disruptions to critical
infrastructure.
The concept of integrated security challenges the outdated
Source: Bank of England, SEB notion that investments in security and sustainability are
mutually exclusive. In fact, sustainable finance already
The necessity to invest in cybersecurity becomes apparent
targets many of the interconnected risks that an integrated
when considering that the transition to renewables involves
security approach seeks to address. By adopting a more
fundamentally changing how energy is generated,
holistic perspective—one that prioritizes long-term well-
distributed, and consumed. This shift towards a more
being at individual, national, and global levels—there is
electrified, distributed, and digitally interconnected energy
substantial potential to unlock meaningful synergies
system introduces a host of new vulnerabilities that require
between security and sustainable finance.
proactive and comprehensive investments.
Specifically, the intersection of sustainable finance and
Attacking renewable infrastructure could be a form of
integrated security presents a range of investment areas—
asymmetric warfare, low-cost to the attacker but
including, but not limited to, renewable energy, resource
potentially high impact in terms of economic damage and
efficiency, disaster preparedness, and cybersecurity.
political instability for the target nation. A major cyber
Scaling up investments in these areas can drive long-term
incident causing prolonged outages or physical damage to
sustainable development while enhancing resilience to both
renewable assets could also devastate investor
confidence20. current and emerging security threats.
19 How cyberattacks on grocery stores could threaten food security | 20 Why Should Governments Prioritize Renewable Energy
IBM Cybersecurity Programs?

Europe’s energy pivot: A strategic blueprint for a prosperous and
secure energy future
Philip Christiani
Partner
phc@cip.com
Natacha Blackman
Director
nabl@cip.com
Morten Kopenhagen
Vice President
mokk@cip.com
Figure 24 Final energy demand by source
Source: Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners
In an era marked by geopolitical tensions, market volatility, The Context: Navigating a Volatile Global
and urgent climate imperatives, Europe's energy landscape Energy Market
is at a critical crossroads. A recent white paper by The global energy sector is experiencing unprecedented
Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners (CIP) in partnership shifts. Political instability in key oil and gas-producing
with Oxford Economics and EA Energianalyse presents a regions, fluctuating commodity prices, and the ongoing
vision for transforming Europe's energy system, transition to decarbonized energy have created a
emphasizing the pivotal role of low-cost renewable energy landscape where traditional fossil fuel reliance is
sources. The underlying message is clear: Europe's future increasingly unsustainable and risky. Europe, heavily
economic competitiveness and energy security depend on dependent on energy imports, particularly fossil fuels, finds
ambitious investments in renewable energy infrastructure, itself vulnerable to global supply disruptions and price
combined with strategic system integration and grid shocks.
expansion. These renewable assets will form the backbone
The whitepaper underscores this vulnerability, revealing
of Europe's future energy mix, with the ultimate goal of
that Europe currently imports approximately 56% of its
delivering over 90% of energy from clean sources by
final energy demand at a cost of about EUR 450bn
2050.

annually. This dependency not only poses economic risks Figure 26 European electricity production capacity in
but also undermines energy sovereignty. To counter these GW
challenges, we advocate for a strategic overhaul of the
continent’s energy system, grounded in accelerating the
deployment of clean energy technologies.
Electrification Will Spark European
Competitiveness and Improve Energy Security
Electrification will not detrimentally change the way we
live. Instead of driving petrol cars and heating our homes
with natural gas, we will drive electric vehicles and heat
our homes and industry with electric heat pumps.
Electrification is key to obtaining an affordable, resilient
and clean energy system driven by the sometimes-
overlooked energy efficiency gain. As we gradually replace
fossil energy with electricity, through the electrification of
transportation, household- and industrial heating, we
increase our electricity consumption while reducing the
Source: Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners
overall energy consumption by ~40 % from 12,550 TWh to
In this scenario, the energy landscape by 2050 involves a
7,750 by 2050 (see Figure 24).
total clean generation capacity of around 2,760 GW
To support this change in energy demand, a significant (increased by x3 from today’s installed capacity), primarily
build-out of new electricity generation is required with our driven by building cheap solar PV and wind technologies.
study investigating the economically optimized road to low This build-out is ambitious but not unrealistic, with onshore
energy prices in Europe. wind only requiring a doubling of Europe’s current capacity
Figure 25 Examples of electrification
and solar PV footprint equating to three to four times the
area currently dedicated to golf courses in Europe.
The Critical Need for Investment
To deliver the build-out and supporting infrastructure, we
forecast an investment requirement of about EUR 5tn
(roughly EUR 200bn annually) by 2050. This figure aligns
with estimates from other prominent analyses, such as the
Draghi report, and underscores the scale of transformation
needed. These investments encompass renewable
generation, grid infrastructure, and hydrogen systems—
integral components for a resilient, low-carbon future.
Of particular importance is the focus on electricity
generation. CIP estimates that approximately EUR 2tn will
be necessary specifically for new generation capacity,
including offshore wind (EUR 445bn), onshore wind (EUR
715bn), and solar PV (Approximately EUR 435bn).
Source: Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners
Building a Cost-Effective, Secure and Lower Energy Costs and Greater Resilience
A transition to this renewable-dominant energy system
Sustainable Energy Mix
offers substantial economic benefits. In our Low-Price
Of three scenarios modelled in our analysis (Net Zero, Low
scenario, we project that demand weighted energy prices
Price and Slow Transition), our base case, the Low-Price
will fall by ~30% from present day to 2050 - resulting in
scenario, aligns with current geopolitical agendas focusing
significant savings for households and industries. Lower
on reduced energy pricing and increasing energy security
energy prices translate directly into reduced production
to enable European industrial growth and competitiveness
costs, improved competitiveness, and increased disposable
while reducing GHG emissions.
income for consumers.

Moreover, reducing dependence on imported fossil fuels This growth is driven by several factors:
could have profound geopolitical and economic
• Job Creation: Construction, manufacturing, and
implications. Europe’s reliance on fossil fuel imports
maintenance of renewable assets and grid
currently costs about EUR 450bn annually. By 2050, this
infrastructure will generate millions of new jobs.
reliance could decrease to just EUR 75bn—roughly a
• Industrial Competitiveness: Lower energy costs
quarter—and reliance on domestic renewable energy
bolster the competitiveness of European
sources would substantially boost energy sovereignty and
industries in global markets.
resilience against international market shocks.
• Resilience and Security: A diversified, locally
Figure 27 Energy sourcing in Europe (% of total energy) sourced energy system reduces exposure to
international disruptions, ensuring steady supplies
during crises.
Investing in new cost-competitive energy, system
integration assets, and building the infrastructure to
support it is Europe’s most effective path to securing
affordable energy, strengthening resilience, and enabling
robust, long-term economic growth. At Copenhagen
Infrastructure Partners, we are committed to powering this
transition – building a stronger, more sustainable and
competitive Europe.
About CIP
Founded in 2012, Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners P/S
(CIP) today is the world’s largest dedicated fund manager
within greenfield energy renewable investments. The funds
managed by CIP focus on investments across energy
Source: Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners
transition technologies, including offshore and onshore
Catalysing Economic Growth and Societal wind, solar PV, biomass and energy-from-waste,
Benefits transmission and distribution, reserve capacity, storage,
Investing in the transformation of Europe's energy system advanced bioenergy, and Power-to-X.
is not solely about climate mitigation; it is a powerful driver
CIP manages 13 funds and has to date raised
of economic growth. We estimate that by 2050, the
approximately EUR 33bn for investments in energy and
continent could see a cumulative GDP increase of
associated infrastructure from approximately 200
approximately EUR 2.9tn attributable to energy
international institutional investors. CIP’s open-ended
infrastructure investments. This equates to a multiplier
evergreen fund, Global Energy Transition, is available for
effect of about 1.9, meaning each euro invested in energy
qualified, private investors through SEB in Scandinavia.
infrastructure could generate EUR 1.9 in economic output.
CIP has projects in more than 30 countries and more than
2,500 employees across platforms and projects globally.
The full white paper “Powering the future – a vision for
Europe’s Energy System in 2050 can be found here.

Treading the path to Lithuania’s energy independence and
security: the role of EPSO-G
Tomas Varneckas
Head of projects and infrastructure
tomas.varneckas@epsog.lt
Saulius Rimutis
Planning and oversight project manager
saulius.rimutis@epsog.lt
Over the past few years, much of Europe has experienced a In EPSO-G’s Strategy 2035, “Provider of Security and
transformation in its energy landscape — from Reliability” stands alongside “Driver of Tomorrow’s Energy
accelerating the shift towards renewables to reducing Infrastructure” and “Vital and Skilled Strategic Partner” as
dependence on fossil-fuel imports from unreliable one of three key strategic directions. Over the past decade,
neighbors to the East. Lithuania, however, has pursued EPSO-G has enhanced Lithuania’s energy security through
these changes longer than most - for several decades in projects such as increasing Lithuanian security of supply by
fact. building electricity connections with Poland and Sweden
and a gas interconnection pipeline with Poland. We have
For the past twenty years, Lithuania’s primary aim was to
also completed one of the first of its kind in Europe, a
diversify its energy imports and eliminate reliance on a
transmission grid connected battery energy storage park
single supply source, which was Russia. The objective was
with 200 MW/MWh capacity. All of these initiatives paved
realized incrementally and finished in 2022, when,
the way for the Baltics’ synchronization with the
following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, we became the first
Continental European Network (CEN), a twenty-year
EU member to end all imports of Russian electricity, natural
ambition realized in .
gas and oil — a landmark achievement in diversifying
away from Eastern sources. At the forefront of this effort
Cutting off the last ties with the East –
stands EPSO-G, Lithuania’s state-owned group of energy
synchronization of the Baltic states
companies, that has been one of the main drivers towards
Even though commercial electricity trade with Russia was
energy independence for more than a decade.
cut-off already in 2022, until 2025, Lithuania, Latvia, and
EPSO-G group: a driver of change in the energy Estonia still operated in the same synchronous area as
Russia and Belarus — the so-called “BRELL ring”. To put it
system
simply, being synchronized meant we are part of the same
At its core, EPSO-G oversees several critical segments of
power system as Russia and Belarus. This arrangement
the energy value chain. Its two largest subsidiaries operate
limited the Baltic states’ control over key grid parameters,
Lithuania’s electricity and gas transmission networks,
notably system frequency. Baltic states have historically
transporting vast quantities of energy domestically and
not considered Russia to be a reliable partner and knowing
facilitating exports, imports, and transit to neighboring
the risks we had being part of the same system, the three
markets. Beyond transmission, EPSO-G also owns a
states set out to join the CEN synchronous area. Over the
network-construction company, Europe’s first biomass
years, new power lines and other infrastructure were built
exchange platform, and one of the largest European
or reconstructed in the Baltic states, as well as developing
battery-energy storage facilities. Most recently, EPSO-G
interconnectivity with neighboring Poland. The total cost of
has expanded into defence industry investments,
the Baltic states’ synchronization projects comes to EUR
partnering with Germany’s Rheinmetall to build an artillery-
1.8bn.
munitions factory in Lithuania.

This preparation bore fruits in the early hours of February Figure 29 Renewable solar and wind power installed
8, 2025, when the electricity grids of the three Baltic states capacity in Lithuania
desynchronized from the Russian-Belarusian synchronous
area. For the next 27 hours, our subsidiary Litgrid along
with the other two Baltic electricity transmission system
operators conducted an isolated operation test, meaning
their power systems worked as if it were an island – not
part of any other energy system. On the afternoon of
February 9, the transmission system operators
successfully synchronized again – but not to the BRELL
ring, rather to the Continental European Network – and
have been successfully operating in it ever since. The
connections with Russia and Belarus have been cut and the
power lines connecting to these states are demolished.
Figure 28 Construction of Vilnius-Neris transmission
power line in Lithuania, 2024 March
Source: EPSO-G
We currently see that this goal may even be exceeded in
the coming years as growth of renewables has not yet
stopped. Indeed, last year Lithuania was 3rd in the world
by the amount of solar power capacity connected to the
transmission and distribution grids per capita. As the
country’s transmission system operator, EPSO-G plays a
key role in making these renewable ambitions real. We
need to ensure that all these growing numbers of
renewables can connect to the grid, as well as make sure
the network is safe by balancing the intermittent
generation of wind and solar power plants. Over the
coming years, our main investments will focus on
reinforcing and extending our high-voltage network,
upgrading substations, and enhancing cross-border links
Source: EPSO-G with other EU states. Between 2023 and 2030, EPSO-G
The next big challenge – connecting a growing planned investments constitute nearly EUR 4bn, of which
capacity of renewable energy more than half will be spent on the modernization and
EPSO-G is proud to have taken part in this huge project that maintenance of the electricity network.
increased the energy security of the whole Baltic region. Figure 30 EPSO-G investment plan for 2024-2035
We now turn our attention to the next big Lithuanian
challenge – once again becoming self-sufficient with
domestic electricity production no later than by 2030.
After more than a decade as a net importer, Lithuania takes
part in the energy transition with remarkable speed, hoping
to fill this import gap with 100% renewable energy. In
, Lithuania had only 699 MW of installed
solar and wind energy capacity. By , strategic
investments had driven that figure past 4 300 MW – more
than a 6-fold increase, covering the bulk of domestic
demand. To fully satisfy the local demand, renewables
capacity must grow even further. Lithuania aims that by
2030 there will be at least 10 GW of wind and solar
generation capacity domestically.
Source: EPSO-G

Over the years, EPSO-G has a track record of stepping
Protection against threats and new options in
beyond its role in the energy sector. Today, we are part of a
the defence industry
joint venture with Rheinmetall to build a state-of-the-art
However, we are aware of the evolving threat landscape. 155 mm artillery‐munitions factory in Lithuania, due to
Russia’s assaults on Ukrainian power systems, suspected
begin production in 2027. This facility will not only
sabotage acts in the Baltic Sea and to various
strengthen the much-needed regional ammunition supply
infrastructure objects across Europe, and an increase of
but also deepen our expertise in the defence industry.
cyber-attacks widely attributed to Russian actors have all
Looking ahead, EPSO-G will take part to further support
shown how vulnerable critical infrastructure can be. In
government initiatives in other important projects for the
response, we are increasing both our physical and digital
growth of the national defence industry.
defences: deepening our cooperation with government
Europe today faces renewed geopolitical uncertainty and
institutions, intensifying staff training on emergency
the imperative of strategic autonomy in both energy and
response, and hardening key installations with physical
defence. Lithuania shares the EU’s ambition to reduce
barriers, anti-drone systems and advanced threat detection
dependence on external actors in these sectors, and EPSO-
technologies. At the same time, we’re bolstering our cyber-
G is committed to delivering the projects that will make it
security incentives and response capabilities. By combining
possible. Whether by securing our grids, integrating
these measures, we are mitigating the risks to power
renewables, or contributing to defence-industry capacity,
system disruptions, both in peacetime and otherwise.
we remain dedicated to strengthening security, resilience
and sustainability at home and across the region.

Cybersecurity for a sustainable future
Fei Su
Researcher, China and Asia Security Programme
fei@sipri.org
Larisa Saveleva Dovgal
Independent Consultant, Former Research Assistant
savelyeva.lara@gmail.com
Global cybersecurity landscape cybersecurity governance at both regional and international
The increasing reliance on digital solutions and cross-sector levels.
interconnectivity has, on the one hand, benefited societal
Cyber threat trends
and economic development, but on the other hand,
Despite substantial investments and continued efforts to
introduced new vulnerabilities and security challenges. A
enhance cybersecurity and safeguard digital development
cyber incident can lead to significant disruption in the
by both the public and private sector, the scale, frequency,
physical world. This highlights the urgent need for robust
and complexity of cyber incidents continue to rise. This
cybersecurity measures to protect critical infrastructure,
escalating threat landscape is driven by a range of factors,
which is an enabler of sustainable development. Key
posing serious implications, particularly for critical
sectors such as energy, information and communications
infrastructure sectors, which are essential for enabling
technology (ICT), transport, and finance are widely
sustainable development of modern society.
recognized by major cyber powers, including China, the
European Union (EU), Russia and the United States, as Figure 31 Targeted sectors per number of incidents, July
particularly vital. 2023-
In particular, the banking and financial services sector faces
mounting challenges in enhancing its cybersecurity posture
while also fostering innovation and sustainable growth. The
global information technology (IT) market is valued at over
USD 5tn, with cybersecurity accounting for approximately
USD 250–270bn and expected to double by 2030.21 Of this,
the banking and financial services sector represents a
significant and growing share, valued at USD 74.3bn in
2022 and projected to reach USD 282bn by 2032. The
sector’s investment in cybersecurity is driven by increased
reliance on cloud infrastructure, AI-enabled fraud detection,
digital identity platforms, and other tools.22 While this
digitalization can act as a powerful enabler of innovation,
competitiveness, and financial inclusion, it also exposes
financial actors to a range of cybersecurity risks. These risks
threaten not only operational continuity but also public Source: European Union Agency for Cyber Security
trust, potentially stalling ongoing efforts to strengthen
21 Grand View Research, Cybersecurity Market Size Report, 2024 22 World Bank. (2022). The global digital ID toolbox: Technical
standards, functional building blocks, and procurement guidance. World
Bank Group.

Increasing targeting against the EU Decoy operations
Cyberattacks targeting EU countries have surged An emerging and increasingly concerning trend is the use of
significantly, primarily driven by the war in Ukraine and the cybercrime tactics—typically associated with financial
EU’s support for Ukraine. In the last six months of 2022 gains—for cyberwarfare purposes, such as facilitating
only, the number of cyberattacks targeting EU countries military operations or gathering intelligence. Specifically,
surged, rising from 9.8% to 46.5% of all global attacks.23 decoy ransomware and DDoS attacks are increasingly being
Beyond these, another contributing factor is the EU’s employed to deliver destructive wipers and remote access
increasing engagement in the Asia-Pacific region. As noted trojans for cyber operations aimed at data exfiltration and
in the 2022 Threat Landscape Report of the EU Agency for even destruction. One illustration of this is the ransomware
Cybersecurity (ENISA), there is a development of state- attack reportedly carried out by the hacker group KillNet in
sponsored threat actors targeting ‘Member States of the EU 2022, targeting an Italian chemical factory.25 Forensic
that had established closer ties with Taiwan’ with cyber report later revealed that the ransomware lacked any
operations.24 This trend is only likely to grow amid payment information and was designed to overwrite files
intensifying geopolitical tensions. with random data, making them unrecoverable —
suggesting the aim was not financial gain but rather data
Spillover effects
destruction.
The risk of being impacted by cyberattacks, even without
being directly targeted, is expected to persist. For example, Undefined role of non-state actors
coinciding with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February Recent regulatory initiatives in the EU increasingly delegate
2022, a cyberattack targeted the KA-SAT satellite responsibility and liability to the private sector, encouraging
broadband network, operated by Skylogic (a subsidiary of private entities to secure their own networks.26 As a result,
French satellite operator Eutelsat) on behalf of the US the private sector may adopt more proactive approaches to
company Viasat. While the attack likely aimed to take down enhance monitoring through cyber incident preparation,
Ukraine’s military satellite communications, it affected tens remediation and resilience. For instance, Deloitte
of thousands of fixed broadband customers across emphasized the necessity of the private sector engaging in
Europe—including emergency services in France and the more ‘proactive’ and ‘zero-trust’ approaches, even
remote monitoring and control of approximately 5,800 wind advocating industry to ‘go on offense’ in hunting for
turbines in Germany. potential threats in their own information technology
networks.27
Kinetic escalation
Meanwhile, there are ongoing discussions that suggest the
Cyberattacks—especially those targeting dual-use critical
potential for private sector engagement in ‘hack back’
infrastructure used both for civilian and military purposes,
tactics. The situation becomes even more problematic when
such as satellite services—have the potential to trigger
the private sector contributes to armed conflict through
kinetic escalation. The above mentioned Viasat case that
digital means. In the context of the war in Ukraine, for
disrupted civilian services across Europe is one example of
example, there is an urgent need to raise awareness not
how civilian assets used for military purposes may be
only among private companies, but also among their
targeted deliberately in the future. There is currently no
employees - such as those involved in the IT Army of
consensus among states on whether dual-use infrastructure
Ukraine if their cyber operations amount to direct
constitutes a legitimate target for initiating attack or
participation in hostilities - regarding the potential of being
retaliation during armed conflict.
23 gb/cyber-protection-center/posts/killnet-ransomware-a-wiper-from-
Thales Group, ‘From Ukraine to the whole of Europe: Cyber conflict
the-chaos-family/>.
reaches a turning point’,
Press release, 29 Mar. 2023. 26 Su F., Saveleva Dovgal, L. and Saalman L., ‘Advancing the Role of the
24 European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA), ‘ENISA Threat European Union in Promoting Global Cyber Stability’, SIPRI, Dec.
Landscape 2022 (. Su F., Saveleva Dovgal, L. and Saalman L., ‘Advancing the Role
2021 to )’, 3 Nov. 2022, of the European Union in Promoting Global Cyber Stability’, SIPRI,
<
Dec. 2023.
2022>.
27 Deloitte, ‘Is your critical infrastructure resilient against cyber
25 Acronis Security Team, ‘Killnet ransomware — a wiper from the threats?’, <
Chaos family’, 25 Nov. 2022, < your-critical-infrastructure-resilient-against-cyber-threats.html>.

targeted by counter-attacks and losing protection under alongside heightened accountability for senior
international humanitarian law.28 management, which are intended to drive top-down
implementation.
Mitigating cyber risks
Moreover, there is growing emphasis on addressing
To mitigate cyber risks, the EU has placed strong emphasis
cybersecurity risks in supply chains and supplier
on cyber risk management. This includes the identification,
relationships. At the EU level, this includes a coordinated
analysis, and evaluation of risks, as well as the treatment
risk assessment of critical supply chains, considering both
and monitoring of risks across network and information
technical factors including critical dependencies, and non-
systems, physical critical infrastructure, and ICT products.
technical ones, such as ‘undue influence by a third country
These include the updated Network and Information
on suppliers and service providers’ through hidden
Security Directive (NIS2 Directive), which expands
backdoors, technological lock-in, or provider dependency.29
cybersecurity obligations to cover 18 critical sectors; the
Similar concerns are echoed by other major cyber actors:
Cyber Resilience Act, aimed at enhancing the security of
the USA has used trade restrictions and executive orders to
digital products; the EU Cybersecurity Act, which introduces
mitigate similar concerns, while China and Russia have gone
a voluntary cybersecurity certification framework for ICT
further by mandating the replacement of foreign
products, services, and processes; and the Digital
technologies in key sectors with indigenous alternatives.
Operational Resilience Act (DORA), which focuses
specifically on financial systems and information security. Given the above trends, effective cyber risk mitigation will
depend on more than regulatory compliance—it will require
Through a consolidated set of initiatives, the EU has sought
close collaboration between the public sector and private
to promote a ‘single rulebook’ for cybersecurity across all
sector to keep up with the evolving cyber threats and
member states. These efforts aim to foster a safer and more
collaborate in cyber incident response and cyber defence.
secure digital environment by providing clear guidance and
establishing minimum standards to enhance overall cyber This article is based on a series of SIPRI reports on cyber
resilience across the entire EU, while emphasizing the need postures and cyber risk reduction conducted by Dr Lora
to ensure compliance. Accordingly, both NIS2 Directive and Saalman, Fei Su and Larisa Saveleva Dovgal.
DORA introduce fines and penalties for non-compliance,
You can find the publications in this link.
28 ICRC, ‘8 rules for “civilian hackers” during war, and 4 obligations for a high common level of cybersecurity across the Union, amending
states to restrain them’, 4 Oct. 2023, < Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 and Directive (EU) 2018/1972, and
policy/2023/10/04/8-rules-civilian-hackers-war-4-obligations- repealing Directive (EU) 2016/1148 (NIS 2 Directive)’, 27 Dec.
states-restrain-them/?utm_source=chatgpt.com>. 2022.
29 European Commission, ‘Directive (EU) 2022/2555 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 14 on measures for

The Sustainable Finance Outlook Editorial Team
Gregor Vulturius, PhD Mads Skak Bossen
Lead Scientist and Senior Advisor Quantitative Strategist
Climate & Sustainable Finance Equity Strategy Research
gregor.vulturius@seb.se mads.bossen@seb.dk
Thomas Thygesen Alison Mariko Rhatigan
Head of Strategy & Equities and a transition specialist Sustainable Finance Analyst
Sustainable Banking DCM/Bond Origination
thomas.thygesen@seb.dk alison.rhatigan@seb.no
Elizabeth Mathiesen Filip Carlsson
Senior Strategist Junior Quantitative Strategist
Equity Strategy Research Macro & FICC Research
elizabeth.mathiesen@seb.dk filip.carlsson@seb.se
Ben Powell Samantha Arpas
Head of Sustainability Fixed Income Sustainable Finance Specialist
DCM/Bond Origination Climate & Sustainable Finance
ben.powell@seb.no samantha.arpas@seb.se
Karl-Oskar Olming
Head of Sustainability Strategy and Policy
Sustainable Banking
karl-oskar.olming@seb.se
This report was published on 12 .
Cut-off date for calculations was 31 , unless otherwise stated.
Subscribe/Unsubscribe to The Sustainable Finance Outlook by sending an e
mail to: samantha.arpas@seb.se
Important. Your attention is drawn to the statement at the end of this
report which affects your rights. Securities transactions in the United
States conducted by SEB Securities, Inc., Member FINRA/SIPC. This
communication is intended for institutional investors only and not intended
for retail investors in any jurisdiction.

Contacts at SEB
Hans Beyer SEB Climate & Sustainable Finance
Chief Sustainability Officer of SEB greenbonds@seb.se
hans.beyer@seb.se
Åsa Knudsen Sterte Christopher Flensborg
Head Climate & Sustainable Finance Head SEB Water
asa.knudsensterte@seb.se christopher.flensborg@seb.se
SEB Norway: SEB Denmark:
Øystein Stephansen Kirstine Lund Christiansen
Head Climate & Sustainable Finance in Norway Head of Sustainable Banking in Denmark
oystein.stephansen@seb.no kristine.lund@seb.dk
SEB Finland: SEB USA:
Anssi Kiviniemi John Arne Wang
Head of Sustainability in Finland General Manager
anssi.kiviniemi@seb.fi john.wang@sebny.com
SEB Germany: SEB Baltics:
Alexandra Themistocli Anders Larsson
Head of Sustainable Banking in Germany Head of Sustainable Banking, Baltics
alexandra.themistocli@seb.de anders.a.larsson@seb.se
SEB UK: SEB Asia:
Yulia Kozlova Erik Halldén
ESG Manager Sustainability Advisor, Asia
yulia.kozlova@seb.co.uk erik.hallden@seb.se

This statement affects your rights prohibition on dealing ahead of the dissemination of investment
This report is a marketing communication produced by the Climate and research, SEB or its affiliates, officers, directors, employees or
Sustainable Finance team, a unit within Large Corporates & Financial shareholders of such members (a) may be represented on the board
Institutions, within Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken AB (publ) (“SEB”)
of directors or similar supervisory entity of the companies mentioned
to provide background information only. It does not constitute
herein (b) may, to the extent permitted by law, have a position in the
investment research or a solicitation offer. It is confidential to the
recipient and any dissemination, distribution, copying, or other use of securities of (or options, warrants or rights with respect to, or interest
this document is strictly prohibited. in the securities of the companies mentioned herein or may make a
market or act as principal in any transactions in such securities (c)
Good faith & limitations
may, acting as principal or as agent, deal in investments in or with
Opinions, projections and estimates contained in this report represent
companies mentioned herein, and (d) may from time to time provide
the author’s present opinion and are subject to change without notice.
investment banking, underwriting or other services to, or solicit
Although information contained in this report has been compiled in
investment banking, underwriting or other business from the
good faith from sources believed to be reliable, no representation or
companies mentioned herein.
warranty, expressed or implied, is made with respect to its
correctness, completeness or accuracy of the contents, and the Recipients
information is not to be relied upon as authoritative. To the extent In the UK, this report is directed at and is for distribution only to (i)
permitted by law, SEB accepts no liability whatsoever for any direct or persons who have professional experience in matters relating to
consequential loss arising from use of this document or its contents. investments falling within Article 19(5) of the Financial Services and
Markets Act 2000 (Financial Promotion) Order 2005 (The ‘‘Order’’) or
Disclosures
(ii) high net worth entities falling within Article 49(2)(a) to (d) of the
The analysis and valuations, projections and forecasts contained in this
Order (all such persons together being referred to as ‘‘relevant
report are based on a number of assumptions and estimates and are
persons’’. This report must not be acted on or relied upon by persons in
subject to contingencies and uncertainties; different assumptions
the UK who are not relevant persons. In the US, this report is
could result in materially different results. The inclusion of any such
distributed solely to persons who qualify as ‘‘major U.S. institutional
valuations, projections and forecasts in this report should not be
investors’’ as defined in Rule 15a-6 under the Securities Exchange Act.
regarded as a representation or warranty by or on behalf of SEB or
U.S. persons wishing to effect transactions in any security discussed
any person or entity within SEB that such valuations, projections and
herein should do so by contacting SEB Securities Inc. (SEBSI). The
forecasts or their underlying assumptions and estimates will be met or
distribution of this document may be restricted in certain jurisdictions
realized. Past performance is not a reliable indicator of future
by law, and persons into whose possession this document comes
performance. Foreign currency rates of exchange may adversely
should inform themselves about, and observe, any such restrictions.
affect the value, price or income of any security or related investment
mentioned in this report. Anyone considering taking actions based The SEB Group: members, memberships and regulators
upon the content of this document is urged to base investment Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken AB (publ) is incorporated in Sweden,
decisions upon such further investigations as they deem necessary. as a Limited Liability Company. It is regulated by Finansinspektionen,
This document does not constitute an offer or an invitation to make an and by the local financial regulators in each of the jurisdictions in which
offer, or solicitation of, any offer to subscribe for any securities or it has branches or subsidiaries, including in the UK, by the Prudential
other financial instruments. Regulation Authority and Financial Conduct Authority (details about
the extent of our regulation is available on request); Denmark by
Conflicts of Interest
Finanstilsynet; Finland by Finanssivalvonta; Norway by Finanstilsynet
This report is marketing communication. It does not constitute
and Germany by Bundesanstalt für Finanzdienstleistungsaufsicht. In
independent objective investment research, and therefore is not
the US, SEBSI is a U.S. broker-dealer, registered with the Financial
protected by the arrangements which SEB has put in place designed to
Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA). SEBSI is a direct subsidiary of
prevent conflicts of interest from affecting the independence of its
SEB.
investment research. Furthermore, it is also not subject to any