Policy Brief
HAI Policy & Society

What Makes a Good
Key Takeaways
The rapid advancement and
AI Benchmark? proliferation of AI systems, including
foundation models, has catalyzed
the widespread adoption of AI
benchmarks—yet only very limited
research to date has evaluated
Anka Reuel, Amelia Hardy, Chandler Smith, Max Lamparth, the quality of AI benchmarks in a
structured manner.
Malcolm Hardy, and Mykel J. Kochenderfer
We reviewed benchmarking
THE RAPID ADVANCEMENT AND PROLIFERATION OF AI SYSTEMS, and literature and interviewed
expert stakeholders to define
in particular foundation models (FMs), has made AI evaluation crucial for
what makes a high-quality
assessing model capabilities and risks. AI model evaluations currently
benchmark, and developed a
include both internal approaches—such as privately testing models on novel assessment framework
proprietary data—and external approaches—such as scoring models on for evaluating AI benchmarks
based on 46 criteria across five
public benchmarks. Researchers and practitioners alike have adopted AI
benchmark life-cycle phases.
benchmarks as a standard practice for facilitating comparisons between,
measuring the performance of, tracking progress in, and identifying
weaknesses in different models.
In scoring 24 AI benchmarks, we
found large quality differences
between them, including those
Yet, no studies to date have assessed the quality of AI benchmarks in general
widely relied on by developers and
in a structured manner, including both FM and non-FM benchmarks. Further,
policymakers. Most benchmarks
no comparative analyses have assessed the quality differences across the are highest quality at the design
stage and lowest quality at the
benchmark life cycle between widely used AI benchmarks. This leaves a
implementation stage.
significant gap for practitioners who may be relying on these benchmarks to
select models for downstream tasks and policymakers who are increasingly
integrating benchmarking in their AI policy apparatuses. Policymakers should encourage
developers, companies, civil
society groups, and government
Our paper, “BetterBench: Assessing AI Benchmarks, Uncovering Issues,
organizations to articulate
and Establishing Best Practices,” develops an assessment framework that benchmark quality when
conducting or relying on AI model
considers 46 best practices across a benchmark’s life cycle, drawing on expert
evaluations and consult best
interviews and domain literature. We evaluate 24 AI benchmarks—16 FM and
practices for minimum quality
8 non-FM benchmarks—against this framework, noting quality differences assurance.

Policy Brief
What Makes a Good
AI Benchmark?
across the two types of benchmarks. Looking forward,
we propose a minimum quality assurance checklist to
We define a high-quality AI
support test developers seeking to adopt best practices.
benchmark as one that is
We further make publicly available a living repository of
benchmark assessments at betterbench.stanford.edu.
interpretable, clear about its
intended purpose and scope,
This research aims to help make AI evaluations more
transparent and empower benchmark developers
and usable.
to improve benchmark quality. We hope to inspire
developers, companies, civil society groups, and
policymakers to actively consider benchmark quality
differences, articulate best practices, and collectively
move toward standardizing benchmark development
and reporting.
Introduction
To understand what makes a high-quality,
effective benchmark, we extracted core themes
Benchmarks are used in a variety of fields—from
from benchmarking literature in fields beyond
environmental quality to bioinformatics—to test and
AI and conducted unstructured interviews with
compare the performance of different systems or
representatives from five stakeholder groups, including
tools. In the context of AI, we adopt the definition
more than 20 policymakers, model developers,
of a benchmark as “a particular combination of a
benchmark developers, model users, and AI
dataset or sets […], and a metric, conceptualized as
researchers. The core themes include:
representing one or more specific tasks or sets of
abilities, picked up by a community of researchers as
• Designing benchmarks for downstream utility,
a shared framework for the comparison of methods.”
for example, by making benchmarks situation-
Despite AI benchmarks having become standard
and use-case-specific.
practice, there are still vast inconsistencies when
• Ensuring validity, for example, by outlining how
it comes to what these benchmarks measure and
to collect and interpret evidence.
how the measurements are used. Because past work
• Prioritizing score interpretability, for example, by
has already focused on the limitations of existing
stating evaluation goals and presenting results
benchmarks, as well as specific proposals for data
as inputs for decision-making, not absolutes.
curation and documentation for AI benchmarks, our
• Guaranteeing accessibility, for example,
work aims to offer practical insights and proposes
by providing data and scripts for others to
a rigorous framework that empowers developers to
reproduce results.
assess and enhance benchmark quality.

Policy Brief
What Makes a Good
AI Benchmark?
Based on this review, we define a high-quality AI Research Outcomes
benchmark as one that is interpretable, clear about
its intended purpose and scope, and usable. We also
Our research highlights that AI model benchmarks—
identified a five-stage benchmark life cycle and paired
including ones that are commonly used—vary
each benchmark stage with criteria we could use for
significantly in their quality. For example, the
our quality assessments:
widely used MMLU benchmark scored the lowest
on usability (5.0) among all 24 benchmarks we
1. Design: 14 criteria (e.g., Have domain experts
evaluated, while another commonly used benchmark,
been involved in the development?)
GPQA, scored much higher (10.9). Yet it is common
2. Implementation: 11 criteria (e.g., Is the
for developers to report results on both MMLU
evaluation script available?)
and GPQA without articulating their limitations or
3. Documentation: 19 criteria (e.g., Is the
quality differences—for example, when introducing
applicable license specified?)
major models such as GPT-4, Claude-3, and Gemini.
4. Maintenance: 3 criteria (e.g., Is a feedback
Similarly, the UK’s AI Safety Institute has developed
channel available for users?)
a framework for evaluating LLMs that includes both
5. Retirement: no criteria (only suggested best
MMLU and GPQA, while the EU AI Act specifically
practices in our paper, since we cannot
mentions the use of such benchmarks. This means
evaluate the retirement of active benchmarks)
policymakers and other actors often rely on
conflicting and even misleading evaluations.
We used this scoring system to assess 16 FM
benchmarks (including MMLU, HellaSwag, GSM8K,
Most benchmarks we evaluated also fail to distinguish
ARC Challenge, BOLD, WinoGrande, and TruthfulQA)
between signals and noise. Developers may test
and 8 non-FM benchmarks (including Procgen,
two models with one benchmark but struggle
WordCraft, FinRL-Meta, and MedMNIST v2) according
to understand if different results reflect genuine
to each criterion, assigning 15 (fully meeting criterion),
performance differences or merely noisy outputs.
10 (partially meeting), 5 (mentioning without fulfilling),
or 0 (neither referencing nor satisfying). At least two
Implementation remains another major weakness of
authors independently reviewed each benchmark and
AI benchmarks. Both FM and non-FM benchmarks,
reached consensus on all final scores.
on average, achieve their highest scores at the design
stage (10.6 and 11.1 on average, respectively) and their
lowest scores at the implementation stage (5.5 and
AI model benchmarks—including 7.4 on average, respectively), in line with previously
reported implementation challenges.
ones that are commonly used—
vary significantly in their quality. Of note, both FM and non-FM benchmarks are
particularly weak on the reproducibility and interpretation
of results: 17 of 24 benchmarks do not provide easy-

Policy Brief
What Makes a Good
AI Benchmark?

0 5 10 15
Design Score [a.u.]
to-run scripts to replicate the results from initial
papers, and only 4 of 24 benchmarks provide scripts
Reproducibility is important for
to replicate some of the results. This is a problem.
Reproducibility is important for validating benchmarks, validating benchmarks, but there
but there are clear gaps when it comes to empowering
are clear gaps when it comes
developers, companies, civil society groups, and
policymakers to evaluate and replicate results. to empowering developers,
companies, civil society groups,
We also found statistically significant correlations
between design and usability scores for FM and non- and policymakers to evaluate and
FM benchmarks, suggesting that poorly designed
replicate results.
benchmarks tend to be less usable.
Finally, the strong discrepancies we found in AI
benchmark quality highlight the urgent need for the
development of best practices that can help ensure

].u.a[
erocS
ytilibasU
Foundation Model DecodingTrust
Non-Foundation Model
ALE
PDEBench
BIG-bench
GPQA FinRL-Meta
AgentBench MLCommons AI Safety v0.5
TruthfulQA
WinoGrande
Procgen RL Unplugged
ARC Challenge
Machiavelli
GSM8k
SafeBench
BBQ Human Eval
HellaSwag Wordcraft
MMMU
BOLD
MMLU
MedMNIST v2
Figure 1: Design and usability scores for all 24 assessed benchmarks, whereby the usability score is the weighted average of the
implementation, documentation, and maintenance scores.

Policy Brief
What Makes a Good
AI Benchmark?
a minimum quality standard for AI benchmarks,
especially given their increasing popularity and use
Small changes can lead to
in governance contexts. We developed a checklist of
46 best practices and encourage developers to adopt significant improvements in
these during their process of creating benchmarks.
overall benchmark practices.
These include, for example, making sure that the
benchmark clearly describes how scores should
be interpreted, makes its evaluation code publicly
available, documents its limitations, and includes a
feedback channel for users.
Our research underscores that policymakers should
In addition to identifying best practices, we outlined
go one step further to articulate what makes AI
a variety of design considerations that benchmark
benchmarks high-quality and what their limitations
developers should take into account when developing
are—stating clearly in guidance documents that
high-quality benchmarks but that were either
benchmarks vary in quality and approach, and that
context-dependent or harder to operationalize as
developers should strive to articulate the quality
concrete criteria. These include considering whether
of their benchmark evaluations. These statements
to prioritize broad concept benchmarks or those
alone should clarify misconceptions about different
focused on specific AI contexts and domains; how
benchmarks’ applicability and encourage industry to
to assess multimodal models across their multiple
strengthen benchmarks’ interpretability and usability.
modalities; whether to prioritize dynamic versus
Articulating quality metrics across benchmark
static benchmarks in different situations; and how to
life cycle stages (e.g., when they are designed vs.
prevent cheating and to ensure evaluations accurately
implemented) can strengthen evaluations.
reflect model performance.
Our research also shows that small changes can lead
to significant improvements in overall benchmark
Policy Discussion
practices. Many criteria we laid out over the
benchmarking life cycle’s five phases are relatively
AI benchmarks have already become a widely
easy to implement, even for existing AI benchmarks.
accepted tool for developers to compare model
For example, adding code documentation and a point
performance and in some cases inform decisions
of contact to a benchmark are not time-consuming,
regarding downstream tasks. Policymakers, too, are
but they can significantly enhance a benchmark’s
increasingly working to understand AI benchmarks,
usability, transparency, and accountability. Developers
promoting their use across companies and relying
and civil society groups should make these kinds of
on their outcomes for policy decisions. Making AI
measures an explicit best practice, and policymakers
benchmarks more practicable, transparent, and
should integrate such recommendations into their AI
comparable is therefore crucial.
evaluation guidance.

Policy Brief
What Makes a Good
AI Benchmark?
Policymakers should additionally encourage research
on open challenges in AI benchmarking. These include
quick saturation (benchmarks becoming quickly
outdated because model capabilities advance so
quickly that models achieve near-perfect scores),
contamination (model developers training on
benchmark data, such as when scraping the web),
poor construct validity (not designing a test such that
it accurately measures the concept it is intended to
measure), and standardization of benchmark reporting.
Future research on these topics could build on our
concept of measuring the quality of benchmarks
and focus further on empowering developers and
evaluators to produce systematic, repeatable, and
interpretable results for different AI applications.
The greater adoption of AI benchmarks helps with
systematic model evaluation, transparency, and,
ideally, accountability. By adopting this framework
and checklist to generate higher-quality benchmarks,
we hope that developers, policymakers, and other
stakeholders can make better-informed model
selections and decisions for downstream tasks—while
potentially reducing risks and improving outcomes in
high-stakes applications.

Reference: The original article is accessible at Anka Reuel is a PhD student in computer
Anka Reuel, Amelia Hardy et al., “BetterBench: science at the Stanford Trustworthy AI
Assessing AI Benchmarks, Uncovering Issues, and Research Lab and the Stanford Intelligent
Establishing Best Practices,” arxiv.org, November Systems Lab at Stanford University.
20, 2024, The article
was accepted as a Spotlight Paper at NeurIPS 2024.
A living repository of benchmark assessments is Amelia Hardy is a researcher
available at with the Stanford NLP Group at
Stanford University.
Chandler Smith is a research
Stanford University’s Institute for Human-Centered
scholar at ML Alignment & Theory
Artificial Intelligence (HAI) applies rigorous analysis
Scholars.
and research to pressing policy questions on artificial
intelligence. A pillar of HAI is to inform policymakers,
industry leaders, and civil society by disseminating
Max Lamparth is a postdoctoral fellow
scholarship to a wide audience. HAI is a nonpartisan
at the Center for International Security
research institute, representing a range of voices.
and Cooperation at Stanford University
The views expressed in this policy brief reflect the
and the Stanford Center for AI Safety.
views of the authors. For further information, please
contact HAI-Policy@stanford.edu.
Malcolm Hardy is a researcher at the
Stanford Intelligent Systems Labs at
Stanford University.
Mykel J. Kochenderfer is an associate
professor of aeronautics and astronautics
at Stanford University and a faculty
affiliate of the Stanford Institute for
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence.
Stanford HAI: 353 Jane Stanford Way, Stanford CA 94305-5008
T 650.725.4537 F 650.123.4567 E HAI-Policy@stanford.edu hai.stanford.edu