Embracing the
Organized Mess
Defense AI in Israel
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Inbar Dolinko and Liran Antebi
DAIO Study 23|15

About the Defense AI Observatory
The Defense AI Observatory (DAIO) at the Helmut Schmidt University in Hamburg
monitors and analyzes the use of artificial intelligence by armed forces. DAIO comprises
three interrelated work streams:
Culture, concept development, and organizational transformation in the context of
military innovation
Current and future conflict pictures, conflict dynamics, and operational experience,
especially related to the use of emerging technologies
Defense industrial dynamics with a particular focus on the impact of emerging
technologies on the nature and character of techno-industrial ecosystems
DAIO is an integral element of GhostPlay, a capability and technology development
project for concept-driven and AI-enhanced defense decision-making in support of fast-
paced defense operations. GhostPlay is funded by the Center for Digital and Technology
Research of the German Bundeswehr (dtec.bw). dtec.bw is funded by the European Union
– NextGenerationEU.
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von

Embracing the
Organized Mess
Defense AI in Israel
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Inbar Dolinko and Liran Antebi
DAIO Study 23|15

About the Authors
Inbar Dolinko is a researcher and consultant specializing in the intricate intersections of
AI with defense, regulation, and ethics. Holding an M.A. in political science from Tel Aviv
University, she graduated Cum Laude. Her thesis delved into examining the attitudes of
AI practitioners regarding public regulation of AI, demonstrating her dedication to under-
standing the field’s complex dynamics. Over the past six years, Inbar has worked in various
capacities, including think tanks, private companies, and the Israeli Ministry of Defense. Her
expertise spans multiple technological domains, including AI, cyber, and space technol-
ogies. She has contributed to the establishment of new initiatives and provided policy
recommendations to decision-makers, led projects, and worked closely with top compa-
nies and academic institutions. Additionally, she has served as a teaching assistant at Tel
Aviv University. During her time at the Institute for National Security Studies (INSS), Inbar
served as the Program Coordinator of the AI and National Security Program. In this role,
she effectively oversaw the research steering committee, organized impactful events, and
contributed to published research.
Dr. Liran Antebi is the director of the Advanced Technologies and National Security Pro-
gram at the Institute of National Security Studies (INSS). She is an expert in AI policy and
has been leading groundbreaking research on the intersection of AI and policy for over a
decade. With extensive experience in advising organizations, including the Israeli Ministry
of Defense, Dr. Antebi contributes to the responsible development and implementation
of AI. In addition, she has taught at several leading universities in Israel, including Tel-Aviv
University and Ben-Gurion University. As a former member of iPRAW, she advocates for
global AI regulations balancing innovation and security. Her publications on AI and national
security explore topics like AI’s impact on current and future battlefield, AI and national se-
curity in Israel, and the challenges of deepfakes in national security. Dr. Antebi has a Ph.D.
in Political Science. Her practical insights span technical, operational, business, legislative,
and international aspects of AI.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz and Joseph Verbovszky for their valua-
ble comments and suggestions. The authors are solely responsible for any errors in fact,
analysis, or omission.
Imprint
Inbar Dolinko and Liran Antebi, Embracing the Organized Mess. Defense AI in Israel. DAIO
Study 23/15 (Hamburg: Defense AI Observatory, 2023).
Defense AI Observatory | Chair of Political Theory | Helmut Schmidt University
Holstenhofweg 85 | 22043 Hamburg | T +49 40 6541 2776
 | contact@defenseai.eu | @Defense_AIO
ISSN (online): 2749-5337 | ISSN (print): 2749-5345
4 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

Content
1 Summary ..................................................................................................................... 6
2 Thinking About Defense AI ....................................................................................... 8
2.1 Definition of AI ............................................................................................................9
2.2 The Role of AI in Israel ...............................................................................................10
2.3 Defense Opportunities and Concerns ........................................................................13
3 Developing Defense AI. ........................................................................................... 15
3.1 Ecosystem Cooperation .............................................................................................16
3.2 IDF Contribution .......................................................................................................17
3.3 Industry Contribution .................................................................................................18
4 Organizing Defense AI ............................................................................................. 19
5 Funding Defense AI ................................................................................................. 22
6 Fielding and Operating Defense AI ......................................................................... 25
6.1 Logistics ....................................................................................................................26
6.2 Intelligence ...............................................................................................................26
6.3 Command and Control ..............................................................................................28
6.4 AI in Fielded Air, Sea, and Land Systems ....................................................................29
6.5 Cyber ........................................................................................................................31
6.6 Conclusion ................................................................................................................31
7 Training for Defense AI ............................................................................................ 32
7.1 Training Human Capital .............................................................................................33
7.2 Training Models .........................................................................................................34
8 Conclusion. ................................................................................................................ 36
Literature ...................................................................................................................... 38
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 5

1 Summary
Israel has emerged as a prominent player in the field of artificial intelligence (AI),
particularly in the realm of defense and security. The role of this technology goes
beyond its traditional defensive functions and extends to its impact on the Israeli
economy and its reputation on the global stage. To utilize AI’s full potential, Israel
must face both common and distinct challenges.
Some unaddressed challenges have led to deterioration in Israeli leadership;
most notably are the challenge of competing in a fiercely aggressive global race
for dominance in the field of AI, without a proper national strategy or budget
and central management to support it. In addition, Israel’s relative smallness and
limited resources available for AI can be considered additional limiting factors.
Despite its shortcomings, the country is still among the most advanced in the field
of defense AI, relaying on the Israeli ecosystem’s distinctive advantage, born out
of structural and organizational aspects.
Mandatory and reserve services at the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) nurture and fa-
cilitate a unique exchange of personnel and knowledge. Moreover, IDF units, such
as Unit 8200 and LOTEM, the unit for Operational Technological Intensification,
indirectly support the AI ecosystem by supplying skilled personnel to academia
and industry. These processes create a trained and familiar talent pool and enable
collaborative AI development in Israel, involving the Israel Ministry of Defense
Directorate of Defense Research & Development (IMOD DDR&D), the defense
industry, academia, and civil companies.
As of , there is no single Israeli body responsible for overseeing the field
of defense AI. Nonetheless the Ministry of Defense (IMOD) and Israel Innovation
Authority are shaping it by launching several key initiatives aimed at improving
the necessary infrastructure and enabling further advancement in defense AI. For
example, the Israel Innovation Authority, IMOD DDR&D, and the Ministry of Inno-
vation, Science and Technology have together set up the National Natural Lan-
guage Processing Plan. This initiative specifically focuses on tackling the unique
challenges posed by Semitic languages like Hebrew and Arabic in the context of
developing Natural Language Processing (NLP) models. In addition, bottom-up
initiatives and organizational changes are being made to support defense and
security-related AI applications in Israel. For instance, in 2023, a new directorate
was established at IMOD DDR&D focusing on innovative technologies, including
AI. The IDF is also creating new units and roles that leverage AI’s immediate oper-
ational value in combat contexts and everyday needs.
6 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

Israel’s investment in AI for defense and security purposes is challenging to quan-
tify due to the lack of transparency regarding its defense budget. However, the
significance of investing in AI has been recognized, resulting in the allocation of
NIS550 million (around €140 million) to several critical projects.
Throughout the years Israel’s leading position in defense AI has emerged from the
ongoing security challenges it faces, requiring the Israeli security and defense es-
tablishment, defense industry of Israel, and academia to stay alert and continuous-
ly evolve, and as a result contributing to its rapid advancement. Israel’s implemen-
tation of AI extends beyond its traditional areas of expertise, such as unmanned
military systems, air defense, and cyber warfare. Its prowess in AI for intelligence is
evident in its diverse range of applications, which have contributed significantly to
its military successes in recent operations, for example, against Hamas in Gaza.
Despite notable progress and achievements, Israel’s approach to defense AI is the
result of an “organized mess,” triggered by Israel’s informal culture, the country’s
tendency to let market forces push technology forward, a demanding security
environment, and the need to be able to respond to new threats in a quick and
flexible manner. This approach has yielded benefits in the past and enabled Israel
to become a prominent player in various technology fields. However, as the inter-
national competition for defense AI (and AI in general) grows, Israel should adopt
a more robust approach to extend its leading role. In so doing, overcoming the
“organized mess” with the help of a more institutionalized set up and the defini-
tion of a comprehensive national plan, oversight and budget would be important
steps into the right direction.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 7

2 Thinking
About
Defense AI
8 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

2.1 Definition of AI
As in many other countries and organizations around the world, Israel has strug-
gled to formulate one encompassing definition for AI. Furthermore, the country
tends to let market forces push technology forward, which means formal defi-
nitions sometimes follow practice. Nevertheless, a few definitions have been
suggested by Israeli governmental agencies, due to the increasing role of AI in all
areas of life and defense specifically.
One definition can be found in the recommendations of the TELEM forum (Nation-
al Infrastructure for Research and Development) for a national AI strategy:
A machine or system that performs tasks that usually require human think-
ing, such as understanding natural language, learning behaviors or problem
solving. There is a wide range of such behaviors, but most involve computers
running algorithms, which are often based on data.1
Furthermore, the definition recognizes the acceleration of the field due to
“technological, algorithmic and computational advancements, and due to the
availability of big data.”2 Another definition can be found in a recent publication
by the Ministry of Innovation, Science and Technology – a draft detailing princi-
ples, regulations, and ethics for AI. The writers distinguish between two types of
common definitions for AI: technical ones, which focus on AI’s capabilities and
the methods to achieve those, and practical ones, which compare AI’s abilities to
those of humans. The ministry offers the following definition for the purpose of the
publication:
The field of AI is a general name for development in the field of information and
communication technologies and data science that enables decision-making,
making predictions, or performing actions by a computer at a high level of inde-
pendence, in a way that simulates or is able to replace human intelligence.3
Both definitions are broad, touching briefly on technical aspects and emphasizing
AI’s independence. AI is perceived as a versatile tool that can replace humans
in a variety of tasks. The underlining approach allows for flexibility and does
not require frequent updates depending on technological advancement. This is
important due to the nature of AI as a dynamic emerging technology that effects
all dimensions of warfare.
1 CommitteefortheAdvancementofAIandDataScience,p.16
2 CommitteefortheAdvancementofAIandDataScience.
3 “Principlesofpolicy,regulationandethicsinthefieldofartificialintelligence–Draftforpublicreference.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 9

2.2 The Role of AI in Israel
Technology is holding critical importance to Israeli defense and security, ever since
the days when Israel’s first prime minister, David Ben-Gurion, shaped the founda-
tions of the country’s “Security Concept” (National security strategy). As a small
state with few natural resources and many defense and security challenges, Israel
has always focused on cultivating its technological edge to maintain its economic,
international, and security status. With AI being a general-purpose technology that
impacts every aspect of life, including defense, as well as enabling many opportu-
nities, it appears to be an essential technology for Israel.4
The global “competition for superiority” that has been increasingly shaping all
technology areas including AI also influences Israel. This competition impacts the
global balance of power, countries’ standing, and their ability to operate in the
international arena. Israel is affected by this competition both in “hard” military
aspects such as military force buildup, battlefield capabilities, and counterterror-
ism capabilities counterterrorism; As well as in “soft” aspects such as the export
of civilian and military technologies that affect the economy, jobs in the economy,
and the ability to employ soft power in the international arena.
As part of the “competition for superiority,” AI has been recognized as a crucial
technology for Israel’s economy, not just in defense. Israel was an early leader in
this field compared to many other countries, as reflected in its industry, defense,
and academia. However, there was no proper national strategy or budgeting to
support this, as will be discussed further in chapter 3. Israel’s leadership in AI has
diminished in the past few years due to various reasons. One reason is the chal-
lenge of competing in a fiercely aggressive global race for dominance in the field,
without a proper national strategy or budget and central management to support
it. In addition, Israel’s relative smallness and limited resources available for AI can
be considered additional limiting factors.
Nonetheless, Israel is ranked fifth on the 2023 Global AI Index, which is reflected
in different benchmarks.5 The number of start-ups active in the field of AI, for ex-
ample, has risen in recent years. According to Start-Up Nation Central, as of , there are 2,039 Israeli companies focusing on AI as a core technology (out
of 6,995 active start-ups registered in the database).6 Additionally, many interna-
tional companies have established R&D centers in Israel. Furthermore, in academ-
ia, the number of academic publications on AI has been on the rise over the last
decade, based on OECD data.7 In 2018, a study identified 273 Israeli researchers
4 Antebi,ArtificialIntelligenceandNationalSecurityinIsrael.
5 “TheGlobalAIIndex.2023.”
6 “Startups:AIcompanies.”
7 “AIinIsrael.”
10 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

specializing in AI and its related fields such as natural language processing (NLP),
computer vision, and big data, across various academic institutions.8
The vibrant business and research environment has helped establish a well-func-
tioning ecosystem, in which the Israeli defense and security establishment works
closely with local institutes and companies. The Israeli academia contributes to the
development of AI research, while the leading industries and giant technological
companies establish research centers and work alongside thousands of innovative
startups. Moreover, the Israeli defense and security establishment has undergone
impressive development, especially for military intelligence and operational activ-
ities. Several factors explain close public-private cooperation in Israeli ecosystems
(Figure 1).9
Figure 1: Core Elements of Israel’s Ecosystem
Physicalproximitybetweenindustry, Afterservinginmilitaryunits,
thesecurityestablishment,thecon- qualifiedandexpertpersonnel
sumersthemselvesandthebattle- pursuehighereducationorgo
field.Personnelwithexperienceand directlyintoindustry.SomeJoin
know-howrelevanttothesecurity existingIndustriesandsome
establishmentareintegratedinin- Industry foundstart-ups.
dustryafterdemobilizationfrom
producestechnologies
thearmy,andpreserve
forthesecurity
currentknow-how
establishment
throughserviceinthe
reserves.
Security Higher
Establishment Education
providesprojectsand producespersonneland
know-howforindustry knowhowforindustry
Academicscientificprojectsincooperation
withorbudgetedbythesecurityestablishment.
Source:Antebi,ArtificialIntelligenceandNationalSecurityinIsrael,p.85.
8 Artificialintelligence,datascienceandintelligentrobotics:Firstreport.
9 Antebi,ArtificialIntelligenceandNationalSecurityinIsrael.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 11

Familiarity
Connections between academia, the civil–commercial industry, and the
defense and security establishment emerge quickly at the organizational,
social, and professional level. There is a great sense of familiarity, which fosters
innovation and creativity.
Proximity
The short physical distance between a significant number of regional technol-
ogy clusters and Israel’s government as well as defense and security centers
facilitate strong cooperation.
Culture
As Israel faces many defense and security challenges, many professionals both
in academia and industry, have a sense of “partnership of fate”, encouraging
their collaboration with defense and security agencies, especially the IMOD
and the IDF. Moreover, an open and entrepreneurial character of Israeli culture
(in comparison to countries where it is more hierarchical and bureaucratic) help
move ideas and gain achievements.
IDF Service Model
The IDF is composed of mandatory service personnel, professionals from the
standing army, and military reserves. As a result of this interaction, knowledge
is exchanged from different sources and at different stages of a professional
career – in the industry, academia, or defense and security establishment. By
working together, the three pillars can remain up to date on the advances in
the field and leverage each other’s strengths. Furthermore, military experience
of Israeli academics and industry professionals enhances their ability to con-
tribute to civilian roles through familiarity with defense and security needs and
system operations.
To sum up, Israel’s unique ecosystem has contributed to its impressive achieve-
ments in the field of AI and has helped position the country as one of the global
leaders in this rapidly growing field, despite the erosion of its leadership.
12 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

2.3 Defense Opportunities and Concerns
Israel acknowledges the immense potential of utilizing defense AI, just as it has
successfully done with cyber technologies and UAVs in the past. AI is viewed as
a versatile and empowering technology that can greatly augment Israel’s capa-
bilities. It has the ability to revolutionize various aspects such as logistics and
command and control systems, while also enhancing fields in which Israel has
already established significant expertise. Leadership in AI has a profound impact
on Israel’s economy, international standing, and defense capabilities.
Despite the benefits and opportunities, challenges remain. Technological chal-
lenges and scarce human capital are two challenges that are of particular rele-
vance for Israel:
Technical Challenges
AI presents numerous technical challenges. Historically, the military has led
technological development, and many of these innovations have later been
adopted for civilian use. However, nowadays, the private sector has taken the
lead in developing new technologies, with the military adapting them for their
purposes. Adapting AI algorithms to the military context can be challenging
due to differences in training data, environments, and standards. These differ-
ences can impact the algorithm’s performance and safety and make it difficult
to utilize commercially available AI in the defense sector.
One specific technical challenge stem from semitic language and has direct
consequence for using AI techniques like Natural Language Processing (NLP).
NLP focuses on enabling computers to comprehend human languages and
perform tasks such as speech recognition, natural-language understanding,
and natural-language generation. In the past year, NLP has gained significant
traction due to advancements like Chat-GPT and demonstrates impressive
progress in English and Indo-European languages. However, the progress in
Semitic languages, such as Hebrew and Arabic, is much slower. As these are
Israel’s two national languages and Semitic languages play an important role in
its intelligence efforts, there is a need for advancement in this field. Therefore,
the Israel Innovation Authority, IMOD DDR&D, and the Ministry of Innovation,
Science and Technology have together set up the National NLP Plan.10 The
plan proposes multiple approaches to tackle the challenges in Semitic lan-
guage NLP. This includes initiatives such as establishing language corpora,
facilitating access to Hebrew and Arabic datasets; developing generic NLP
10 “TheNationalProgramforNaturalLanguageProcessing.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 13

algorithms for Semitic languages; training a comprehensive language model
rooted in Semitic linguistics. The aim is to enhance accessibility and adapt-
ability of these capabilities using open-source infrastructure when possible,
catering to diverse applications.
Human Capital
Due to its small size and limited resources, Israel faces challenges in compet-
ing with global AI leaders like the US and China in terms of funding and talent
pool. The country’s smaller GDP means it cannot allocate the same level of
funding to national AI efforts. Recruiting and retaining skilled personnel ca-
pable of developing, adapting, and implementing AI systems for military and
national security purposes is challenging due to intense competition from the
private sector, which provides more favorable employment conditions. While
Israel’s economy benefits from a flourishing private sector, competition on
human capital challenges the ability of the Israel defense and security estab-
lishment to retain skilled professionals. Additionally, confidentiality and com-
partmentalization requirements limit the ability of personnel to move between
defense organizations. Therefore, it becomes difficult to establish a career
path that will encourage qualified individuals to stay in government service.
Additional concerns complement these two key challenges. These include, among
other aspects, the requirement for explainable AI, ethical considerations regard-
ing AI, bias and fake news in the defense environment, and the impact of AI on
the pace of war and operations.11 The IDF and IMOD have not publicly disclosed
their position on these matters. The only public document on AI ethics in Israel,
published by the Ministry of Innovation, Science, and Technology, suggests that
Israel aims to align its ethical standards with those established by other prominent
nations, rather than taking a leading role in this domain.
11 Formoreinformationaboutthesechallenges:Antebi,ArtificialIntelligenceandNationalSecurityinIsrael.
14 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

3 Developing
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 15

The research and development of AI in Israel is the result of a collaborative effort
among the IMOD DDR&D, the defense industries, and academia as well as startup
companies, as elaborated in the preceding chapter. Below we discuss several
defense AI R&D projects that exemplify how the relevant stakeholders contribute
at different levels of the national ecosystem.
Despite delivering successful defense AI applications, the lack of national funding
and appropriate institutional provisions to plan and execute defense AI projects is
a serious shortfall (see also Chapter 5). This shortfall constitutes one of the biggest
hurdles Israel will need to address in the future.
3.1 Ecosystem Cooperation
Two particular examples illustrate how ecosystem partners cooperate to provide
and advance defense AI capacities in Israel:
MAFAT Challenge
This challenge12 organized by DDR&D includes a series of prize competitions
in the field of data science that are open to the public, academia, and indus-
try. It aims at exploring “the potential of advanced data science methods to
improve and enhance IMOD current data products. The winning method may
eventually be applied to real data and the winners may be invited to further
collaborate with IMOD on future projects.”13 As of , one challenge is
ongoing, three challenges were completed, and another three are planned.14
Projects Stargate and Startrack
Out of ten planned projects these two focus on developing and using AI
tools for intelligence. They include participants from Israeli startups, the Israeli
defense industry, and academics. They are joined by soldiers from the Israeli
Military Intelligence Directorate, the Israeli Computer and IT Directorate, the
Israeli Ground Forces, the Israeli Air Force, and soldiers from Project “See
Far,” that enable young people on the autistic spectrum to join the IDF. This
collaboration allows the quick development of AI tools tailored specifically to
the IDF’s needs.15
12 Achallengeisacommonhigh-techindustrypractice,allowingcompaniestoquicklyfindsolutionstoproblems,identifyquali-
fiedhumancapital,andsometimessupportcertaincommunitiesandsocialgoals.
13 “MAFATchallenge.”
14 Ibid.
15 Cohen,“Nolongersatisfiedwith8200:thisishowthearmydevelopsartificialintelligenceincooperationwithhigh-techcompanies.”
16 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

3.2 IDF Contribution
Inside the IDF, specialized units work on defense AI research and development.
These include Unit 8200 and Unit 81 in the Israeli Military Intelligence Directorate
and LOTEM, the unit for Operational Technological Intensification in the Israeli
Computer and IT Directorate. Tools are developed to serve the needs of these
units, as well as other users within the IDF. The newly established Information and
Artificial Intelligence Division in the Computer and IT Directorate utilizes the large
amount of data in the IDF to conduct meaningful operational projects that benefit
other departments. One such project is a system that warns soldiers in the West-
ern Negev of threats from anti-tank missiles from the Gaza Strip. Another project
uses algorithms that recognize suspicious patterns in the field and prioritize videos
for human observers in Division 210 on the Israel-Syria border.16
Furthermore, some new units and roles are being established to accommodate
needs arising from the use of big data in defense. The Analytics Lab of Shahar
Unit – a cooperation between the Computer and IT Directorate and the Personnel
Directorate – is a notable example of this process. In the lab, the first of its kind,
data analysts and researchers use AI and machine learning models to recognize
patterns and predict needs of the IDF’s manpower. The analysts and researchers
are soldiers with a relevant background who undergo special training. Three
notable research projects include predicting the likelihood of soldiers extending
their service, identifying potential outstanding commanders early on, and creating
personalized training programs for combatants to prevent injuries.17
In addition, each year, hundreds of experienced soldiers enter the technological
ecosystem at existing companies or as founders of new AI startups. This process
reinforces the capabilities and capacities of the Israeli tech industry as a whole.18
A notable example is Unit 81 as one hundred graduates of this unit have estab-
lished about fifty companies from between 2003 and 2010. Some of them, such as
Innoviz and D-Fend, offer solutions used for defense.19 The startup Exodigo was
also founded by Unit 81 graduates, who won the Israel Security Award during their
service. This startup developed a system combining a drone, ground sensors and
AI to map in 3D what is happening underground.20
16 Bohbot,“Agame-breakingweapon:thetechnologythatwilldecidetheIDF’snextcampaign.”
17 Greenberg-Cohen,“Basedondata:theIDFlaboratorythatdetermineswhoissuitabletosignpermanently.”
18 Lt.Col.G.,MajorG.,andMajorL.,“OnNetworkIntelligenceandArtificialIntelligence:TheArtificialIntelligenceTransformation
oftheInformationProcessingandAnalysisCenterin8200.”
19 Shulman,“Anarmyofstartups.”
20 Alxalsi,“Ayearagotheywerereleasedfrom81andnowtheyareexposedwithoneofthelargestSeedRoundinIsrael.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 17

3.3 Industry Contribution
Several prominent projects were developed by the Israeli Defense companies.
One example is CARMEL, the future Ground Combat Vehicle (GCV) of the IDF,
which is being developed by ELTA systems.21 The CARMEL program will improve
the GCV’s AI, autonomous, and automatic capabilities for future combat scenarios,
urban maneuvering, and operating with only two soldiers.22 Another example is
SOI (“Standoff In”), a secret project in development by the IAI. This program uses
uncrewed air and ground vehicles that are controlled from a safe distance to pro-
tect Israeli soldiers during combat. Both of these projects will be further discussed
in chapter 6.
Most Israeli defense industry projects cater to Israel’s own needs, but occasionally
systems emerging from national projects are sold to other countries. For instance,
Elbit’s Seagull system, an unmanned surface vessel, has been sold to a state in
East Asia. It is believed that the system incorporates AI capabilities to facilitate its
operation. This suggests that defense industries generate revenue and contribute
to AI development through international collaborations. However, information
on budgeted collaborations between Israel and the USA in defense AI remains
scarce, indicating a high level of secrecy in the field.23
21 AsubsidiaryofIsraelAerospaceIndustries(IAI).
22 “Surprise:IAIwontheMinistryofDefensetenderforthedevelopmentofthe“lighttank”technology.”
23 Frantzman,“Israel’sElbitsendsSeagullUSVtoDigitalHorizoneventinBahrain.”
18 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

4 Organizing
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 19

Right now, Israel has no single body to guide the development and use of AI in
general and for specific defense and military purposes. However, several sig-
nificant organizations are involved in leading and funding the field, including
the IMOD and Israel Innovation Authority, which is affiliated with the Ministry of
Innovation, Science and Technology.
Over the past few years, several committees have been established to address the
organization of the AI field in Israel. These committees have recognized the impor-
tance of AI in defense and security matters. However, due to political instability,
the matter has not been fully prioritized or budgeted.
Consequently, a new program has been established which focuses on national
infrastructure related to AI. The program operates through the Ministry of Inno-
vation, Science and Technology, though it may encounter difficulties in asserting
authority over other government ministries. Despite this, IMOD DDR&D maintains
strong relationships with academic institutions and the defense industries in R&D.
At the same time diverse AI initiatives led by academia, industry, and the military
continue to emerge.
These new AI initiatives are primarily focused on enhancing the country’s defense
capabilities through the development of advanced technologies, including auton-
omous systems, cybersecurity, and intelligence gathering and processing. The IDF,
in collaboration with IMOD, leads most of these programs, which are designed
to serve all branches of the IDF, including the Israeli Ground Forces, Navy, and
Air Force. However, some specific projects are developed and managed inde-
pendently inside the forces themselves.
Over the past several years, the widespread use of AI has led to a growing recog-
nition among high-ranking officials in the IDF and the IMOD that data is a critical
asset, much like traditional weapons. This shift in mindset has significant impli-
cations for how the military operates in regards to data. Given the abundance of
advanced technology available, there are significant opportunities to fully leverage
its potential. Therefore, the IDF and IMOD must adopt proactive strategies to
harness these opportunities.24
Consequently, the IDF is undertaking significant efforts to promote connectivity
and knowledge sharing among its various units. These projects are designed to
facilitate collaboration, enhance communication, and streamline the exchange
of information, ultimately improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the IDF’s
operations. 25
24 “ArtificialIntelligenceisaWeaponforEverything:TheIDF’sPlansfortheNewBattlefield.”
25 Tzafarir,“ThecloudsignificantlyhelpstoincreasetheoperationaleffectivenessoftheIDF.”
20 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

Israel’s focus on digital transformation has led to the announcement of Project
Nimbus, aimed at establishing national cloud centers. The IDF is a key participant
in this project, and Amazon AWS and Google Cloud have won the bid to set
up and operate the project. It is a state tender at an investment of roughly NIS4
billion (around €1 billion).26 This initiative reflects a commitment to enhancing the
country’s technological capabilities and promoting innovation in the public sector,
including within the IDF.27
In addition, the IDF’s technology units also adopt a civilian tech sector mindset
and approach. This involves building a collaborative environment where research-
ers from diverse backgrounds cooperate towards achieving a common goal. This
fosters an environment that functions more like an incubator, putting a premium
on continuous improvement and constant development to deliver “products”
rather than “projects.” This approach propels R&D to a new level needed to
successfully compete in the ever-evolving technological landscape.28
Furthermore, the IMOD is also implementing significant organizational changes to
retain its leadership role on defense AI. In , MG (ret.) Eyal Zamir, the
new director general of the IMOD announced the establishment of a dedicated
administration within IMOD DDR&D to focus specifically on the development of
future technologies. The aim of this initiative is to position Israel as the “world’s
leader in futuristic technologies.” The new administration will oversee the devel-
opment of AI technologies in Israel and provide the necessary management to
ensure their progress and contribution to the country’s advancement.29
In line with this effort, MG (ret.) Zamir also recently addressed the 2023 Herzliya
Conference to unveil a new multi-year plan, a strategic initiative aimed at enhanc-
ing Israel’s military capabilities. Highlighting the significance of AI, Zamir empha-
sized its potential to revolutionize Israel’s intelligence and targeting systems. He
argued that by harnessing AI technologies, including group and swarm operations
and independent combat systems, Israel aims to gain a significant advantage on
the battlefield. In conjunction with this plan, the Defense Ministry will establish a
dedicated organization focused on AI and robotics, operating under the DDR&D.
Zamir also announced a substantial increase in the defense R&D budget, with in-
vestments directed towards secure production lines, ensuring independence from
potentially hostile powers. Despite his clear statements and broad references to
artificial intelligence and his intention to invest funds and administrative resources
in it, no specific numbers regarding the investment size were revealed.30
26 Ziv,“IsraelPicksGoogle,AmazonforMassiveOfficialCloud;“DataWillRemainHere.”
27 Berkowitz/Levy-Weinreeve,“Nowit’sofficial:thestatechoseAmazonandGoogleintheNimbuscloudtender.”
28 Bohbot,“Sneakpeek:TheIDF’sUnit3060isleadingarevolutioninintelligenceinformation.”
29 Azoulai,“TheMinistryofDefenseisplanning:theestablishmentofanadministrationforthedevelopmentoffuturetechnologies.”
30 Berman,“DefenseMinistrytoinvestheavilyinAIinbidtoimproveintelonIran.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 21

5 Funding
Defense AI
22 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

Neither the amount of funding dedicated to developing and using AI for defense
and security purposes in Israel, nor the national budget allocated to defense
organizations such as the Mossad and the Shin Bet are made public. The budget
articles of the IMOD and the IDF are classified and not available to all members
of the Knesset, the Israeli parliament.31 Therefore, unlike other nations, Israel does
not have one comprehensive document that would lay out the country’s defense
AI investments. However, some information can be gleaned from recent attempts
to formulate a national AI strategy. Those point to the fact that while the funding
of defense AI is still decentralized and lacks national oversight, its importance is
not lost on decision makers and progress is slowly made.
Over the last five years, two national committees have been formed to address the
need for a national AI strategy. Each of them identified areas in need of budgets
and resources. In 2018, a government committee chaired by Professor Isaac Ben
Israel and Professor Eviatar Matania was established. Its goal was to formulate
a plan that would position Israel as a leading force in AI worldwide. Over 300
experts and 15 different sub-committees made up the committee, which exam-
ined the impact of AI on all aspects of life in Israel. Among its recommendations,
the committee called for an annual investment of NIS1-2 billion (around €250-500
million) per year for five years.
Given that Professor Ben Israel is regarded as one of the key figures behind the
strategy that transformed Israel into a formidable cyber power, the findings of
the committee were awaited with anticipation. But the proposals put forth by
the committee were not officially endorsed, primarily due to the political uncer-
tainty that prevailed during its tenure. Israel held a total of five national elections
between and .32 For three years no state budget was
approved, and no resources could be allocated to finance the committee’s vast
recommendations.33
The visible deterioration of Israel’s leading position in the international AI competi-
tion, exemplified by its declining rankings in the global AI index,34 has been linked
to the inadequate allocation of government resources and the lack of a compre-
hensive national strategy. As a result, it seems imperative to deal with these issues
promptly, even outside of direct government involvement.
This understanding has led the TELEM forum to establish an independent commit-
tee in chaired by Dr. Orna Berry. TELEM included representatives
from the Israel Innovation Authority; Council for Higher Education; IMOD DDR&D;
31 Schwartz/Harosh,“TheprocessofapprovingthedefensebudgetanditssupervisioninIsraelandothercountries.”
32 “Abouttheelectionsforthe25thKnesset.”
33 Zarchia,“Forthefirsttimeafterthreeyears:thegovernmentapprovedthestatebudget;ThedecisionwillgototheKnesset.”
34 “GlobalAIIndex.2023.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 23

Ministry of Innovation, Science and Technology; and Ministry of Finance. The com-
mittee examined where Israeli industry stands in the field of AI, what barriers can
be removed, and how the government can contribute to the field’s development.
The recommendations were submitted a year later. TELEM’s narrow plan request-
ed a budget of a billion NIS for five years.35 TELEM’s recommendation was to start
by investing NIS550 million (around €140 million) into urgent projects, which in-
clude infrastructure building, personnel training, and prioritizing R&D projects with
significant national importance.36 When eventually a state budget was approved
during , resources were allocated to the program and the rest of
the budget should be approved in the current government budget.37
35 Ziv,“WhereisthefieldofartificialintelligenceprogressinginIsrael?Asecondgovernmentcommitteewillreview;”Committee
fortheAdvancementofAIandDataScience.
36 Orbach,“Thereisanationalprogramforartificialintelligence,butthereisnobudget.”
37 Halperin,“Willthenationalartificialintelligenceprogrambedelayedbecauseoftheelections?”
24 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

6 Fielding and
Operating
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 25

Israel is recognized as a leader in the development and implementation of AI in
military operations. The country has developed various AI-powered systems that
help with early warning of potential attacks, planning and executing military op-
erations, and situational assessment. Israel’s expertise in AI also extends to other
defense-related areas as we discuss below.
6.1 Logistics
At 2021, IDF started to establish three logistics centers in Israel, costing NIS5.5
billion (around €1.4 billion). The centers will be constructed and managed by an
external civil contractor over a period of 20 years, as the IDF aims to implement
a significant transformation in the logistics field. The primary objectives of this
initiative are to achieve substantial personnel savings and enhance equipment and
inventory optimization. The project leaders assert that the plan will incorporate
cutting-edge technologies, including some specifically designed for this project,
which are currently unavailable. The project comprises automated warehouses and
robots to carry out picking operations, all of which are powered by AI technolo-
gies.38 In addition, there are several further projects within the IDF that relate to
the management of munitions and other operational warehouses, which make use
of AI while connecting to systems that assist in the planning and management of
operations.39
6.2 Intelligence
Intelligence is one of the prominent fields in which AI is being used in Israel’s
defense. In recent years, Israel has been utilizing AI to collect and analyze vast
amounts of data, making the intelligence-gathering process more efficient and ef-
fective. This has allowed the country to stay ahead of potential threats and protect
its citizens.
General Intelligence
The Israeli defense and security establishment has been utilizing AI to enhance
its intelligence-gathering and processing capabilities. One notable example is
the facial recognition technology developed by AnyVision, which is being used
in two primary applications. The first is for checkpoints where Palestinians pass
38 Binstock,“Amazon,behindyou:TheIDFreplacestheWarehouseswithartificialintelligence.”
39 Heller,“Changestherulesofthegame:AfirstlookattheIDF’sartificialintelligence.”
26 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

on their way to work inside Israel. The system enables quick identification of visa
holders and shortens queues, facilitating movement and reducing waiting times.
The second application is a more secretive project based on a network of cameras
spread throughout the area. The system is used to track and identify potential
threats, even outside the checkpoints. The use of AnyVision’s technology in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been controversial, but it has also been praised for
its potential to enhance security.40
In addition to facial recognition technology, Israeli defense and security establish-
ments are also utilizing AI capabilities to analyze encrypted content, track suspi-
cious parties, and handle vast amounts of information in the cyber dimension. The
IDF, the Shin Bet, and the Mossad have each developed their own set of technolo-
gies for gathering, processing, and analyzing different types of data such as voice,
image, and text. These advanced technologies allow Israel defense and security
establishment to monitor potential threats more effectively and respond quickly
to any suspicious activity. With the ongoing development of AI technologies and
the increasing use of big data, Israel defense and security establishment is likely to
continue expanding its use of AI in intelligence operations:
The Shin Bet, for example, established in recent years an accelerator for
companies that develop technologies for its use, including, among others, a
company in the field of Speech Recognition by AI.41
The Mossad has created Libertad, a fund for technological innovation that in-
vests in breakthrough technologies. The fund has expressed a specific interest
in AI and NLP technologies.42 The Mossad has also been reported to use AI for
a range of purposes. The agency’s use of AI is largely classified, but it is known
that they work with Israeli startups and academic institutions to develop and
integrate advanced technologies into their operations.43
Intelligence for Operations
AI has improved real-time targeting, reduced collateral damage, and increased
efficiency. The IDF uses AI for intelligence analysis and distribution, for example,
with a trio of applications. “The Alchemist” provides real-time visual detection
of targets, while “The Gospel” generates target recommendations based on AI
capabilities. Another albeit classified project is “The Depth of Wisdom.”
These programs helped enhance the efficiency and accuracy of intelligence anal-
ysis and distribution, thereby contributing to the IDF’s overall operational effec-
40 Solon,“WhydidMicrosoftfundanIsraelifirmthatsurveilsWestBankPalestinians.”
41 Pick,“Israel’sShinBet,TelAvivUniversityAnnounceThirdAcceleratorCohort.”
42 Orbach,“Mossad’sVentureArmtoDiversifyPortfolio.”
43 Devori,“TheMossadissteppingintoamoretechnologicalfuture.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 27

tiveness.44 During Operation Guardian of the Walls, the Israeli Air Force attacked
50% of the 200 high-quality targets that the IDF produced in twelve days. A huge
improvement, because prior to this operation it took the IDF almost one year to
produce such number of high-quality targets.
Overall, improved accuracy also reduced the number of enemy multi-barreled
rocket launchers and halved the number Kornet launchers, both count as a prob-
lematic threat by the IDF.45 Unit 8200 developed the AI programs, while Unit 9900
used AI technologies for visual intelligence analysis, creating “dual maps” for
accurate fire plans and executing the “Lightning Strike” operational program. AI
also helped detect “ground violations” for hidden rockets, building tunnels, and
bunkers, producing additional targets for attack.
6.3 Command and Control
The IDF has developed several AI-powered systems, such as the one created by
the Israeli Computer and IT Directorate, which provides early warning of potential
attacks and helps plan the IDF’s attacks while coordinating all different military
units. Additionally, there are systems that can prioritize hundreds and thousands of
targets, examining armaments and officials who can act against them, which would
be time-consuming or even impossible for humans to do. These systems combine
information from various sources, including tanks, surveillance cameras, airplanes,
UAVs, and ships, to provide a comprehensive situational assessment to the Com-
manders. This allows them to quickly understand the situation and make decisions.
The system’s data and insights are also available to attack units and even to the
Chief of the General Staff, who is Israel’s Commander-in-Chief, if necessary.46
44 Antebi,“HasArtificialIntelligenceTriumphedoverTerrorism?”
45 Bohbot,“Thedestructionofthemetroandthethwartingoflaunches:thetechnologicalmeansthattheIDFfirstoperatedin
Gaza.Kornetisconsideredoneofthemostadvancedanti-tankmissilesintheworld.
46 Heller,“Changestherulesofthegame”:AfirstlookattheIDF’sartificialintelligence.”
28 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

6.4 AI in Fielded Air, Sea, and Land Systems
Unmanned Systems
Israel is a prominent provider of unmanned systems across all domains and plays
a leading role in developing, producing, operating, and exporting unmanned
systems that utilize AI. These systems are designed to perform with different levels
of autonomy. AI allows these systems to operate independently, reducing human
intervention. Israel has used the respective expertise in particular to develop
unmanned air power with UAVs for intelligence, reconnaissance, and surveil-
lance (ISR) as well as strike missions. Israel also holds the top position in loitering
weapons.
In the land domain, project SOI (“Standoff In”) provides a glimpse into the future,
although this development project, for which IMOD contracted IAI, is top secret.
This program aims to reduce risk to Israeli soldiers in direct combat with enemy
forces by using an armed vanguard of uncrewed air and ground vehicles con-
trolled by human soldiers from a safe distance. The SOI program builds on prior
Israeli programs, including Rafael’s SmartTrigger system, which automates the
process between identifying a target and assigning it to a weapon. The first SOI
capabilities are scheduled to become operational within three years, but experts
question the ability of unmanned systems to effectively operate in densely popu-
lated areas.47
At sea, the Seagull USV discussed in chapter 4, highlights the combination of
unmanned technology with AI for underwater and surface warfare, including an-
ti-submarine warfare, electronic warfare, and mine detection, and has participated
in the Digital Horizon exercise led by the U.S. Navy.48
AI-Enabled Military Manned System
The IDF is utilizing AI technology in its advanced military systems such as the
F-35 fighter jet and the future Ground Combat Vehicle (GCV) named CARMEL.
ADIR, the Israeli version of the American F-35 fighter jet, incorporates advanced
AI systems to enhance its combat capabilities. The IDF’s F-35 aircraft have been
operational since and have already played a significant role in
intercepting two Iranian drones and participating in various operational missions.49
47 “IsraelPlanstoFieldAdvancedAutonomousCombatUnitBy2025.”
48 Frantzman,“Israel’sElbitsendsSeagullUSVtoDigitalHorizoneventinBahrain.”
49 “ThreenewF-35fighterjetslandinIsrael;”Tor-Paz,“Forthefirsttimeintheworld:‘Israeli“Adir’(F-35i)planesintercepted
Iraniandrones.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 29

CARMEL is being developed by ELTA. The program aims to improve the AI,
autonomous, and automatic capabilities of the GCV to handle present and future
combat situations, maneuver in urban environments, and operate with only two
soldiers. Right now, similar systems operate with a crew of eleven fighters. Re-
ducing the number to two suggests a significant reduction of human risk on the
battlefield while maintaining combat power. 50
The GCV is equipped with a comprehensive set of situational awareness, force
protection sensors, target acquisition, weapon stations, electronic counter meas-
ures (ECM), as well as autonomous navigation and maneuvering features. Al-
though the GCV has not yet been deployed for operational use, it is considered a
vital element in bolstering the IDF’s military capabilities and is being evaluated for
its potential use in future conflicts. 51
Air Defense Systems
Israel’s air defense systems rely on AI features to enhance their capability to
advance protection against various air threats. In use since 2011, the Iron Dome
systems is a crucial element of Israel’s air defense umbrella, designed to intercept
short-range rockets, mortar shells, and UAVs.52 This portable active air defense
system has undergone upgrades, making it more effective in addressing multiple
rocket barrages in a short period. Additionally, the Drone Dome system disables
drones, while the new David’s Sling system supplements Iron Dome using an
interceptor missile that maneuvers quickly and directs itself using a radar and an
electro-optical sensor.53
During the 2021 operation “Guardian of the Walls” involving Israel and Hamas,
the Iron Dome system intercepted 1,660 rockets with a 90% success rate, despite
firing heavy barrages of 100-150 rockets in the same area. This remarkable accom-
plishment is due to the high level of autonomy combined with AI and full integra-
tion into Israel’s air defense systems.54
50 “Surprise:IAIwontheMinistryofDefensetenderforthedevelopmentofthe‘lighttank’technology.
51 “’Carmel’Revealed:WhatWilltheIDF’sVehicleoftheFutureLookLike?”
52 Uzi.“Israel’sAirDefenseinTestDuringOperationGuardianoftheWalls.”
53 Formerlyknownas ‘MagicWand’.
54 Levin/Bustan,“Thestickandthelaser:theIDF’simpressivetechnologicalcapabilitieswillnotsufficeinthenextround.”
30 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

6.5 Cyber
Israel is a global leader in the cybersecurity industry, with over 450 cybersecurity
companies (as of ), many of them using AI and machine learning
technologies to provide advanced threat detection and response capabilities.55
Israeli companies such as Cybereason and Cynet use AI to identify and respond to
cyber-attacks in real-time.56 Other leading companies like ActiveFence detects and
protects against disinformation, terror, and other malicious content and activities
online.57
The Israeli government has also recognized the importance of AI in cybersecurity.
In 2018 it has launched the National Cybersecurity Agency and has made signifi-
cant investments in developing the country’s capabilities in this area.58 The IDF is
also a leading developer and user of AI for cybersecurity purposes, with several
units dedicated to this task, including Unit 8200 and the Israeli Computer and IT
Directorate. The IDF has established a dedicated research center, the Artificial
Intelligence and Big Data Research Center, to develop cutting-edge AI algorithms
for threat detection and response. Israel’s commitment to staying at the forefront
of technological innovation in defense and security underscores its position as a
global leader in the field of AI-powered cybersecurity.59
6.6 Conclusion
Israel has been integrating AI not only in traditional fields – such as unmanned
military systems or cybersecurity – but also in other areas like logistics and in-
telligence. Although some major AI projects like the SOI and CARMEL are still
under development, operational applications of AI in unmanned ground and
naval systems are not yet widespread. This is similar to the situation in other
leading countries. At the same time, Israel’s leadership in the field of intelligence
is evident, with a wide range of capabilities and applications. These capabilities
have contributed to significant military achievements in recent operations against
Hamas in Gaza. It is likely that Israel possesses even more advanced capabilities
that it has not yet revealed.
55 TheIsraeliCybersecuritySector.
56 Forfurtherinformation,see:
57 Forfurtherinformation,see:
58 “AboutIsraelNationalCyberDirectorate.”
59 “DeputyCommanderofEliteIntelligenceUnit8200RevealsItsSecretWeapon.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 31

7 Training for
Defense AI
32 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

7.1 Training Human Capital
As part of the mandatory service customary in Israel, high school graduates are
recruited for a service that ranges from 24 to 32 months. An appropriate training
program is needed to allow the IDF to reap the benefits of their service before
their release, especially when it comes to technological roles that require complex
and expensive training.
Leading military technology units such as Unit 8200 of the Israeli Military Intelli-
gence Directorate and the LOTEM unit in the Israeli Computer and IT Directorate
recruit talented high school graduates in a series of exams prior to their enlist-
ment. Training generally lasts two to six months and is sometimes incorporated
into pre-military training programs. The young recruits learn computing and
software skills, as well as professional tools used in civilian and defense environ-
ments.60 Their demanding role requires them to constantly improve their skills and
to be able to cope with complex issues in a quick and efficient manner.
The IDF school for computer and cyber professions is the main unit to train sol-
diers for various technological roles: developers, DevOps, data analysts, cyber-
security, and many others. The courses combine theoretical studies with practical
exercises, encouraging trainees to study independently and find the method that
suits them.61 The school incorporates concepts from the civilian tech industry and
offers personalized learning areas as well as meetups and hackathons in collabora-
tion with academia and civilian industries.62
The growing role of AI in all areas of life led to the need for additional training to
all military personnel, especially commanding officers. A new program – a collab-
oration between the Shiloh Brigade (Combat Methods and Innovation) with the
Maltak (Tactical Command College) and Microsoft – aims to answer this need. This
program has two parts: The first is available to any soldier through their phone or
computer and offers soldiers lectures and material on AI, the means to integrate
it to governmental organizations and how to create a culture and strategy for AI.63
The second is under higher classification and is open to Majors and above in the
IDF internal system. This part discusses AI in operational contexts, considers its
potential and reflects upon use-cases relevant to the IDF.64
60 “GettoknowLOTEMunit.”
61 “TheSchoolofComputerandCyberProfessions.”
62 Tal,“Thebaseofthecomputerscienceschoolhasmovedtothesouth–getaspeciallookinside.”
63 InformationaboutthecoursealongwiththesyllabusareavailableinHebrewonthewebsite:
com/he/aiforidf(lastaccessed30May2023).
64 Revivo,“MeetthenewIDFartificialintelligencecourse.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 33

7.2 Training Models
Another important aspect is the training of AI models. AI is an ever-improving
technology, requiring an iterative process of learning and adjusting. In this context
data plays an important role, as it enables training the algorithms and preparing
them for autonomous action. A lack of data challenges the ability to improve and
use AI. This issue is relevant both to civilian companies in the private sector, and
even more so to the defense sector where data is scarce and costly. There are
several challenges regarding data in the defense sector:
Secrecy and Compartmentalization
As the defense agencies are traditionally not connected to external networks
and cloud technology, they are unable to use the data centers of other enti-
ties, sometimes even within the same organization. Due to national security
and safety concerns the Israel defense and security establishment avoids
sharing data, algorithms and even results due to fear of exposing data through
reverse engineering. Therefore, these agencies are compelled to operate
using only their own hardware capabilities and internal databases, with limited
ability to collaborate.
Lack of Data
In the intelligence and operational world insufficient data can impede the
training of vital algorithms needed to solve problems. For instance, one image
or a few images of strategic importance is not enough to train the algorithm
properly to act on a specific subject or phenomenon.
Training for the previous War
Israel’s defense and security establishment primarily gather information in
routine, but statistical changes in emergencies or combat need to be ad-
dressed. However, databases cannot fully represent future operational realities,
so training data is based on past routine or emergency scenarios. This poses a
challenge as it’s like preparing for a war that has already happened, while the
operational arena is constantly changing and unpredictable.
Technical Challenges
In addition, there are technical challenges that may not be unique to the
defense sector but present a meaningful hurdle for any data-oriented organ-
ization. The cost of storage and lack of space sometimes leads to the erasing
of data. Moreover, the information collected over the years may not always be
suitable for processing within the framework of AI, and it is necessary to “clean
it” and rearrange it to accommodate its use with an AI model.
34 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

Some work has been aimed at addressing these challenges. Private and local
cloud infrastructure has been developed in the IDF as part of Momentum (Tnufa)
Multiyear Plan since 2018.65 In addition, the previously mentioned Project Nimbus
aims to provide the Israeli government, the Israeli defense establishment, and
others an all-encompassing cloud solution.66 The move towards a shared oper-
ational cloud service could solve technical challenges relating to storage and
enable a secured connectivity within the defense apparatus that in turn could
facilitate more collaboration and sharing of data and algorithms.
65 Htoni,“EverythingyouwantedtoknowabouttheoperationalIDFcloudanddidn’tdaretoask.”
66 Ziv,“IsraelPicksGoogle,AmazonforMassiveOfficialCloud;‘DataWillRemainHere.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 35

8 Conclusion
36 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

AI has become a cornerstone of Israel’s national security strategy, serving as a
critical tool for enhancing defense capabilities, driving economic growth, and
bolstering the country’s international standing. While Israel has reaped numerous
benefits from leveraging AI in defense and security applications, it also faces
distinctive challenges that set it apart from other leading countries in this field.
Nonetheless, these challenges have not prevented Israel from emerging as one of
the world’s foremost AI innovators and leaders in the defense and security domain,
as described above.
Israel successfully uses defense AI in the absence of coherent management and
explicit budget allocation. Its relentless defense and security challenges enable its
position as a global AI powerhouse, which is further based, among other things,
on the uniqueness of the Israeli ecosystem in the field. The defense and security
establishment, defense industry, and academic institutions of Israel have contribut-
ed significantly to the rapid progress of AI in various domains, including logistics,
intelligence gathering, command and control, unmanned and manned systems,
air defense, and cyber warfare. Additionally, Israel’s remarkable capabilities and
applications in the field of intelligence have played a pivotal role in recent military
successes, further solidifying its position as a leader in AI.
Due to the significant impact of AI on Israel’s defense and security, it becomes
evident that Israel is obliged to take proactive measures to uphold its position as a
world leader in this field. To accomplish this, the Israeli government must allocate
a dedicated budget and management resources at the national level, rather than
relying on the advantages of the unique Israeli ecosystem to compensate for any
shortcomings in governance. Israel could reap additional benefits from allocating
extra resources from relevant organizations like the military and IMOD towards en-
hancing the “soft aspects” of defense AI. This could involve activities like formu-
lating and advocating suitable doctrines, increasing involvement in international
forums, and dedicating more comprehensive consideration and expert attention
to legal and ethical concerns that may emerge in relation to the operational use of
AI for defense and security objectives.
In a fiercely competitive environment and amidst a global arms race, it is essential
to recognize that relying on an organized mess approach may no longer guarantee
the same level of success. However, by embracing this challenge as an opportunity
for growth and innovation, Israel can adapt its strategies, foster collaboration, and
harness its technological prowess to stay competitive and to keep it position as a
leader in defense AI.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 37

Literature
“’Carmel’Revealed:WhatWilltheIDF’sVehicleof “Principlesofpolicy,regulationandethicsinthefield
theFutureLookLike?,”MinistryofDefense,4August ofartificialintelligence–Draftforpublicreference,”(Tel
2019, Aviv:MinistryofInnovation,ScienceandTechnology,
ticles/Pages/4.8.19.aspx(lastaccessed30May2023) 2022),
[Hebrewsource]. news20223110/he/Regulatory%20and%20ethics%20
policy%20document%20in%20the%20field%20of%20
“AboutIsraelNationalCyberDirectorate,”TheState artificial%20intelligence%20in%20IsraelAI.pdf(last
ofIsrael,undated, accessed30May2023)[Hebrewsource].
about/newabout(lastaccessed30May2023).
“Startups:AIcompanies,”Start-UpNationCentral,
“Abouttheelectionsforthe25thKnesset,”IsraelDe- undated,
mocracyInstitute,undated, ny/search?&sort=name-asc&coretechnology=agxzfmls-
parties-and-elections/elections/2022-1/(lastaccessed bGlzdHNpdGVyJAsSF0Jhc2VDbGFzc2lmaWNhdGlvb-
30may2023)[Hebrewsource]. k1vZGVsGICA4Lu1rJEIDA%7CRbmqmksX733j5CtxKDoX-
KAlJOiX11qFZmHFTAfFaP47PbnvrXrLWt1%7Cagxzfmls-
“AIinIsrael,”OECD.AIPolicyObservatory,undated, bGlzdHNpdGVyJAsSF0Jhc2VDbGFzc2lmaWNhdGlvb-
 k1vZGVsGICA4Lu-u8oLDA%7CagxzfmlsbGlzdHNpdGVy-
accessed30May2023). JAsSF0Jhc2VDbGFzc2lmaWNhdGlvbk1vZGVsGICA4I-
e8rfEKDA%7CagxzfmlsbGlzdHNpdGVyJAsSF0Jhc2VDb-
“ArtificialIntelligenceisaWeaponforEverything: GFzc2lmaWNhdGlvbk1vZGVsGICA4PuDl6YLDA%7Cagx-
TheIDF’sPlansfortheNewBattlefield,”MaarivOnline,8 zfmlsbGlzdHNpdGVyJAsSF0Jhc2VDbGFzc2lmaWN-
February2022, hdGlvbk1vZGVsGICA4Lu81fgLDA&status=Active&saved-
Article-896771(lastaccessed30May2023)[Hebrew searchid=zRyAigyGjMiJY9FXWVIKLHOS1zhQwl7KOe1K-
source]. gZCaTQaviLj62mGtmn(lastaccessed30May2023).
“DeputyCommanderofEliteIntelligenceUnit8200 “Surprise:IAIwontheMinistryofDefensetender
RevealsItsSecretWeapon,”Forbes,30June2022, forthedevelopmentofthe‘lighttank’technology,”The
ForbesIsrael. Marker,10October2021,
er-of-elite-intelligence-unit-8200-reveals-its-secret-weap- news/2021-10-10/ty-article/.premium/0000017f-f174-
on/(lastaccessed30May2023). d497-a1ff-f3f486d00000(lastaccessed30May2023)
[Hebrewsource].
“GettoknowLOTEMunit,IDFwebsite,undated,
 “TheGlobalAIIndex.2023,”TortoiseMedia,undated,
%D7%99%D7%97%D7%99%D7%93%D7%95%D7%AA/%D 
7%9C%D7%95%D7%98%D7%9D/(lastaccessed30May (lastaccessed30May2023).
2023)[Hebrewsource).
“TheNationalProgramforNaturalLanguage
“IsraelPlanstoFieldAdvancedAutonomousCombat Processing,”TheStateofIsrael,undated,
UnitBy2025,”AviationWeek,24June2022, nationalplanil.ai/(lastaccessed30May2023)[Hebrew
ationweek.com/defense-space/missile-defense-weap- source].
ons/israel-plans-field-advanced-autonomous-com-
bat-unit-2025(lastaccessed30May2023) “TheSchoolofComputerandCyberProfessions,”
IDFwebsite,19February2019,
“MAFATchallenge,”MinistryofDefense,undated, il/%D7%90%D7%AA%D7%A8%D7%99-%D7%99%D7
 %97%D7%99%D7%93%D7%95%D7%AA/%D7%90%D
May2023). 7%92%D7%A3-%D7%94%D7%AA%D7%A7%D7%A9%
D7%95%D7%91-%D7%95%D7%94%D7%94%D7%92-
%D7%A0%D7%94-%D7%91%D7%A1%D7%91-
38 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

%D7%A8/%D7%9B%D7%9C-%D7%94%D7%9B%D7%AA% globes.co.il/news/article.aspx?did=1001368315(last
D7%91%D7%95%D7%AA/%D7%9B%D7%AA%D7%91%D7 accessed30May2023)[Hebrewsource].
%95%D7%AA-%D7%9B%D7%9C%D7%9C%D7%99%D7%95-
%D7%AA/%D7%91%D7%A1%D7%9E-%D7%97/(last Berman,Lazar,“DefenseMinistrytoinvestheavily
accessed30May2023)[Hebrewsource]. inAIinbidtoimproveintelonIran,”TheTimesofIsrael,
22May2023,
“ThreenewF-35fighterjetslandinIsrael,“The ministry-to-invest-heavily-in-ai-in-bid-to-improve-intel-on-
JerusalemPost,13November2022, iran/(lastaccessed30May2023).
com/israel-news/article-722294(lastaccessed30May
2023). Binstock,Neta-Lee.“Amazon,behindyou:TheIDF
replacestheWarehouseswithartificialintelligence,”
Alxalsi,Osheri,“Ayearagotheywerereleasedfrom Calcalist,14April2021,
81andnowtheyareexposedwithoneofthelargest local/articles/0,7340,L-3904473,00.html(lastaccessed
SeedRoundinIsrael,”Geektime,17February2022. 30May2023).

map-the-underground-with-a-few-sensors-and-a-drone- Bohbot,Amir,“Agame-breakingweapon:thetechnol-
exodigo/(lastaccessed30May2023)[Hebrewsource]. ogythatwilldecidetheIDF’snextcampaign,”Walla,23
February,2023,
Antebi,Liran,“HasArtificialIntelligenceTriumphed (lastaccessed30May2023).
overTerrorism?LessonslearnedfromtheIDF’suse
ofadvancedtechnologyinOperationGuardianofthe Bohbot,Amir,“Thedestructionofthemetroandthe
Walls?,”Vortex.StudiesonAirandSpacePower,3(June thwartingoflaunches:thetechnologicalmeansthatthe
2022),pp.103-120, IDFfirstoperatedinGaza,”WALLA,27May2021,https://
books/00694028836ec273548b7(lastaccessed30May news.walla.co.il/item/3438217(lastaccessed30May
2023). 2023)[Hebrewsource].
Antebi,Liran,ArtificialIntelligenceandNationalSe- Bohbot,Hagar,“Sneakpeek:TheIDF’sUnit3060
curityinIsrael,MemorandumNo.207(TelAviv:Institute isleadingarevolutioninintelligenceinformation,”
forNationalSecurityStudies,2021), Ynet,30September2018,
org.il/publication/artificial-intelligence-and-national-se- cles/0,7340,L-5361168,00.html(lastaccessed30May
curity-in-israel/(lastaccessed30May2023). 2023)[Hebrewsource].
Artificialintelligence,datascienceandintelligent Cohen,Sagi,“Nolongersatisfiedwith8200:this
robotics:firstreport(Haifa:SamuelNeamanInstitute ishowthearmydevelopsartificialintelligencein
forNationalPolicyResearch,2018), cooperationwithhigh-techcompanies,”TheMarker,26
neaman.org.il/Files/Artificial-Intelligence-Data-Sci- September,2019
ence-and-Smart-Robotics_20181204151647.206.pdf tion/2019-09-26/ty-article/.premium/0000017f-dee8-
(lastaccessed30May2023)[Hebrewsource]. df9c-a17f-fef8df750000(lastaccessed30May2023)
[Hebrewsource].
AsifTor-Paz,forthefirsttimeintheworld:“Israeli
“Adir”(F-35i)planesinterceptedIraniandrones.”At:The Devori,Nir,“TheMossadissteppingintoamore
IsraelAirForcewebsite,March07,2022. technologicalfuture,”N12,11November2021,
iaf.org.il/9501-55171-he/IAF.aspx(lastaccessed30 
May2023). cle-b88cd6b5b5d1d71026.htm?sCh=31750a2610f26110
&pId=173113802(lastaccessed30May2023)[Hebrew
Azoulai,Yuval,“TheMinistryofDefenseisplan- source].
ning:theestablishmentofanadministrationforthe
developmentoffuturetechnologies,”Calcalist,23 Greenberg-Cohen,Einav,“Basedondata:theIDF
February2023, laboratorythatdetermineswhoissuitabletosign
article/hklxszhcs(lastaccessed30May2023)[Hebrew permanently,”MAKO,11March2021,
source]. co.il/pzm-magazine/Article-92c8c2573912871026.htm
(lastaccessed30May2023)[Hebrewsource].
Berkowitz,UriandEllaLevy-Weinreeve,“Nowit’s
official:thestatechoseAmazonandGoogleintheNim- Frantzman,SethJ.,“Israel’sElbitsendsSeagull
buscloudtender,”Globes,21April2021, USVtoDigitalHorizoneventinBahrain,”C4ISRNet,
14December2022,
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 39

manned/2022/12/13/israels-elbit-sends-seagull-usv-to- articles/0,7340,L-3883198,00.html(lastaccessed30
digital-horizon-event-in-bahrain/(lastaccessed30May May2023)[Hebrewsource].
2023).
Pick,Adi,“Israel’sShinBet,TelAvivUniversity
Halperin,Yaniv,“Willthenationalartificialintelli- AnnounceThirdAcceleratorCohort,”CTHEC,23
genceprogrambedelayedbecauseoftheelections?,” December2019,
PeopleandComputers,18July2022, articles/0,7340,L-3776316,00.html(lastaccessed30
pc.co.il/news/367237/.(astaccessed30May2023) May2023).
[Hebrewsource].
Revivo,Gal,“MeetthenewIDFartificialintelli-
Heller,Or,“Changestherulesofthegame”:Afirst gencecourse,”IDFwebsite,5August2021,https://
lookattheIDF’sartificialintelligence,”RESHET13,10 
March2023, %d7%95%d7%a2%d7%93%d7%9b%d7%95%d7%a
security/izp5v-903457413/(lastaccessed30May2023) 0%d7%99%d7%9d/2021/%d7%91%d7%99%d7%a0
[Hebrewsource]. %d7%94-%d7%9e%d7%9c%d7%90%d7%9b%d7%95%d-
7%aa%d7%99%d7%aa-%d7%91%d7%9b%d7%a3-
Htoni,Yossi,“Everythingyouwantedtoknowabout %d7%94%d7%99%d7%93-
theoperationalIDFcloudanddidn’tdaretoask,”People %d7%9c%d7%9b%d7%9c%d7%9c-
andComputers,17November2019, %d7%97%d7%99%d7%99%d7%9c%d7%99-%d7%95%d7
il/news/303311/(lastaccessed30May2023)[Hebrew %9e%d7%a4%d7%a7%d7%93%d7%99-%d-
source]. 7%a6%d7%94%d7%9c-%d7%a7%d7%95%d7%a8%d7%a1/
(lastaccessed30May2023)[Hebrewsource].
Levin,AlonandYuvalBustan,“Thestickandthe
laser:theIDF’simpressivetechnologicalcapabilities Rubin,Uzi,“Israel’sAirDefenseinTestDuringOp-
willnotsufficeinthenextround,”ForbesIsrael,21 erationGuardianoftheWalls,”TheJerusalemInstitute
June2021, forStrategyandSecurity,8July2021,
accessed30May2023)[Hebrewsource]. il/he/rubin-israels-air-defense-tested-during-opera-
tion-wall-guard/(lastaccessed30May2023)[Hebrew
Lt.Col.G.,MajorG.,andMajorL.,“OnNetworkIn- source].
telligenceandArtificialIntelligence:TheArtificialIntelli-
genceTransformationoftheInformationProcessingand Schwartz,EliezerandYoniBenHarosh,“Theprocess
AnalysisCenterin8200,”IDFDadoCenter,January2021, ofapprovingthedefensebudgetanditssupervision
 inIsraelandothercountries,”TheInformationCenter
%D7%99%D7%97%D7%99%D7%93%D7%95%D7%AA/ oftheKnessetofIsrael,19November2015.https://
%D7%9E%D7%A8%D7%9B%D7%96-%D7%93%D7%93 fs.knesset.gov.il/globaldocs/MMM/8e2669be-c5bd-
%D7%95/%D7%9E%D7%90%D7%9E%D7%A8%D7%99 e511-80d6-00155d0204d4/2_8e2669be-c5bd-e511-
%D7%9D-%D7%95%D7%AA%D7%95%D7%9B%D7%9F- 80d6-00155d0204d4_11_8685.pdf(lastaccessed30
%D7%9E%D7%A7%D7%95%D7%95%D7%9F/%D7 May2023)[Hebrewsource].
%A2%D7%9C-%D7%91%D7%99%D7%A0%D7%94-
%D7%A8%D7%A9%D7%AA%D7%99%D7%AA- Shulman,Sophie,“Anarmyofstartups,”Calcalist,7
%D7%95%D7%91%D7%99%D7%A0%D7%94-%D7%9E%D7 January2021.
%9C%D7%90%D7%9B%D7%95%D7%AA%D7%99%D7%AA- zine-07-01-21/m01.html(lastaccessed30May2023)
%D7%A1%D7%90-%D7%9C-%D7%92-%D7%A8%D7%A1- [Hebrewsource].
%D7%9F-%D7%91%D7%9E%D7%99%D7%9C-
%D7%92-%D7%95%D7%A8%D7%A1-%D7%9F- Solon,Olivia,“WhydidMicrosoftfundanIsrae-
%D7%91%D7%9E%D7%99%D7%9C-%D7%9C/(last lifirmthatsurveilsWestBankPalestinians,”NBC
accessed30May2023)[Hebrewsource]. News,28October2019,
news/all/why-did-microsoft-fund-israeli-firm-sur-
Orbach,Meir,“Mossad’sVentureArmtoDiversify veils-west-bank-palestinians-n1072116,(lastaccessed
Portfolio,”CTECH,21May2019, 30May2023).
tech.com/ctech/articles/0,7340,L-3762567,00.html(last
accessed30May2023) Tal,Yuval,“Thebaseofthecomputerscience
schoolhasmovedtothesouth–getaspeciallook
Orbach,Meir,“Thereisanationalprogramfor inside,”IDFwebsite,19October2022,
artificialintelligence,butthereisnobudget,”Calcalist, idf.il/%D7%90%D7%AA%D7%A8%D7%99-%D7%99%D
22December2020, 7%97%D7%99%D7%93%D7%95%D7%AA/%D7%90%
40 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

D7%92%D7%A3-%D7%94%D7%AA%D7%A7%D7%A9 Ziv,Amiti,“IsraelPicksGoogle,AmazonforMassive
%D7%95%D7%91-%D7%95%D7%94%D7%94%D7%92- OfficialCloud:‘DataWillRemainHere’,”HAARETZ,
%D7%A0%D7%94-%D7%91%D7%A1%D7%91- 21April2021,
%D7%A8/%D7%9B%D7%9C-%D7%94%D7%9B%D7%A news/2021-04-21/ty-article/israel-picks-google-ama-
A%D7%91%D7%95%D7%AA/2022/%D7%91%D7%A1% zon-for-official-state-cloud/0000017f-e896-dc91-a17f-
D7%9E-%D7%97-%D7%91%D7%A1%D7%99%D7%A1- fc9fd1ce0000(lastaccessed30May2023)[Hebrew
%D7%91%D7%93%D7%A8%D7%95%D7%9D- source].
%D7%94%D7%90%D7%A8%D7%A5-
%D7%94%D7%A6%D7%A6%D7%94-%D7%97%D7
%93%D7%A9%D7%A0%D7%95%D7%AA-
%D7%90%D7%92%D7%A3-%D7%94%D7%AA%D7%A7-
%D7%A9%D7%95%D7%91-%D7%95%D7
%94%D7%94%D7%92%D7%A0%D7%94-
%D7%91%D7%A1%D7%91%D7%A8/(lastaccessed30
May2023)[Hebrewsource].
TheIsraeliCybersecuritySector(TelAviv:Start-Up
NationCentral,undated),
org/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/2-pager-Cybersecuri-
ty_screen.pdf(lastaccessed30May2023).
CommitteefortheAdvancementofAIandData
Science(TelAviv:TheStateofIsrael/TELEMFo-
rum,December2020),
il/sites/default/files/%D7%93%D7%95%D7%97%20
%D7%A1%D7%95%D7%A4%D7%99%20
%D7%A1%D7%99%D7%9B%D7%95%D7%9D%20
%D7%95%D7%95%D7%A2%D7%93%D7%AA%20
%D7%AA%D7%9C%D7%9D%20%D7%-
9C%D7%AA%D7%9B%D7%A0%D7%99%D7%AA%20
%D7%9E%D7%95%D7%A4%20%D7%9C%D7
%90%D7%95%D7%9E%D7%99%D7%AA%20
%D7%91%D7%91%D7%99%D7%A0%D7%94%20
%D7%9E%D7%9C%D7%90%D7%-
9B%D7%95%D7%AA%D7%99%D7%AA%20-.pdf(last
accessed30May2023)[Hebrewsource].
Tzafarir,Yoel,“Thecloudsignificantlyhelpsto
increasetheoperationaleffectivenessoftheIDF,”The
Marker,31August2021,
labels/cloud/2021-08-31/ty-article-labels/0000017f-
f88a-ddde-abff-fcef76800000(lastaccessed30May
2023)[Hebrewsource].
Zarchia,Zvi,“Forthefirsttimeafterthreeyears:the
governmentapprovedthestatebudget;Thedecision
willgototheKnesset,”Calcalist,2August2021,https://

accessed30May2023)[Hebrewsource].
Ziv,Amitai,“Whereisthefieldofartificialintelligence
progressinginIsrael?Asecondgovernmentcommittee
willreview,”TheMarker,31December2019,https://

premium/0000017f-eef4-da6f-a77f-fefef54c0000(last
accessed30May2023)[Hebrewsource].
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 41

42 EMBRACING THE ORGANIZED MESS

Defense AI Observatory Studies
23|15 Inbar Dolinko and Liran Antebi, Embracing the Organized Mess. Defense AI in Israel
23|14 Alastair Finlan, A Fertile Soil for AI? Defense AI in Sweden
23|13 John Lee, “Overtaking on the Curve?” Defense AI in China
23|12 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, and Joseph Verbovszky, Master and Servant. Defense
AI in Germany
23|11 Katarzyna Zysk, High Hopes Amid Hard Realities. Defense AI in Russia
23|10 Yvonne Hofstetter and Joseph Verbovzsky, How AI Learns the Bundeswehr’s
“Innere Führung.” Value-Based Engineering with IEEE7000™-2021
23|09 Robert C Engen, When the Teeth Eat the Tail: A Review of Canada’s Defence Artificial
Intelligence
23|08 Çağlar Kurç, Enabling Technology of Future Warfare. Defense AI in Turkey
23|07 Lauren A. Kahn, Risky Incrementalism. Defense AI in the United States
22|06 Yvonne Hofstetter, Wie KI Innere Führung lernt. Wertbasierte Technik mit
IEEE7000™-2021
22|05 Andrea Gilli, Mauro Gilli, and Ivan Zaccagnini, Exploring the Benefits of a New Force
Enabler: Defense AI in Italy
22|04 Kenneth Payne, Bright Prospects – Big Challenges. Defense AI in the United
Kingdom
22|03 Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber, Armin Brandstetter, and Gary S. Schaal, Free
Jazz on the Battlefield. How GhostPlay’s AI Approach Enhances Air Defense
22|02 Peter Layton, Evolution not Revolution. Australia’s Defence AI Pathway
21|01 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, Joseph Verbovszky, Beware the Hype. What Military
Conflicts in Ukraine, Syria, Libya, and Nagorno-Karabakh (Don’t) Tell Us About the
Future of War