A Fertile Soil
for AI?
Defense AI in Sweden
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Alastair Finlan
DAIO Study 23|14

About the Defense AI Observatory
The Defense AI Observatory (DAIO) at the Helmut Schmidt University in Hamburg
monitors and analyzes the use of artificial intelligence by armed forces. DAIO comprises
three interrelated work streams:
Culture, concept development, and organizational transformation in the context of
military innovation
Current and future conflict pictures, conflict dynamics, and operational experience,
especially related to the use of emerging technologies
Defense industrial dynamics with a particular focus on the impact of emerging
technologies on the nature and character of techno-industrial ecosystems
DAIO is an integral element of GhostPlay, a capability and technology development
project for concept-driven and AI-enhanced defense decision-making in support of fast-
paced defense operations. GhostPlay is funded by the Center for Digital and Technology
Research of the German Bundeswehr (dtec.bw). dtec.bw is funded by the European Union
– NextGenerationEU.
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von

A Fertile Soil
for AI?
Defense AI in Sweden
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Alastair Finlan
DAIO Study 23|14

About the Authors
Professor Alastair Finlan is a Professor of War Studies at the Swedish Defence University,
Stockholm. He is author of numerous books and articles on military culture, Special Forces
and modern warfare. These include: The Royal Navy in the Falklands Conflict and the Gulf
War: Culture and Strategy (London: Frank Cass, 2004), Special Forces, Strategy and the
War on Terror: Warfare by Other Means (London: Routledge, 2008), Contemporary Mili-
tary Culture and Strategic Studies: US and UK Armed Forces in the 21st Century (London:
Routledge, 2013) and Contemporary Military Strategy and the Global War on Terror: US
and UK Armed Forces in Afghanistan and Iraq 2001-2012 (New York: Bloomsbury, 2014). He
has contributed to numerous defense reviews in the UK and is part of the Executive Board
of the Scandinavian Journal of Military Studies.
Acknowledgments
I thank Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, and Joseph Verbovzsky for valuable comments and
suggestions. The author is solely responsible for any errors in fact, analysis or omission.
Design
Almasy Information Design Thinking
Imprint
Alastair Finlan, A Fertile Soil for AI? Defense AI in Sweden. DAIO Study 23/14 (Hamburg:
Defense AI Observatory, 2023).
Defense AI Observatory | Chair of Political Theory | Helmut Schmidt University
Holstenhofweg 85 | 22043 Hamburg | T +49 40 6541 2776
 | contact@defenseai.eu | @Defense_AIO
ISSN (online): 2749-5337
ISSN (print): 2749-5345
4 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

Content
1 Executive Summary .................................................................................................... 6
2 Thinking about Defense AI ........................................................................................ 8
2.1 A Fertile Soil for AI to Grow? .......................................................................................9
2.2 Sweden Embraces the AI Pathway .............................................................................10
2.3 Total Defense and AI .................................................................................................11
2.4 The Impact of AI on the Future of Warfare ..................................................................13
3 Developing Defense AI. ........................................................................................... 16
3.1 The Swedish AI Ecosystem ........................................................................................18
3.2 AI Partners in Sweden and Abroad .............................................................................20
3.3 NATO .......................................................................................................................22
4 Organizing Defense AI ............................................................................................. 24
5 Funding Defense AI ................................................................................................. 27
5.1 The Armed Forces .....................................................................................................28
5.2 Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP) ..........................28
5.3 Vinnova and AI Sweden .............................................................................................29
6 Fielding and Operating Defense AI. ....................................................................... 30
7 Training for Defense AI ............................................................................................ 33
8 Conclusion. ................................................................................................................ 36
Literature ...................................................................................................................... 39
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 5

1 Executive Summary
Sweden is very well positioned today regarding the development of AI for both
civil and military applications. Most of the essential conditions are in place to make
this high technology Nordic nation an ideal environment for AI to grow, develop
and flourish at a rapid pace. This is in part due to bold and relatively recent strate-
gic initiatives from the government and private foundations to invest in Sweden’s
AI future.
Nevertheless, the long-term fertility of Sweden’s AI soil depends heavily on what
is nurtured now and, though conditions are as good as they can be, it still requires
active planning and preparatory work to ensure that the optimum benefits of this
technology for defense AI purposes can be reaped in the future.
The current stage of AI’s development in Sweden also comes at a rare moment in
history when the country has decided to massively invest in its armed forces in the
light of increasing instability in Europe and the War in Ukraine as well as abandon
its longstanding policy on neutrality by applying to join the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in 2022.
Together, these elements combine to create an extraordinarily beneficial climate
for AI to flourish in what is already one of the most advanced and digitally net-
worked societies in Europe.
Research on AI in the defense sector has long roots in Sweden. The country is also
home to one of the leading-edge defense industries in the world in the form of
Saab that is already incorporating AI into deployable military systems. Much of the
initial concept work about AI has already been started and, thanks to the massive
investment in AI research in Swedish universities, this should develop rapidly.
The old and now resurrected “total defense” concept in Sweden also promises
to ensure the interflow of ideas and technologies from civil society to the armed
forces to help defend the country if needed. AI has many significant benefits for
the unique strategic circumstances of Sweden with a vast, but sparsely populated
territory to defend, which has been identified by earlier research in this area as
something that could be offset by these new technologies.
6 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

The only major risk for the development and exploitation of AI for defense purpos-
es is the question of prioritization in view of the massive scale required to revitalize
and rebuild the Swedish conventional forces. There are so many areas that need
attention after over two decades of decline and contraction of resources in the
form of units, major equipment and bases.
The question is whether investing in present-day military needs will push back
investment in future capabilities (to the detriment of AI research) or whether a
balance can be found.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 7

2 Thinking
about
Defense AI
8 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

2.1 A Fertile Soil for AI to Grow?
Sweden has a remarkable track record of success with regard to the production of
engineering and technical innovations in the civilian and military spheres that has
generated a global impact for a Nordic state with a relatively small population.
The spirit of rigorous scientific enquiry continues to reverberate strongly within
and across educational, health, military, political and social realms within Swedish
society to the point that Sweden today is one of the most advanced digitalized
nation states in the world. From seamless money transfers from mobile phones
(Swish) to effortlessly networked health systems, from health professional to
pharmacy, Sweden offers a rich and fertile environment for the so-called “Fourth
Industrial Revolution” (Artificial Intelligence, biotechnologies, and the Internet of
Things or IoT) to develop.
The connection between civil society and military organizations is an intimate one
and, as Sweden embraces AI into the warp and weft of civil life, it will inevitably
feed into and affect the military community that civilians consciously maintain for
the security of the state.
Until the end of the Cold War, Sweden regularly recruited around 50,000 con-
scripts (about 18 years of age) every year and they constituted between 68-77%
of the Swedish armed forces at any one time.1 In time of national emergency,
Sweden had an impressive 850,000 military personnel available in the mid-1980s
for operations with mobilization.2
Historically, the footprint of the armed forces in Swedish society has been surpris-
ingly very large with nearly 10 percent of the nation serving in the armed forces
during the latter part of the Cold War. That means that the senior leadership of the
workforce in Sweden today will have in all likelihood military experience of some
form or another.
Equally, the rapid reduction of the Swedish armed forces at the end of the Cold
War shutdown entire units, but conversely opened up space for personnel to
move around the services. Consequently, it is not unusual to meet a fighter pilot
in the air force who started their military career in the army. This means that there
is a degree of porousness in Swedish military culture that is not evident in other
countries.
1 Sørensen,“ConscriptioninScandinaviaDuringtheLastQuarterCentury,”p.321.
2 Åselius,“SwedishStrategicCultureafter1945,”p.35.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 9

Naturally, the successful adoption of AI will necessarily be infused within a cultur-
ally influenced context to characterize a particular Swedish interpretation of this
innovative and multi-dimensional technology from a “smaller military” perspective.
Unsurprisingly, Sweden has a long interest in AI given the seamless cosmopolitan
connections and networks between scientific communities across continents in the
time before the Internet. While the concept of artificial intelligence was first artic-
ulated by the American computer scientist John McCarthy in the 1950s, Swedish
defense researchers were examining the idea as early as the 1980s.3
The critical turning point for Sweden with regard to AI and, as a corollary for its
armed forces, occurred a little over five years ago when a scoping study from
Vinnova, the Swedish innovation agency looked at the state of AI in Sweden. Its
conclusions were concerning. It assessed that:
Swedish AI research has, overall, limited international competitiveness. It is
a generally accepted view that development within AI, both in research and
commercially, is dominated by the USA, with China being the main contender,
while Europe has tended to lose ground, relatively speaking.4
This was a surprising statement in view that Sweden possessed considerable ad-
vantages over other nations in terms of digitalization and infrastructure. It clearly
needed some form of government intervention to set Sweden on a better trajec-
tory for the development of AI in both civil and military areas.
2.2 Sweden Embraces the AI Pathway
Sweden’s government in 2018 published its AI strategy called “National Approach
to Artificial Intelligence” and set out a bold vision of the future in the first para-
graph of the document:
Sweden aims to be the world leader in harnessing the opportunities offered by
digital transformation. By international standards, Sweden is in the vanguard.
Many countries have high ambitions for their digital development and Sweden
must work hard to advance and strengthen its efforts. If Sweden succeeds,
there will be considerable scope to develop Swedish competitiveness and
3 Schubert,ArtificiellIntelligensförMilitärtBeslutsstöd,p.22.
4 ArtificialIntelligenceinSwedishBusinessandSociety:AnalysisofDevelopmentandPotential,p.14.
10 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

welfare. One rapidly evolving field of digital technology is artificial intelligence
(AI).5
“National Approach to Artificial Intelligence” is primarily focused on stimulating
and encouraging growth in AI in Sweden through the development of what it de-
scribes as four conditions: “education and training, research, innovation and use,
framework and infrastructure.”6 By strengthening engagement in these conditions,
Sweden should be well placed in terms of AI in society.
Much of the focus in the document is on growing AI within civil society, but there
is a focus within the “research” condition for benefitting from “the synergies
between civil research and defence research from a total defence perspective.”7
More specifically, it suggests that:
AI is also a growing field in defence research. There are potential opportuni-
ties for coordination between civil research and defence research, including
cybersecurity and autonomous systems, that should be seized.8
For a society that is very advanced and highly reliant on digital systems, there is an
acute awareness of the vulnerability of all these technologies to malicious attack
from outside of Sweden. Equally, though not an area of large development yet by
the Swedish armed forces, there is also a recognition that autonomous platforms
will be an important technological pathway in the defense sector in the future.
“National Approach to Artificial Intelligence” defines AI quite broadly as “intel-
ligence demonstrated by machines” that is taken from the Vinnova report, but it
recognizes that there are many definitions of it.9
2.3 Total Defense and AI
The Total Defense concept has significant potential to be an indirect driver of the
adoption of defense AI as it is designed to meld and harness the power of civil
and military spaces in times of national need. Sweden has promoted the concept
of total defense for a very long time, and it has become culturally embedded in
society and among political and military elites on how to think about war and
defense in the modern age.
5 NationalApproachtoArtificialIntelligence,p.4.
6 Ibid,p.5.
7 Ibid,p.7.
8 Ibid.
9 Ibid,p.4.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 11

The Swedish armed forces have famously not fought a war in the name of the
state for over 200 years, but its thinking about war and warfare has continued with
limited experience of actual combat through international missions with the United
Nations and with coalition forces in Afghanistan in the twenty-first century.
According to Sebastian Larsson, the conceptual and historical foundations of total
defense emerged in the dark days of the Second World War when Sweden trod a
delicate and dangerous diplomatic path between Nazi Germany, the Soviet Union,
and the Allies. An official report argued that the lines between civil and military
“have to a large extent been erased.”10
This thinking of an entwinned space between the civilian and military world ded-
icated together to defend Sweden was further developed throughout the Cold
War in which Sweden could assemble and equip a 300,000-man field army,11 if
necessary, by drawing upon its small cadre of military professionals combined with
trained conscripts from civil society.
The end of the Cold War witnessed Sweden, along with many nations in Europe,
drawdown their military capabilities to exploit the benefits of the peace dividend,
but Russia’s invasion of Crimea in 2014 provoked a resuscitation of the total de-
fense concept. As James Wither explains, the updated contemporary idea of total
defense:
is defined in Swedish law as “all activities preparing the society for war” and
consists of both military and civil defence (Sweden, Government Offices 2018).
In contrast to Finland, Sweden abandoned its traditional whole of government
and society preparations for defence after the Cold War. Policy changed in
2015, when the government tasked the Ministry of Defence and the Civil Con-
tingencies Agency of the Ministry of Justice jointly to develop a total defence
proposal.12
In many other societies in Europe, the armed services are often perceived as a
separate dimension of society that are given significant autonomy to conduct
operations without much involvement of civilians, except in specialist roles. In con-
trast, Sweden’s armed forces have a much larger societal imprint, through residual
memory of the original total defense concept in the Cold War and an expectation
or norm that the active participation of civil society in defense is critical to military
success. This is very different to other countries such as the United Kingdom for
instance.
10 Larsson,“Swedishtotaldefenceandtheemergenceofsocietalsecurity,”p.47.
11 Finlan,“TheShapeofWarfaretoCome,”p.475.
12 Wither,“BacktotheFuture?NordicTotalDefenceConcepts,”p.65.
12 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

AI can potentially handle the vast information loads concerning the mobilization of
key sectors of civil society such as healthcare to cater for the anticipated needs of
the armed forces, if combat occurs. Mobilizing a society, even for a so-called small
state like Sweden, with a population of 10 million inhabitants, still requires mas-
sive data lakes to be accessed and actioned at appropriate times, using cutting
edge mobile phone technology. AI can greatly assist in these critical preparatory
measures.
2.4 The Impact of AI on the Future of Warfare
Swedish thinking about AI and its potential applications for the armed forces and
for Sweden’s security is very much at an early stage. This is reflected in the sparsity
of debates about the potential ethical aspects of defense AI, though initial work is
beginning to emerge in Sweden.13
Consequently, inceptive thinking has been naturally quite conceptual in scope
and initial studies suggest that it may have broad benefits across the spectrum of
warfare and for the concept of total defense. An early investigation by the Swed-
ish Defense Research Agency or FOI in 2019 made the case that AI could offer
“advantages”14 in specific areas. It argued:
In today’s armed conflicts, conventional military warfare often includes ele-
ments of hybrid warfare, such as cyberattacks or propaganda campaigns on
social media. Thus, analysis of large volumes of data from various domains is
necessary to maintain situation awareness. Given this fact, considerable advan-
tages can be derived from the use of AI. Due to the ability to quickly classify
and identify patterns in large data volumes, AI technology is well suited for use
in sensor data processing and intelligence analysis.15
FOI’s research pointed towards various dimensions of warfare that could be
augmented by the incorporation of AI data such as sensor analysis.16 Monitoring
of sensors ostensibly seems to be an innocuous and tangential aspect of warfare
when compared to the kinetic dimension such as active fighting, but it has even
greater significance in the light of the recent introduction of hypersonic weapons
13 SeeMalmio,“Ethicsasanenablerandaconstraint.”
14 Andersson/Gustavi/Karasalo,ArtificialIntelligence–OpportunitiesandChallengesforSweden’sNationalSecurity.
15 Ibid.
16 Ibid.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 13

by Russia. Hypersonic weapons are a game-changer in modern warfare.17 The
reason is simple: speed.
The extraordinary velocity of hypersonic weapons places enormous pressure
on humancentric command and control systems to respond in a timely manner.
Hypersonic speed exceeds the natural abilities of people to react and, conse-
quently, a military advantage gap exists between those who possess this technol-
ogy (Russia) and everyone else. Swedish researchers argue that AI offers through
sensor analysis an ability to improve decision-making cycles18 by increasing speed
of assessment of the raw data being thrown up by different inputs such as “radar
signals and sonar data.”19 To a degree, the pace of technology is also acting as
another indirect driver of Defense AI is this respect.
The benefits of integrating AI into the military system architecture would potential-
ly greatly enhance situational awareness and act as a “force multiplier.”20 Situation-
al awareness should be elevated to a principle of war (a guideline for planning/
action) in the twenty-first century because of the power of innovative and new
technologies such as drones that overlap and influence traditional boundaries in
warfare.
Principles of war vary from which country under consideration and range between
nine and twelve. Many are derived from twentieth century warfare. That said, war-
fare as witnessed in Ukraine at the moment has clearly undergone some significant
alterations in terms of the absorption of new technologies such as drones of all
varieties with traditional arms in the form of artillery and infantry.
Together, they have greatly augmented the power of traditional formations that
has necessitated the return of old tactics such as the construction of trenches to
offset the improved firepower element and exploit the protective qualities of earth
and wood. A future refresh of the principles of war in the light of modern technol-
ogy and praxis needs to embrace the significance of situation awareness with an
eye on future AI applications in this area.
17 Onestudysuggeststhat“themostworryingdevelopmentofhypersonictechnologiesisbestcapturedbytheRussianZircon
anti-shipmissilethatwassuccessfullytestedagaininOctober2020.AccordingtoRussiansources,itpropelledahyperson-
icprojectivetoaspeedinexcessof“Mach8or6138mph”whenfiredfromthefrigate,AdmiralGorshkov,andhitatarget 
“298miles”fromtheshipinjust“4.5”minutes.Toputthisachievementincontext,thedeadlyFrenchExocetmissilesofthe
FalklandsConflictaresubsonicweaponsandflyatspeedsoftypicalcontemporaryanti-shipmissilesaroundMach0.9or
approximately700mph.”See:Finlan,“TheShapeofWarfaretoCome,”p.481.
18 Andersson/Gustavi/Karasalo,ArtificialIntelligence–OpportunitiesandChallengesforSweden’sNationalSecurity.
19 Ibid.
20 Finlan,“TheShapeofWarfaretoCome,”p.477.
14 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

Another aspect highlighted by the Swedish researchers was the utility of AI when
combined with intelligence work. The problem with intelligence in the twenty-first
century is the excessive volume of data that often overwhelms the ability of human
analysts to see the bigger picture or draw a line between significant dots that
point to another “9/11” or “Pearl Harbor.”21 FOI argues that “AI offers an oppor-
tunity to identify the unexpected – the so called ‘black swan’ – by analysing large
volumes of traditional intelligence data in combination with open web data.”22 The
use of web-based data also facilitated the employment of so-called algorithmic
warfare that enables the monitoring of internet traffic and chatter to specifically
identity targets of opportunity that can be actioned against by military forces. This
was recently demonstrated in Ukraine when a concentration of Russian soldiers
being moved up to the front line was precisely targeted with a missile based on
this method of identifying clusters of soldiers from their internet/digital footprint.23
21 Andersson/Gustavi/Karasalo,ArtificialIntelligence–OpportunitiesandChallengesforSweden’sNationalSecurity.
22 Ibid.
23 Candlin,“RoleofAlgorithmicWarfareisa‘game-changer’ontheBattlefield.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 15

3 Developing
Defense AI
16 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

Sweden finds itself in an unexpected place in terms of its defense posture. For
years after the end of the Cold War, successive governments in Sweden assumed
that defense was a low priority to the point that they drew down their forces and
capabilities on a massive scale, from shutting bases, closing down entire mili-
tary units and selling off heavy equipment such as artillery. The future Sweden
imagined was of a small, largely professional military that would contribute to
expeditionary international missions without much concern for homeland defense
in view of the peaceful and stable European environment.
Russia’s seizure of Crimea in 2014 provoked a shift in government and public
attitudes towards the issue of defense that has gained significant momentum
today. The Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022 and the ongoing war has solidified
defense policy around national defense and the Swedish armed forces find them-
selves in the challenging position of receiving vast amounts of increased funding
while trying to resurrect, reconstruct and revive former capabilities while at the
same time looking ahead to the future to see what it should invest in now.
This context dominates the future R&D priorities. An inkling of future direction is
provided by a very new publication by the Swedish armed forces called “A Strong-
er Defense for a Challenging Future” in which it states that “the future operating
environment will be greatly affected by technological developments.”24 A great
emphasis is place on “digitalization” and the connections between different
systems that will facilitate better situational awareness. The research is acutely
conscious of the links between the five domains of air, land, sea, cyber and space
in future warfare and technologies must have an ability to synchronize within this
multidomain environment.25
What is interesting between the FOI and Swedish armed forces studies is how the
research agency sees many applications for AI whereas the military focus really
on just a few explicit pathways for development, but implicitly in the digitalization
and the connections between different systems is an ideal developmental area for
artificial intelligence.
It needs to be recognized that FOI is a research support agency for the armed
forces. It can make suggestions and drive research in specific areas, but these are
directed by the Swedish military.
The report specifically mentions AI with regard to its future applications with
autonomous platforms26 and intelligence support. This is highly interesting in view
24 EttStarkareFörsvarförenUtmanandeFramtid,p.26.
25 Ibid,p.29.
26 Ibid,p.27.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 17

that this is an area of limited development within the armed forces, but clearly it
sees applications here. Presently, the armed forces have just 8 very small UAVs27
and has a research stake in Dassault’s “nEUROn” drone28 and has recently become
involved “on the margins” with the British Tempest sixth generation fighter aircraft
development that may well be unmanned or offering an unmanned option. The
focus is clearly on more kinetic options for the future, rather than the more attaina-
ble information management dimension of warfare.
3.1 The Swedish AI Ecosystem
There is a fair degree of uneven development in the Swedish AI ecosystem that
has been formally recognized by state research agencies and the government.
Typically, for Sweden, the solution is a mixture of state intervention and private
financing to improve key competencies in the ecosystem linking primarily civilian
applications, though increasingly through the total defense posture, it will flow
into the military world.
Civil Initiatives
The largest private investment in autonomous systems research was offered by the
Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation in 201529 that is part of the extraordinary
family of industrialists and bankers in Sweden who own many famous companies,
including Saab. Its chairman is Marcus Wallenberg who is also vice chair of the
Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation.
It is called WASP (Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program)
and involves five partner universities including “Chalmers University of Technology,
Linköping University, Lund University, KTH Royal Institute of Technology and Umeå
University.”30 It is claimed to be “the largest individual research program in Swe-
den.”31 This perhaps indicates how important the development of AI and autono-
mous systems and associated software is to Sweden.
Linköping University is home to the National Supercomputing Centre and has
greatly benefitted from WASP’s funding. In 2021, it inaugurated one of Europe’s
fastest supercomputers for AI called Berzelius. This has pushed Sweden to the
27 Finlan,“TheShapeofWarfaretoCome,”p.475.
28 Ibid,p.480.
29 Formoreontheprogram,see:
30 Ibid.
31 Ibid.
18 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

forefront of these technologies in Europe. Berzelius has “94 AI systems, which
together consist of 752 GPUs. With more interconnected systems, which also have
higher clock rates, the new computing power equates to as much as 470 petaflops
for AI calculations.”32 The important aspect to note about Berzelius is that it is
seen as a “national resource”33 for all researchers across Sweden so this technolo-
gy is not parochial to Linköping University and can act as a core engine for innova-
tion and development in the Swedish AI ecosystem.
Military Initiatives
The Swedish armed forces own university, the Swedish Defense University, has also
developed over the years expertise in AI systems through encouraging doctoral
research in this area that spans technical and warfare dimensions. The massive
research funding that the armed forces use to encourage research in areas of na-
tional defense interest through programs such as Forskning och Teknikutveckling
(Research and Technology Development or FoT) also stimulates critical research
across numerous universities and research institutes in Sweden. For 2023 alone,
the FoT budget is planned to be almost SEK952 million (nearly USD100 million)
rising to over a billion Swedish kronor by 2025.34
Along with all aspects of defense, FoT and (Forskning och Utveckling/Research
and Development or FoU) funding pathways are enjoying a significant uplift to
fulfill the burgeoning research needs of the armed forces as it orientates itself
towards potential future warfare.
The Swedish Air Force is the only service that pointedly mentions AI in its list of
future capabilities. Admittedly, not at the top of the list, but nevertheless included
in its line-up of new strengths.
The Air Force wants to create “a unit for intelligence analysis with support from
AI,”35 It does not go into specific details of what this unit will do, but it can be
speculated that such a unit could naturally be employed to develop an overview
of enemy forces, movements, strengths, and weaknesses in order to support the
Swedish Air Forces decision-making processes at the strategy and tactics levels.
It is quite natural for AI to have just a minor support role at this early stage of
development, but with time and confidence built into the humancentric system
32 “SwedishAIResearchGetsMoreMuscle.”
33 Ibid.
34 Budgetpropositionen2023,p.56.
35 EttStarkareFörsvarförenUtmanandeFramtid,p.61.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 19

using this very new capability will undoubtedly encourage further applications if it
works well.
It is highly likely that military AI research will be an important aspect of the Swedish
AI ecosystem as the shift to greater digitalization and integration of systems will
demand much more computer (supercomputer) power in the armed services. This
is very much at a nascent stage as other more pressing priorities such as manpower,
units, bases, and major equipment programs take precedence, but – inevitably – the
armed forces will have to makes some big decisions regarding AI and the support-
ing AI infrastructure soon, if it wants to fulfil its digital and multidomain ambitions.
3.2 AI Partners in Sweden and Abroad
The Swedish AI ecosystem is fortunate to possess some of the most high tech-
nology and globally renown defense industries in the world. Saab, for example,
is universally known for the quality of its military products and their reliability in
modern combat. Most recently, one of its lesser known technologies, the NLAW
(Next Generation Light Anti-Tank Weapon) has proven to be one of the most ef-
fective weapon systems of the ongoing Russo-Ukraine War. It is unsurprising given
the history of the company that they are very much at the leading edge of AI for
military purposes with a very practical view on what is possible at this evolutionary
stage of AI. Two main areas stand out at the moment. These are:
Predictive Maintenance
Modern military vehicles such as aircraft and ships generate a great deal of
data and AI can predict when a problem is likely to arise “before it breaks
down”36 and this potentially saves an enormous amount of cost, but also
makes military technologies “smarter”37 and more effective. Maintenance of
vehicles seems an unglamorous part of warfare but some areas of fighting are
wholly dependent on them. For example, armored warfare involving modern
main battle tanks that has gained great prominence in Ukraine. For every one
tank in the field, two will be in the process of being repaired or completely
broken down. This is a standard condition of mechanized warfare that has
been the case since tanks arrived on the battlefield in World War I.
AI potentially can affect this dynamic through predictive maintenance and
enable military commanders to maximize the utility of their armored forces
and air forces in a way not seen in warfare to date. For smaller armies with less
36 “AIatSaab:ArtificialEye.”
37 Ibid.
20 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

resources, it enables them to punch above their weight when fighting against
more powerful opposition because they are getting the best possible perfor-
mance out of their equipment.
Massive Data Fusion
This is a relatively simple idea that has extraordinary potential across civil and
military applications. In essence, according to Saab, it is “a cloud-based data
lake where we take data and put it into the context of time and space.”38 This
is a very powerful tool because it offers in theory a means to “real-time pre-
dictions about the physical behaviours of where people, ships or planes are
going, and also predict the contextual behaviours of what these people, ships
or planes are actually doing.”39
A cloud-based data lake offers many advantages for military services. First, it
builds in redundancy into the system because it is not dependent on just one
physical platform site. If a key base, facility, or platform is destroyed as a result
of combat or hostile electromagnetic fire, the system continues and survives.
Second, it lays the connective groundwork for the next step in modern war-
fare, beyond combined and joint operations towards integrated operations. In
theory, the integration of all these sensors through a common data lake offers
a powerful machine-based sensitivity to unfolding actions on the battlefield
that greatly outstrips people-based capabilities.
A pressing problem for all military commanders in the modern age is too much
data flowing around the system. This is data generated by your own forces,
but also hostile data from the enemy that can either swamp the system or be
designed to “poison” the data lake. If the AI succeeds, then armed forces with
massive data fusion versus armed forces without it have a significant advan-
tage at the strategy and tactics levels because they can “predict” the move-
ments of the enemy and plan accordingly. The commercial applications are
also vast, from air traffic control to domestic vehicle traffic management and
stock market trading to name just three. Massive data fusion has potentially
societal implications and may well affect the relationships between govern-
ment and citizens from cradle to grave.
Sweden has longstanding relationships and engagements with many of the
leading IT companies in the world such as IBM who are at the forefront of AI
research. That said, however, its recent application to join the North Atlantic
Alliance or NATO in 2022 promises even greater benefits in terms of AI coop-
eration for military purposes.
38 Ibid.
39 Ibid.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 21

3.3 NATO
The decision by the Swedish government in cooperation with the Finnish gov-
ernment to jointly apply for NATO membership in 2022 is historic in every sense
of the word. Abandoning two hundred years of neutrality was no easy step for a
country that has tried to stay away from entangling agreements that could poten-
tially drag the country into a major war.
From an AI perspective, the relationship with NATO offers huge benefits and it
is likely to be an indirect driver for Defense AI in Sweden. Despite not being a
member of NATO yet, the Swedish armed forces have closely followed doctrinal
and planning developments in the North Atlantic Alliance. For example, it has
been teaching NATO’s planning tool or the Comprehensive Operations Planning
Directive (COPD) to senior officers undertaking higher education courses for many
years. Consequently, what NATO decides with AI will be mirrored to some extent
in Sweden and it merits attention.
In 2021, NATO adopted an AI strategy and has moved quickly forward into ex-
ploring the potential uses and pitfalls of this technology for its operations. NATO’s
approach to AI is set out in very clear terms:
The aim of NATO’s AI Strategy is to accelerate AI adoption by enhancing key
AI enablers and adapting policy, including by adopting Principles of Responsi-
ble Use for AI and by safeguarding against threats from malicious use of AI by
state and non-state actors.
By acting collectively through NATO, Allied governments also ensure a con-
tinued focus on interoperability and the development of common standards.
Overall, with innovation ecosystems implicating different actors and faster
technology lifecycles than typically included in traditional capability develop-
ment systems, the NATO AI Strategy is also a recognition that exploitation
of AI will require new efforts to foster and leverage the Alliance’s innovation
potential, including through new partnerships and mechanisms.40
NATO recognizes the military significance of AI and is striving to adopt it in a
responsible way that both incorporates its advantages for NATO operations, but
also protects it from counter-AI use from potential enemies. In a very typical way
for a long-established organization, NATO has put in place certain drivers to push
forward with AI research. The first of these is DIANA (Defense Innovation Accelera-
tor for the North Atlantic) “to bring nations and their industries into closer partner-
40 Stanley-Lockman/Christie,“AnArtificialIntelligenceStrategyforNATO.”
22 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

ship to fund, develop, and field dual-use EDTs, with AI being one of the primary
technologies.”41 EDT means emerging and disruptive technologies and DIANA is
designed to act as a catalyst for cutting edge research to develop in partnership
with NATO.
Alongside of DIANA, NATO has also established the NATO Innovation Fund
(NIF)42 that offers a funding pathway for promising research in this area. These
drivers indicate how seriously the North Atlantic Alliance takes AI and how it aims
to be at the leading edge of this research in terms of practical applications.
Sweden’s membership of NATO (if successful) would thus not only have benefits
for the Alliance with regard to AI research, but also open up new avenues for
research cooperation and funding in this area.
41 Fata,“NATO’sEvolvingRoleinDevelopingAIPolicy.”
42 Ibid.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 23

4 Organizing
Defense AI
24 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

In Sweden, the lead organization with regard to the use of AI for defense purposes
is FOI. It has by far produced the most reports and conducted research in this area
for quite a long time. FOI has a very central remit when compared to defense re-
search in other countries that are often just part of a wide constellation of compet-
ing research agencies vying for government funding. In many ways, the centrality
of FOI fits the innate drive for and respect of science-based knowledge and the
Swedish armed forces are steeped in it. According to FOI, its purpose is:
to support the shaping, build-up and utilisation of Sweden’s defence resources
through its research-based knowledge and experience. In concert with the
Swedish Armed Forces and the Swedish Defence Materiel Administration,
FOI’s task is to develop its knowledge and expertise for the benefit of Swe-
den’s operational defence forces, both in the short and in the longer term, as
well as helping to apply this knowledge in the full range of defence processes
from perspective studies to evaluation.43
FOI researchers are usually civilians that are commissioned by the armed forces
and other state agencies to do work/tasks in specified areas.
Essentially, what starts off as innocuous research in FOI can well lead to profound
impact in terms of affecting how a technology or concept is adopted and employed at
the operational level by the Swedish armed forces. Consequently, what FOI is looking
at the paper level with regard to AI has great significance several years down the line
given this intimate relationship between researcher and warrior. The relatively small
size of the Swedish armed forces and their joint outlook that starts right from initial
officer training44 ensures that ideas percolate relatively quickly in the total organization.
The Swedish Armed Forces can be broken down into:
The Army (6850 soldiers) with 120 Leopard 2 tanks, 411 infantry fighting vehi-
cles, 1064 armoured personnel carriers, 35 Archer 155mm guns and 6 Patriot
PAC-3 systems.
The Navy (1250 sailors and 1100 amphibious forces) with 5 conventionally
powered submarines, 5 Visby Class corvettes, 4 coastal combatants, 133 small
combat boats (troop transport), 7 mine warfare vessels and 11 landing craft.
The Air Force (2700 in total) with 98 Gripen multi-role combat aircraft, 3
Airborne early warning and control aircraft, 8 transport aircraft, 8 RQ-7 Shadow
UAV and 53 helicopters.
Special Forces (2950 with supporting staff)
In total, 14,600 with 10,000 reservists.45
43 
44 Finlan/Danielsson/Lundqvist,“CriticallyEngagingtheConceptofJointOperations.”p.357.
45 Hackett(ed.),TheMilitaryBalance2023,pp.137-139.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 25

Providing a detailed breakdown of the Swedish armed forces in this way shows
how AI can augment and bind the different aspects of the services to maximize the
potential utility of them. It also reveals the challenges that the armed forces face
in expanding quickly the size of the individual services in view of how much they
contracted from the time of the Cold War. The reintroduction of voluntary con-
scription is one pathway to increasing the size of the forces alongside of building
up the size of the total officer corps. Again, with both measures, it will take years
to substantially boost numbers of combat personnel. Nonetheless, the small size
and porousness of the Swedish armed forces provide an environment conducive
to advancing defense AI as parochial, service-specific interests that can hamper
the diffusion of defense AI are less pronounced in Sweden than in other countries.
There has been much speculation in various research papers from FOI as to how
AI can best serve the armed forces given the state of its development. Much of
the work from FOI focuses on the benefits of AI in terms of C2 (Command and
Control) applications using AI for planning, analysis, and execution,46 but other
work stresses the benefits for training purposes.
The most recent defense perspective study, “A Stronger Defense for a Challeng-
ing Future” stresses a future in which multi-domain operations and coordination
between these domains will be vital. This points naturally towards AI, but it is not
explicitly stated as such.
A large part of the problem about AI is that it is quite an opaque technology for
people who do not have more than a layman’s understanding of it. Explainable AI
is one pathway to improve general knowledge and applications, and this is an area
that FOI is exploring. Nevertheless, military organizations are inherently conserva-
tive and that perhaps has some explanatory value as to why only the Swedish Air
Force has explicitly embraced AI so far. Air forces tend to be on the cutting edge
of technology so that explains to a degree why the Swedish Air Force has taken
this quite radical step forward with this new and promising technological pathway.
The inherently joint nature of the Swedish armed forces will ensure that should
AI work well for the Air Force then these lessons will be quickly absorbed by the
other two services and increasingly through training with the technology, it should
seem a more natural fit. The Swedish armed forces have invested significantly in
game and simulation technology for training purposes and AI will fit very well with
these applications.
46 Schubert/Brynielsson/Nilsson/Svenmarck,“ArtificialIntelligenceforDecisionSupportinCommandandControlSystems.”
26 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

5 Funding
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 27

5.1 The Armed Forces
The funding landscape for Defense AI is unusually beneficial due to the massive
increase in defense funding in general, which includes research into specific future
technologies and capabilities, but also from civilian sources as well. In 2022, Sweden
announced that its defense funding would reach 2% of GDP by 2026 and that fund-
ing alone would enjoy an increase of USD800 million in 2023.47 In total, the Swedish
defense budget will grow from USD7.3 billion in 2022 to USD12 billion by 2028.48
Admittedly, while much of the funding will go to major equipment projects and ex-
panding the size of the Swedish armed forces; nevertheless, there are also signs of
a willing to fund leading edge technologies such as AI. A great focus of the 2023
increase is towards boosting cyber-defenses through a dedicated cyber defense
unit that will protect both military and civilian vital IT assets.49
5.2 Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and
Software Program (WASP)
From purely the civil sphere of research funding, the Knut and Alice Wallenberg
Foundation, through WASP described in chapter 3.1, will provide funding over
a 15-year period, from 2015-2031 of SEK4.9 billion Swedish50 (nearly USD500
million) that will be supplemented by more funding from other partners taking the
total to SEK6.2 billion51 (almost USD600 million).
This is one of the largest specific funding programs for AI in Europe and indicates
how seriously Sweden intends to build up core competencies for the benefit of
Swedish society as a whole.
Specifically, it has the ambition to produce 600 PhD students and an intention to
create 80 research groups. They have already recruited 53 international senior
faculty and have 80 companies and organizations involved in WASP.52
These budget and program trends in Sweden suggest that within five years (the typ-
ical duration of a PhD in Sweden) a significant increase of human capital expertise
47 O’Dwyer,“Swedenboostsdefencespending,NATOgoalinmind.”
48 Ibid.
49 Ibid.
50 
51 Ibid.
52 Ibid.
28 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

will be available for both civil, military, and total defense purposes. This represents a
significant R&D investment in this area that has manifold societal benefits.
Thanks already to WASP, Sweden now possesses one of the most advanced super-
computers in Europe devoted specifically to AI applications that promises to help
push and develop the boundaries of research in numerous related fields that have
security benefits for society.
5.3 Vinnova and AI Sweden
Vinnova, Sweden’s innovation agency, also directly stimulates and funds research
into artificial intelligence through an entity called AI Sweden that has resulted from
a public/private finance initiative.
AI Sweden is “the national center for applied artificial intelligence”53 and encour-
ages a wide range of activities related to AI across society in Sweden. According
to AI Sweden, it manages:
projects of national interest together with our partners in areas such as in-
formation-driven healthcare, decentralized AI, edge learning in space, and
language models for the Swedish language. Moreover, we are building
talent programs and provide courses and resources for driving organizational
change.54
The founding partners of AI Sweden include many of the largest state and private
actors in Swedish society, from the National Tax Office (Skatteverket) to Volvo and
a host of universities and private companies such as AstraZeneca.55 It is an extraor-
dinarily influential groups of partnerships that demonstrates how much AI research
is being encouraged within Swedish society by the state authorities in close collab-
oration with private industry.
Many of these organizations and companies have close relationships with mem-
bers of the armed forces and through the “total defense” approach, the flow of
ideas and technologies from civil sector to defense will be intimate. The Swedish
armed forces finance a great deal of applied research in defense-related technolo-
gies through the FoT and FoU pathways in many of the world-leading universities
in Sweden.
53 See:
54 Ibid.
55 Ibid.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 29

6 Fielding and
Operating
Defense AI
30 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

The application of Defense AI industries is very much at an early stage of develop-
ment in Sweden with much work ongoing in the civil sphere with a few dedicated
companies developing it specifically for defense purposes. Sweden has a long
history of thorough testing of military technologies before releasing them for
general use and AI is no exception in this respect. To provide one simple example,
the Bofors gun that was hugely successful in World War II (1939-1945) and was
used again in the Falklands Conflict (1982) had “30,000 hours” “on ‘the drawing
board’” before it went into service.56 This thoroughness in proving scientifically
the efficacy of a technology from a Bofors cannon to NLAW or AI runs deep within
Swedish society and defense industries.
Necessarily, it means that initiatives with AI will take time to become operational
but nevertheless there are green shoots of activity right now in specific companies
such as Saab with real world applications. As Saab publicly admits:
In recent years we’ve seen Artificial Intelligence (AI) become a key element
in much of Saab’s security and defense product portfolio, be it for the likes
of surveillance sensors, smart cockpit technology or autonomous sea rescue
systems.57
The benefits of AI for military sensor information processing are numerous. It can
handle significant quantities of data from different sensors and provide a form of
fusion capability to render the results as quickly as possible for decisionmakers in
a tactical environment. One of Saab’s products, the Information Fusion System,
“collects data and information from a large variety of sources, such as Communi-
cation Intelligence (COMINT), Electronic Intelligence (ELINT), Acoustic Intelligence
(ACINT) and Geographic information systems (GIS).”58
The AI algorithms “can be integrated and trained” with this data to enhance the
already powerful processes within the system that focus on classic AI applications
such as “speech-to-text, entity detection, topic detection, speaker identification
and language identification.”59 Together, a fusion capability such as on offer here
provides a powerful augmentation in capability from existing technologies.
This technological augmentation pathway for improving sensor data was clearly
highlighted by FOI’s influential study and dovetails with a national priority: to be
able to defend Sweden from external attack. Sweden is a vast country twice the
size of the United Kingdom for instance, but it has a relatively small population of
around 10 million. This means as the FOI report indicates:
56 Finlan,“TheShapeofWarfaretoCome,”p.474.
57 “AIatSaab:ArtificialEye.”
58 “Datafusionforcommonprocessingandreporting.”
59 Ibid.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 31

AI could have a significant impact on what has long been one of the major
challenges facing the Swedish Armed Forces; namely surveillance of a vast
and, in parts, very sparsely populated territory.60
This perhaps explains why the first concrete planned use of AI for the Air Force
is to provide “intelligence support” and the ability to handle sensor data in vast
quantities offers significant benefits for the monitoring of the very large Swedish
battlespace.
The complexity of AI necessitates a very large support infrastructure that relies
heavily on industry-supplied expertise. Back in 2018, the Vinnova report into AI
recognized that Sweden lacked sufficient human resources with regard to AI. Its
SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats) analysis highlighted:
AI competence hard to recruit
Lack of competence for digital business models
Universities and university colleges have weak drivers for flexible professional
training
Many SME have limited resources and competence61
The report specifically looked at civil society, but the situation in the military
sphere naturally reflects the state of the nation that supplies and sustains its force
structure. It is likely, given the huge investment in AI education and training, that
the AI competence gap is being gradually filled, but the armed forces will have to
rely heavily on defense industries such as Saab to lead the way in developing and
sustaining these innovative technologies.
This places a great emphasis on nationally based digital hubs/networks to pro-
vide support conduits for the vital AI sustenance that the armed forces require
on operations. Inevitably, it reduces the space between civil and military spheres,
but within total defense concept, this state of affairs would be seen as a desirable
working framework rather than something unusual.
The advanced state of digitalization and networking in Sweden offers enormous
benefits regards the successful operationalization of AI capabilities within the na-
tional military battlespace, but equally it highlights how important the protection
and security of these technologies in the form of wireless communications masts
are for Sweden’s future defense.
60 Andersson/Gustavi/Karasalo,ArtificialIntelligence–OpportunitiesandChallengesforSweden’sNationalSecurity.
61 ArtificialIntelligenceinSwedishBusinessandSociety:AnalysisofDevelopmentandPotential,p.13.
32 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

7 Training for
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 33

The potential applications of artificial intelligence for military purpose in the
defense realm are manifold and potentially game-changing with regard to auton-
omous platforms in the form of aerial, land and sea-based armed and unarmed
drones.
Nevertheless, this remarkable technology is not immediately human compatible
in relation to warfighting utility because it requires training and understanding to
grasp how AI sees and interprets the digital and physical worlds.
This element was identified in a 2019 FOI report called “Explainable Artificial
Intelligence.” It stressed that:
in the military domain the ability to understand and explain the behaviors of AI
systems is critical. In this context, the decisions and recommendations provid-
ed by the AI systems may have a deep impact on human lives. This is valid at
the tactical level where autonomous weapons and drones are used, as well as
at the operational and the strategic level where long-term decisions are made
by military leaders and political decision makers.62
Put simply, AI is not a “plug and play” technology. Military personnel must be
trained alongside of its gradual introduction to understand and develop trust in
the AI. For most people, AI is a nebulous term and consequently, researchers have
realized the importance of developing “explainable artificial intelligence” so that
operators of these systems grasp what the AI can and cannot do.
This is of great significance for any profession in which the risk to life is high,
whether it be for military organizations or health agencies of the state.
For the Swedish armed forces, adequate training of key personnel who both oper-
ate and command AI systems will be critical to the successful employment of this
technology in the field. At this stage, however, this is very much early days, but it
is an area that needs to be prioritized in the future in the same way that Sweden’s
national strategy document places an emphasis on education and training as one
of its essential four pillars for AI development.
The likelihood initial use of AI for training purposes will be in the areas of games
and simulations that Sweden has considerable experience with, not least at the
Swedish Defence University that has a game unit for assisting with officer training.
62 Luotsinen/Oskarsson/Svenmarck/WickenbergBolin,ExplainableArtificialIntelligence:ExploringXAITechniquesinMilitary
DeepLearningApplications,p.45.
34 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

One avenue of exploration is how AI can be used to improve enemy representa-
tions and behavior in simulations to make them “more realistic”63 and have more
value to the Swedish armed forces when training. This can be considered one of
the easiest aspects of AI to develop that does not require all personnel to under-
stand how the technology works, but rather small teams of experts who create the
scenarios and run the technology.
In view that much warfare is platform-based (aircraft, ships, tanks, and armored
personnel carriers), it has great potential for leadership training before actually
applying these skills physically in the field. It also enables young officers and more
senior officers to grasp the bigger picture of the battlespace that is often unseen
in actual combat because it is so compartmentalized in terms of geography and
place in the order of battle. For example, a soldier of a campaign only sees what
is in front of them in terms of platoon-based warfare rather than the bigger picture
that senior commanders have. It offers a better or holistic understanding of com-
mand networks and functions within a battlespace.
This also throws up an element that is focused upon in explainable artificial intelli-
gence: to show visually (in terms that humans can quickly grasp) how AI reaches its
conclusions and translate that facet into a training regime. If the training appears
unrealistic, then people naturally enough will not take it seriously and that affects
training learning outcomes.
63 Kamrani/Cohen/Bissmarck/Hammar,“Beteendemodelleringmedimitationsinlärning,”p.4.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 35

8 Conclusion
36 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

The conditions for the successful development of artificial intelligence for defense
purposes are clearly visible today in Sweden, but much depends on how much of
a priority it is given. The winds of war from Ukraine are palpably felt in this Nordic
country, more so than other European partners such as the UK or Spain, and its
historical and cultural links to the region have added great impetus to the revitali-
zation of its defense forces.
Nevertheless, the opportunities afforded by the massive reinvestment in its military
forces also carries a risk:
Will investing in the future (capabilities) have a lower prioritization to investing in
the present day ones?
The scale of Swedish defense reconstruction is massive, from its army to the navy
and the air force, but difficult choices need to be made about new technologies
that are already affecting modern warfare such as drones, hypersonic missiles, and
AI. It requires not just a technological reinvestment, but an educational one of the
same level to grasp the significance of the new warfighting environment unfolding
in Ukraine at the moment.
The latter is perhaps harder than the former to achieve because it required new
thinking, a shaking up of educational, doctrinal, and training curricula that only the
strongest of military leadership and an external shock usually achieve.
Regardless of which, AI is going to develop at a rapid pace in Swedish civil society
thanks to a forward-looking national strategy in 2018 backed up by massive
amounts of private and public investment. The Swedish government has set the
course for Sweden to be at the forefront of the AI revolution within the next two
decades and the establishment of one of the most power supercomputers for
AI in Europe at Linköping University shows that the country is putting words into
practice.
This enlightened approach to AI policy could well lay the foundations for Sweden’s
high technology society to embrace the benefits of the fourth industrial revolution
far sooner than many other countries in Europe.
What links this potential dynamic pathway to AI maturation to its armed forces
and the security of Sweden is the total defense concept that will ensure a smooth
interflow of ideas and technologies concerning AI between the civil and military
spaces.
Through total defense, the Swedish armed forces will be able to benefit from the
surge in competency in AI that is already coming to fruition as each cohort of
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 37

PhD students is produced. The natural partnership between the cyber realm and
autonomous platforms means that demand for AI expertise in the armed forces is
likely to grow.
An additional benefit for the Swedish armed forces is the close partnership with
one of the globally leading defense companies in the form of Saab that is already
pushing forward with the development and deployment of AI at the sensor level
but has exciting and cutting-edge applications for it in the near future.
The possession of such a national defense industry with a dynamic research envi-
ronment will offset any organizational resistance internally from within the armed
forces to its adoption.
Externally, the Swedish Defense Research Agency has already laid down much
of the initial conceptual work for thinking about AI for defense purposes and it
is likely to provide further intellectual support for the armed forces as to the way
ahead.
In sum, given the weight of investment in AI by Sweden’s government, state
research agencies and private foundations, this technology has solid foundations
for development in the near term that has great benefits for an armed forces in
transition and supported by one of the best defense industries in the world.
The AI future is potentially very bright in Sweden.
38 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

Literature
“AIatSaab:ArtificialEye,”Saab,16September2021, Fata,Daniel“NATO’sEvolvingRoleinDevelopingAI
 Policy,”CSIS,
tember/artificial-eye(accessed15May2023). ing-role-developing-ai-policy,8November2022(last
accessed15May2023).
“Datafusionforcommonprocessingandreporting,”
Saab,undated, Finlan,Alastair,“TheShapeofWarfaretoCome:A
mation-and-intelligence-fusion(accessed15May2023). SwedishPerspective2020-2045,”DefenseandSecurity
Analysis,37:4(November2021),pp.472-491,https://
“SwedishAIResearchGetsMoreMuscle,”Linköping 
University,24January2023, 1995976(lastaccessed15May2023)
item/svensk-ai-forskning-far-mer-muskler(lastaccessed
15May2023). Finlan,Alastair,AnnaDanielsson,andStefan
Lundqvist,“CriticallyEngagingtheConceptofJoint
Andersson,Christer,ToveGustavi,andMaja Operations:Origins,ReflexivityandtheCaseofSweden,”
Karasalo,ArtificialIntelligence–Opportunitiesand DefenceStudies,21:3(June2021),pp.356-374,https://
ChallengesforSweden’sNationalSecurity,Offprintfrom 
StrategicOutlook8,FOIMemo6869(Stockholm:FOI, 1932476(lastaccessed15May2023).
2019),
html?reportNo=FOI%20Memo%206869(lastaccessed Hackett,James(ed.),TheMilitaryBalance2023
15May2023) (London:Routledge,2023).
ArtificialIntelligenceinSwedishBusinessand Kamrani,Farzad,MikaCohen,FrederikBissmarck,
Society:AnalysisofDevelopmentandPotential, andPeterHammar,Beteendemodelleringmedimita-
VinnovaReport,VR2018:09(Stockholm:Vinnova, tionsinlärning.FOI-R-4890-SE(Stockholm:FOI,2019),
2018), 
dc02d541141258d10d60a752677df/vr-18_12.pdf(last portNo=FOI-R--4890--SE(lastaccessed15May2023).
accessed15May2023).
Larsson,Sebastian“Swedishtotaldefenceand
Åselius,Gunnar,“SwedishStrategicCultureafter theemergenceofsocietalsecurity,”inidemandMark
1945,”Cooperation and Conflict,40:1(March2005),pp. Rhinard(ed.),NordicSocietalSecurity:Convergenceand
25-44. Divergence(London:Routledge,2021),pp.45-67
Budgetpropositionen2023,Regeringen.se,8 Luotsinen,LinusJ.,DanielOskarsson,Peter
November2022, Svenmarck,andUlrikaWickenbergBolin,ExplainableAr-
ga-dokument/proposition/2022/11/prop.-2022231(last tificialIntelligence:ExploringXAITechniquesinMilitary
accessed15May2023). DeepLearningApplications.FOI-R-4849-SE(Stockholm:
FOI,2019),
Candlin,Alex,“RoleofAlgorithmicWarfareisa ry.html?reportNo=FOI-R--4849--SE(lastaccessed15May
‘game-changer’ontheBattlefield,”ForcesNet,12Janu- 2023).
ary2023,
cial-intelligence-game-changer-battlefield(accessed15 Malmio,Irja,“Ethicsasanenablerandaconstraint
May2023). –Narrativesontechnologydevelopmentandartificial
intelligenceinmilitaryaffairsthroughthecaseofproject
EttStarkareFörsvarförenUtmanandeFramtid.Slu- maven,”TechnologyinSociety,72(February2023),pp.1-
tredovisningavFörsvarsmaktensPerspektivstudie2022. 10,
FM2022-19979:15(Stockholm:Försvarsmakten,2022). S0160791X22003347(lastaccessed15May2023).
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 39

NationalApproachtoArtificialIntelligence(Stock-
holm:GovernmentOfficesofSweden,2018),https://
wp.oecd.ai/app/uploads/2021/12/Sweden_Nation-
al_Approach_to_Artificial_Intelligence_2018.pdf(last
accessed15May2023).
O’Dwyer,Gerard,“Swedenboostsdefensespend-
ing,NATOgoalinmind,”DefenseNews,22November
2022,
rope/2022/11/22/sweden-boosts-defense-spending-na-
to-goal-in-mind/(accessed15May2023).
Schubert,Johan,ArtificiellIntelligensförMilitärt
beslutsstöd.FOI-R-4552-SE(Stockholm:FOI,2017),

portNo=FOI-R--4552--SE(lastaccessed15May2023).
Schubert,Johan,JoelBrynielsson,MatthiasNilsson,
andPeterSvenmarck,“ArtificialIntelligenceforDecision
SupportinCommandandControlSystems,”Proceedings
ofthe23rdInternationalInternationalCommandand
ControlResearch&TechnologySymposium,Pensacola,
USA,6-7November2018(Washington,DC:IC2I,2018),
paper30,
CRTS_Revised_paper_30.pdf(lastaccessed15May
2023).
Sørensen,Henning,“ConscriptioninScandinavia
DuringtheLastQuarterCentury:Developmentsand
Arguments,”Armed Forces & Society,26:2(Winter2000),
pp.313-334.
Stanley-Lockman,ZoeandEdwardHunterChristie,
“AnArtificialIntelligenceStrategyforNATO,”NATO
Review,25October2021,
view/articles/2021/10/25/an-artificial-intelligence-strat-
egy-for-nato/index.html(accessed15Mary2023).
Wither,JamesKenneth,“BacktotheFuture?Nordic
TotalDefenseConcepts,”DefenceStudies,20:1(2020),
pp.61-81,
080/14702436.2020.1718498(lastaccessed15May
2023).
40 A FERTILE SOIL FOR AI?

Defense AI Observatory Studies
23|14 Alastair Finlan, A Fertile Soil for AI? Defense AI in Sweden
23|13 John Lee, “Overtaking on the Curve?” Defense AI in China
23|12 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, and Joseph Verbovszky, Master and Servant. Defense
AI in Germany
23|11 Katarzyna Zysk, High Hopes Amid Hard Realities. Defense AI in Russia
23|10 Yvonne Hofstetter and Joseph Verbovzsky, How AI Learns the Bundeswehr’s
“Innere Führung.” Value-Based Engineering with IEEE7000™-2021
23|09 Robert C Engen, When the Teeth Eat the Tail: A Review of Canada’s Defence Artificial
Intelligence
23|08 Çağlar Kurç, Enabling Technology of Future Warfare. Defense AI in Turkey
23|07 Lauren A. Kahn, Risky Incrementalism. Defense AI in the United States
22|06 Yvonne Hofstetter, Wie KI Innere Führung lernt. Wertbasierte Technik mit
IEEE7000™-2021
22|05 Andrea Gilli, Mauro Gilli, and Ivan Zaccagnini, Exploring the Benefits of a New Force
Enabler: Defense AI in Italy
22|04 Kenneth Payne, Bright Prospects – Big Challenges. Defense AI in the United
Kingdom
22|03 Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber, Armin Brandstetter, and Gary S. Schaal, Free
Jazz on the Battlefield. How GhostPlay’s AI Approach Enhances Air Defense
22|02 Peter Layton, Evolution not Revolution. Australia’s Defence AI Pathway
21|01 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, Joseph Verbovszky, Beware the Hype. What Military
Conflicts in Ukraine, Syria, Libya, and Nagorno-Karabakh (Don’t) Tell Us About the
Future of War