Policy Brief
HAI Policy & Society

Safeguarding Third-Party
AI Research
Kevin Klyman, Shayne Longpre, Sayash Kapoor, Key Takeaways
Rishi Bommasani, Percy Liang, Peter Henderson
Third-party AI research is
essential to ensure that AI
companies do not grade
their own homework, but
THIRD-PARTY EVALUATION IS A CORNERSTONE OF EFFORTS TO few companies actively
protect or promote such
REDUCE THE SUBSTANTIAL RISKS POSED BY AI SYSTEMS. AI is a
research.
vast field with thousands of highly specialized experts around the
world who can help stress-test the most powerful systems. But few
companies empower these researchers to test their AI systems, for
We found no major
fear of exposing flaws in their products. AI companies often block foundation model
safety research with restrictive terms of service or by suspending developers currently offer
comprehensive protections
researchers who report flaws.
for third-party evaluation.
Instead, their policies often
In our paper, “A Safe Harbor for AI Evaluation and Red Teaming,” we disincentivize it.
assess the policies and practices of seven top developers of generative
AI systems, finding that none offers comprehensive protections for
A safe harbor for good-faith
third-party AI research. Unlike with cybersecurity, generative AI is a
research should be a top
new field without well-established norms regarding flaw disclosure, priority for policymakers. It
safety standards, or mechanisms for conducting third-party research. enables good-faith research
and increases the scale,
We propose that developers adopt safe harbors to enable good-faith,
diversity, and independence
adversarial testing of AI systems. of evaluations.

Policy Brief
Safeguarding
Third-Party AI Research
Introduction
We assess the policies
Generative AI systems pose a wide range of potential
and practices of seven top
risks, from enabling the creation of nonconsensual
developers of generative AI
intimate imagery to facilitating the development of
malware. Evaluating generative AI systems is crucial
systems, finding that none offers
to understanding the technology, ensuring public
comprehensive protections for
accountability, and reducing these risks.
third-party AI research.
In , many prominent AI companies signed
voluntary commitments at the White House, pledging
to “incent third-party discovery and reporting of
issues and vulnerabilities.” More than a year later,
implementation of this commitment has been uneven.
While some companies do reward researchers Companies have continued to be opaque about key
for finding security flaws in their AI systems, few aspects of their most powerful AI systems, such as
companies strongly encourage research on safety or the data used to build their models. Developers of
provide concrete protections for good-faith research generative AI models tout the safety of their systems
practices. Instead, leading generative AI companies’ based on internal red teaming, but there is no way
terms of service legally prohibit third-party safety for the government or independent researchers to
and trustworthiness research, in effect threatening validate these results, as companies do not release
anyone who conducts such research with bans from reproducible evaluations.
their platforms or even legal action. For example,
companies’ policies do not allow researchers to Generative AI companies also impose barriers on their
jailbreak AI systems like ChatGPT, Claude, or Gemini platforms that limit good-faith research. Similar issues
to assess potential threats to U.S. national security. plague social media: Companies have taken steps to
prevent researchers and journalists from conducting
In , we penned an open letter signed investigations on their platforms that, together with
by over 350 leading AI researchers and advocates federal legislation, have had a chilling effect on such
calling for a safe harbor for third-party AI evaluation. research and worsened the spread of harmful content
The researchers noted that while security research on online. But conducting research on generative AI
traditional software is protected by voluntary company systems comes with additional challenges, as the
protections (safe harbors), established vulnerability content on generative AI platforms is not publicly
disclosure norms, and legal safeguards from the available. Users need accounts to access AI-generated
Department of Justice, AI safety and trustworthiness content, which can be restricted by the company that
research lacks comparable protections. owns the platform. Many AI companies also block

Policy Brief
Safeguarding
Third-Party AI Research
certain user requests and limit the functionality of propose alternative practices and policies to enable
their models to prevent researchers from unearthing broader community participation in AI evaluation.
issues related to safety or trustworthiness. The stakes
are also higher for AI, which has the potential not only
Research Outcomes
to turbocharge misinformation but also to provide
U.S. adversaries like China and Russia with material
strategic advantages. At the time of our study, we found that AI companies’
policies and practices regarding independent evaluation
To assess the state of independent evaluation for were inconsistent, opaque, and burdensome, as shown
generative AI, our team of machine learning, law, in Figure 1. Gaps in companies’ practices force well-
and policy experts conducted a thorough review of intentioned researchers to either wait for approval
seven major AI companies’ policies, access provisions, from unresponsive researcher access programs or
and related enforcement processes. We detail our risk violating company policy and losing access to
experiences with evaluation of AI systems and potential their accounts in the course of conducting good-
barriers other third-party evaluators may face, and faith research.
Figure 1: What access protections do AI companies provide for independent safety research?
Source: Longpre et al., A Safe Harbor for AI Evaluation and Red Teaming
Company Practices Claude 2 Command Gemini Inflection-1 Llama 2 Midjourney v6 GPT-4
Model Access How can researchers access the company’s foundation model?
Public API
Deep Access
Dedicated Researcher Access
Independent Access Review
Bug Bounty
Safe Harbor What types of research do companies legally protect, and are those protections determined at their sole discretion?
Security
AI Safety & Flaws
Not Sole Discretion
Policy Enforcement Transparency & Fairness Are the policies used to enforce the terms of use transparent and fair, providing violation justifications and appeals?
Enforcement Policy
Enforcement Justifications
Enforcement Violation Appeals

Policy Brief
Safeguarding
Third-Party AI Research
do not include broader AI safety and trustworthiness
research, such as whether an AI system may facilitate
AI companies’ policies and
the development of cyber weapons.
practices regarding independent
Cohere, OpenAI, and Anthropic are exceptions. They
evaluation were inconsistent,
offer some protections beyond security research,
opaque, and burdensome. though some ambiguity remains as to the scope of
protected activities. Cohere, for example, allows
“intentional stress testing of the API and adversarial
attacks” provided appropriate vulnerability disclosure
(without explicit legal promises). OpenAI expanded
its safe harbor to include “model issues research” and
in some limited cases “academic research related
to model safety” in response to an early draft of
While some companies provide access to their
our paper. Anthropic created a “model safety bug
systems through public Application Programming
bounty” program after the release of our paper that
Interfaces, allow for deeper access to their systems
rewards researchers for “novel, universal jailbreak
through fine-tuning or open-weight releases, and
attacks that could expose vulnerabilities in critical,
maintain dedicated researcher access programs,
high risk domains such as CBRN (chemical, biological,
others take none of these steps. Moreover, companies
radiological, and nuclear) and cybersecurity.”
generally select the researchers who participate in
their researcher access programs, increasing the
likelihood of favoritism and imbalanced representation
in such programs.
Existing protections apply almost exclusively to
security research. Developers of AI systems have
Restrictions on researchers’
engaged to differing degrees with external red teamers
and evaluators, though they focus on cybersecurity- accounts can have a chilling
related flaws. For example, OpenAI, Google, and Meta
effect by making researchers
have bug bounties (monetary rewards for individuals
who report security vulnerabilities) as well as legal reluctant to investigate certain
protections for security research. Still, companies like
risks or systems for fear
Meta “reserve final and sole discretion for whether
you are acting in good faith and in accordance with of blowback.
this Policy,” which could deter good-faith research.
These legal protections extend only to traditional
security issues like unauthorized account access and

Policy Brief
Safeguarding
Third-Party AI Research
Our experiences as researchers conducting AI
evaluation surfaced common themes regarding the
If AI companies do not
barriers that company practices pose to independent
evaluation. For instance, restrictions on researchers’ voluntarily adopt such safe
accounts can have a chilling effect by making
harbors, policymakers should
researchers reluctant to investigate certain risks
or systems for fear of blowback. Similarly, a lack mandate them.
of clarity regarding when and how independent
researchers should disclose flaws in companies’ AI
systems may deter researchers from disclosing their
findings, preventing safety improvements that would
benefit all users of a system.
allow independent researchers to stress-test important
Policy Discussion
AI systems without fear of legal reprisal.
Ensuring a safe harbor for good-faith AI safety and A legal safe harbor could provide assurances that AI
trustworthiness research should be a top priority companies will not sue researchers if their actions
for policymakers. Such protections would unlock were taken for research purposes. In the U.S. legal
good-faith research, increasing the scale, diversity, regime, this would impact companies’ use of the
and independence of evaluations. It is an essential Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA) and Section
precondition for improving our understanding of 1201 of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA)
the wide-ranging risks of AI, increasing public to block independent research. These risks are not
accountability, and ensuring safe and trustworthy AI. theoretical; security researchers have been targeted
under the CFAA, and DMCA Section 1201 hampered
We suggest that AI companies adopt safe harbors to security research to the extent that researchers
improve participation, access, and incentives for public requested and won an exemption from the law for
interest research into AI safety. If AI companies do this purpose. In the context of generative AI, OpenAI
not voluntarily adopt such safe harbors, policymakers has attempted to dismiss a lawsuit brought by the
should mandate them. For example, in the European New York Times by alleging that the media company’s
Union, policymakers have already mandated protections research regarding ChatGPT when preparing the
for independent research on social media platforms. lawsuit constituted hacking.
First, companies can provide a legal safe harbor Second, AI companies can provide a technical
that protects good-faith evaluation provided it is safe harbor by protecting vetted researchers from
conducted in accordance with well-established restrictions on their accounts. Such protections
security vulnerability disclosure practices. This would would prevent account suspensions or other technical

Policy Brief
Safeguarding
Third-Party AI Research
enforcement actions such as rate limiting that also conduct legal or institutional reviews that might
impede independent safety evaluations. Each of these otherwise be deterred by the terms of service without
safe harbors should be scoped to include research a carveout. A technical safe harbor would limit
activities that uncover any flaw in a general-purpose practical barriers to safety research from companies’
AI system, including all types of responses from a enforcement of their terms of service by clarifying that
system that are prohibited by a company’s terms researchers will not be penalized.
of service or acceptable use policy that would not
otherwise violate the law. These protections apply only to researchers who abide
by companies’ vulnerability disclosure policies, to
We propose that companies offer some path to the extent researchers can subsequently justify their
eliminate these technical barriers for good-faith actions in court. Research that is already illegal or does
research, even when it can unearth flaws with not take reasonable steps for responsible disclosure
companies’ systems. This would allow for a wider would not succeed in claiming those protections in an
variety of researchers to access AI systems and ex-post investigation.
guarantee that safety research will not be foreclosed
when adhering to companies’ disclosure policies. The need for independent evaluation of powerful
One way to do this is to scale up researcher access AI systems has garnered significant support from
programs and provide impartial review of applications academics, journalists, and civil society. Safe harbors
for these programs. One potential challenge with would improve safety, security, and trustworthiness in
implementing a technical safe harbor is distinguishing the AI ecosystem, and enable community participation
between legitimate research and malicious actors who in urgent efforts to tackle the risks of AI.
ignore company policies with the intent to cause harm.
An exemption to strict enforcement of companies’
policies may need to be reviewed in advance, or at
least when an unfair account suspension occurs. With
help from credible third-party reviewers, companies
can scale this review process to meet the needs of the
wider research community.
As others have argued, a legal and technical safe
harbor would not inhibit existing enforcement against
malicious misuse, as protections are contingent
on abiding by the law and stringent vulnerability
disclosure policies, determined ex post. A legal safe
harbor would safeguard certain research from some
amount of legal liability, mitigating the deterrent of
strict terms of service. Some research organizations

Reference: The original article is accessible Kevin Klyman is an MA candidate in international
at Shayne Longpre, Sayash Kapoor, Kevin policy at Stanford University and a graduate fellow
Klyman et al. 2024. Position: a safe harbor for AI at the Stanford Center for Research on Foundation
evaluation and red teaming. In Proceedings of Models (CRFM), part of the Stanford Institute
the 41st International Conference on Machine for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI).
Learning (ICML’24), Vol. 235. JMLR.org, His work on this brief was completed prior to
Article 1327, 32691–32710. becoming a government employee.
doi/10.5555/3692070.3693397.
Shayne Longpre is a PhD candidate at
MIT’s Media Lab and the lead of the Data
Provenance Initiative.
Stanford University’s Institute for Human-
Sayash Kapoor is a senior fellow at Mozilla,
Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI) applies
a Laurance S. Rockefeller Graduate Prize
rigorous analysis and research to pressing policy
Fellow in the University Center for Human
questions on artificial intelligence. A pillar of HAI
Values, and a PhD candidate in computer
is to inform policymakers, industry leaders, and
science at Princeton University’s Center for
civil society by disseminating scholarship to a
Information Technology Policy.
wide audience. HAI is a nonpartisan research
institute, representing a range of voices.
The views expressed in this policy brief reflect Rishi Bommasani is a PhD candidate in
the views of the authors. For further information, computer science at Stanford University
please contact HAI-Policy@stanford.edu. and the society lead at Stanford CRFM.
Percy Liang is an associate professor of
computer science and statistics at Stanford
University and the director of Stanford CRFM.
Peter Henderson is an assistant professor
of computer science and of public and
international affairs at Princeton University.
Stanford HAI: 353 Jane Stanford Way, Stanford CA 94305-5008
T 650.725.4537 F 650.123.4567 E HAI-Policy@stanford.edu hai.stanford.edu