Policy brief

The impact of conflict and
displacement on Sudanese
refugee women in eastern
Chad
Marie Riquier and Prisca Nandoumabe
Introduction
Darfur conflict. Chad, already home to an estimated
400,000 Sudanese refugees when the current
The ongoing armed conflict in Sudan between Sudan conflict began in , is now shel-
the Rapid Support Forces (RSF) and the Sudanese tering more recently displaced people, some of
Armed Forces (SAF) has resulted in a large displace- them in the camps initially set up during the Darfur
ment crisis, affecting over 12.6 million people.1 While conflict.4 This massive influx of refugees has placed
the majority – around 8.5 million – remain internally significant strain on the country’s limited resources
displaced within Sudan, over three million have and infrastructure, and, with funding falling behind,
sought refuge in neighbouring countries, primarily humanitarian programmes are struggling to address
Chad, Egypt, and South Sudan.2 As of 26 , mounting, urgent needs.5
Chad is hosting 844,389 Sudanese refugees3 – a
number that rises daily. Women and children, who make up 89 percent of
new arrivals in Chad, endure dire living conditions
As the violence continues to escalate, refugees in the camps and face critical challenges in meeting
face the grim prospect of prolonged displacement. their basic needs.6 The circumstances surrounding
This new wave of displacement compounds a displacement also involve specific challenges for
longstanding refugee crisis in Chad, which has humanitarian organisations, including providing
hosted Sudanese refugees since the 2003-2004 women and children with access to maternal and
1 International Crisis Group, ‘Sudan: A Year of War’, 11 ; Hudson, C., Strucke, M., ‘Sudan’s Humanitarian Crisis: What Was Old Is
New Again’, Center for Strategic and International Studies, December 17, 2024; UNHCR, Sudan situation, last updated 24 .
2 UNHCR CHAD| ‘Influx of Refugees from Sudan’, last updated 6 .
3 UNHCR, ‘Sudan situation’, last updated 26 .
4 UNHCR, ‘Sudan Regional Refugee Response 2024 (Mid-Year update)’, ; Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) Luxembourg, ‘Sudan
war survivors in refugee camps in Chad’, News, .
5 Press release, ‘Humanitarian needs in Sudan grow as funding gap widens, IFRC warns’, 10 Oct. 2023. IRC, ‘IRC warns unfettered
humanitarian access and scale-up of funding needed to avert catastrophic hunger crisis in Sudan’, Press Release, 25 .
6 UNHCR, ‘Emergency situation in Chad: Update on arrivals from Sudan’, 14 .

child healthcare and education, psychosocial threats, risks, and vulnerabilities facing women and
support, safeguarding them against sexual and girls during their flight and in the refugee camps. A
gender-based violence, and preventing child labour. fourth part of the survey, focused on social cohesion
Given the continuous influx of displaced people and gender norms, was specifically addressed to
arriving in the camps, the crisis is intensifying Chadian women residing in the camps.
each day. The need for immediate, life-saving, and
gender-responsive support is critical. Using quota sampling as a methodology to select
the respondents, the survey was administered to
This policy brief draws on research conducted in three distinct demographic groups: newly arrived
eastern Chad in April and . This research Sudanese refugees and Chadian returnees dis-
examines the impact of armed conflict and dis- placed by the ongoing conflict in Sudan; long-term
placement on women and girls in Chad, as well Sudanese refugees displaced by the Darfur armed
as the extent to which the humanitarian response conflict in 2003–2004; and host community mem-
in eastern Chad meets the needs and expecta- bers in Chad. In total, the survey was administered
tions of women and their communities. It focuses to 264 women aged 18 or older.
on the interplay between the impacts of armed
conflict, displacement, and gender norms. While To complement the findings of the perception sur-
the vulnerabilities of displaced women and girls vey, 41 semi-structured interviews were conducted
are significant, women in the camps also exercise with Sudanese refugees, Chadian returnees, Chad-
agency – and the role they can play as active agents ian residents, humanitarian workers and both local
of positive change is considerable in the context
of displacement. In examining these aspects, this
research seeks to encourage humanitarian and
development actors to adopt a systematic and
evidence-based approach when designing and
implementing responses that aim to address the
needs and concerns of women and girls in conflict
settings – in eastern Chad and beyond, as well as in
other contexts affected by transnational conflict and
displacement.
Methodology
The research employed a mixed-methods approach
to data collection that included a perception survey,
qualitative key informant interviews, and focus
group discussions. SIPRI (Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute) partnered with BUCO-
FORE, a local action research centre based in
N’Djamena, Chad, with two of its female researchers
and two female research assistants conducting the
fieldwork.7 Data were collected in the camps of
Farchana and Breidjing in Ouaddai, Djabal in Sila,
and Iridimi in Wadi Fira. These three regions host
the largest refugee populations in Chad.8
The perception survey focused on three key
issues: (i) the dynamics of the Sudan conflict; (ii) Figure 1. Data collection sites in eastern Chad,
humanitarian responses to Chadian and Sudanese 2024.
communities affected by the conflict; and (iii) the
7 BUCOFORE is a local action research centre based in N’Djamena, Chad, and operating in Central and West Africa. The research centre
specialises in issues of security and governance in development and humanitarian contexts. For more information: 
org/fr.
8 Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) Luxembourg, ‘Sudan war survivors in refugee camps in Chad’, News, .

and traditional Chadian authorities. While the survey vulnerable, underscoring the need to address the
was strictly administered to women, interviews traumas by ensuring protective measures, psycho-
about the humanitarian and state responses were social support, and provision of adequate services
mainly conducted with men, as they were more to newly arrived refugees.
frequently engaged in these roles. Four focus group
discussions were also conducted with female Suda- 2. Food, water, and hygiene needs are paramount
nese refugees. While some of the insights collected
may be relevant to various humanitarian contexts, The limited availability of basic services exacerbates
they are specifically drawn from the experiences of the vulnerabilities of women and girls, increasing the
these groups within the four selected research sites. likelihood that they will be exposed to physical vio-
lence, sexual exploitation, and harassment. Women
in the camps have identified food and nutrition, as
Main findings
well as water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH), as
their most pressing needs, with 85 percent of survey
1. Exposure to violence continues in camps respondents reporting a lack of these essentials.
After fleeing a war zone, women continue to face a The provision of food and water is a universal chal-
range of threats and risks along the perilous route to lenge in many humanitarian crises. However, limited
eastern Chad and upon arrival in the refugee camps. resources render women particularly vulnerable
A quarter of the survey’s respondents reported to the risks of violence due to normative gender
experiencing sexual violence or harassment back roles and responsibilities. Fifty percent cite the lack
in Sudan, where the ongoing conflict is now often of food as a key area for improvement. Women
referred to as a ‘war on women’.9 Upon fleeing their in Sudan and Chad are traditionally tasked with
homes and their country, their flight to safety is rou- collecting water and firewood, which exposes them
tinely marked by ethnic discrimination and a wide to safety risks as they venture out in isolated areas,
range of violent attacks, including physical assaults alone and often fatigued. Many women carrying
and sexual gender-based violence. These are a out these tasks report instances of psychological
continuation of the threats women faced in Sudan, and physical violence: 59 percent when collecting
though at varying intensities. firewood and 25 percent while fetching water. Given
the high risk of rape and kidnapping in and around
Although the refugee camps offer residents a the refugee camps, mothers report living in constant
relative sense of safety, with 81 percent of women fear for the safety of their daughters and thereby
respondents reporting a decreased sense of fear, prevent them from moving outside of the camps.
women continue to face multiple threats and risks
within the camps themselves. Dire living conditions Women report that humanitarian aid often fails to
(namely, insufficient lack of food and water), in addi- address their specific needs, overlooking the diver-
tion to a lack of infrastructure and basic services, sity of their experiences and cross-cutting factors,
expose women to similar risks they faced in Sudan. such as their gender, age, and previous socio-eco-
The survey’s findings indicate that 34 percent of nomic status, and assuming that most share the
women residing in the camps have been exposed to same needs. For many women, food and WASH are
psychological violence and 33 percent to physical critical, but some also prioritise economic opportu-
violence, while 22 percent report harassment. nities and education. While balancing these human-
itarian needs within an emergency context may be
Ethnic discrimination remains a persistent threat. challenging, improving communication with refugee
The intersecting identities of Sudanese refugee women to better understand the obstacles they face
women – such as their gender, age, ethnicity, and is likely to provide humanitarian and development
refugee status – compound their vulnerability, plac- actors with key insights to ensure assistance that is
ing them at greater risk of violence, exploitation, and both efficient and life-saving. Augmenting the lines
marginalisation. The findings highlight the trauma of communication can involve setting up dedicated
and widespread psychological and physical abuse spaces and structures, and ensuring that women are
Sudanese women and girls endure during displace- aware of and able to use existing channels to reach
ment. The violence experienced by refugees trying out to humanitarian workers.
to reach the camps in Chad only makes them more
9 ACAPS, ‘Sudan: Impact of the war on women and girls’, 23 Jan. 2024.; CARE International, ‘Because they are women: How the Sudan
conflict has created a war on women and girls’, 11 Apr. 2024.

protection and prevention of SGBV); and 44 percent
had had access to education.
3. Gender-sensitive refugee interventions are
critical to move from crisis to protection Limited access to education for girls and women fur-
ther exacerbates their vulnerability this situation. By
When a humanitarian response fails to address the focusing on protection, and thus failing to implement
specific needs of women, it overlooks the conse- a gender-responsive approach that acknowledges
quences of inadequate assistance. In the four camps the agency of women, humanitarian assistance
in eastern Chad where the research was conducted, may indirectly and unintentionally reinforce power
the infrastructure in place is neither sufficient nor imbalances and unequal gender norms. Access
gender-responsive, leaving women disproportion- to education was a recurrent theme among those
ately affected in some sectors. Although reliable interviewed, often brought up by young girls who
access to resources – particularly food and WASH had been forced to abandon their studies because
– is critical for all displaced persons, it is especially of the war, fearful that they would not find opportu-
essential for women’s health during menstruation, nities in Chad, even outside of the camps. Education
pregnancy, and childbirth. Without a gender-sensi- is seen as a priority among respondents, but access
tive response, women are not only lacking essential remains very limited due to the lack of schools in the
services, but also exposed to additional risks. camps. The lack of or limited access to education for
girls who might be at risk of being excluded due to
This reality underlines the complex challenges economic pressures or security concerns can entail
facing humanitarian responses, as different needs long-term societal implications, such as holding girls
must often be addressed at the same time. Needs back from any kind of social mobility or advance-
are not only linked to gender, but are also tied to ment. Access to education also presents a major
cross-cutting factors such as age, socio-economic obstacle for Chadian returnees. Only 27 percent
status, and economic opportunities. The life and of this group said they had access to education, in
experiences of each woman prior to being displaced sharp contrast to 50 percent of Sudanese refugees.
partly explain how women prioritise their needs in This gap reveals the systemic barriers Chadian
situations of displacement. returnees face in rebuilding their lives, particularly
in terms of providing their children and young adults
The scarcity of resources and limited economic with the education they need to regain a sense of
opportunities result in power imbalances and normalcy and to re-assimilate into a country they
economic insecurity, leaving women exposed to many left years ago.
abuse by those in control of resources, from other
displaced persons and community members, to Access to medical assistance is also inadequate;
aid workers and predominantly men. Because the respondents reported people dying due to lack of
lack of economic opportunities in the camps has care, including children suffering from malnutrition.
immediate and far-reaching effects, women rank Other types of assistance, such as psychosocial
employment as their second most pressing need support, are also lacking in the camps. Nearly 70
after food. While finding a job within the camps is a percent of the surveyed women had not received
challenge for all displaced persons, qualified Suda- psychological support since arriving in Chad, and
nese women refugees who hold vital roles, such as more than half – 54 percent – had not received
nurses and teachers, are not allowed to practice in menstrual hygiene products.
the camps when it could not only restore dignity but
also meet basic needs. 4. Humanitarain response hindered by chronic
underfunding
Only 32 percent of the surveyed women had
received psychological support since arriving in The capacity of the humanitarian sector to address
Chad, and less than half had received menstrual urgent needs related to food security and access
hygiene products (46 percent). In addition, only 16 to healthcare, WASH, and shelter in eastern Chad
percent of women had received assistance in the is severely constrained by limited funding, over-
form of cash transfers; 16 percent had access to crowded camps, and the rapid influx of displaced
economic opportunities; 29 percent had received people since . The primary challenge,
legal assistance or access to justice; 35 percent though, is that available funding cannot keep up
had received protection services (such as child with the rapid escalation of needs, creating gaps in

assistance and failing to protect refugee women in 6. Perspectives on aid equity and potential for
particular.10 tensions
84 percent of the long-term women refugees who While most respondents believe aid is delivered in
participated in the survey said they were given an equitable and fair manner, this research shows
shelter when they arrived in Chad, compared to there are still diverging perceptions of the equity
only 56 percent of recently displaced respond- of aid provision between long-term refugees and
ents. While it is difficult to compare the level of refugees who arrived recently. Although 74 per-
assistance provided to displaced persons over cent of Sudanese women refugees report having
time given factors such as the context in Chad, the received assistance on their arrival in the Chadian
humanitarian landscape, the varying levels and camps, 80 percent of long-term refugees express
scope of needs, and the ongoing influx of refugees concerns over continued assistance, stating clearly
and returnees, the funding gap clearly represents that the amount of assistance is no longer enough
the primary cause of insufficient assistance to the to cover their basic needs. While 61 percent of the
newly arrived. In addition, 88 percent of long-term survey respondents – both Sudanese refugees and
women refugees said they had received medical Chadian returnees – believed that humanitarian aid
assistance, compared to 57 percent of the respond- is distributed in a fair and equitable way, 39 percent
ents who had been recently displaced. Similarly, 55 do not share this perception. Among the respond-
percent of long-term refugees said they received ents who believed aid was not equally distributed,
psychological support on arrival, in sharp contrast to 37 percent believed that not everyone in the camps
the mere 9 percent of those displaced by the most had access to the same basic social services, 28
recent conflict; 91 percent said they had received percent believed that certain women received more
hygiene products, compared to only 36 percent of assistance than others, and 24 percent believed
the recently displaced respondents; and 75 percent that newly arrived refugees were receiving more
said they had received menstrual kits, compared to assistance than others. The perception of discrimi-
just 16 percent of the respondents who had recently nation is more important among recently displaced
arrived in the camps. refugees, particularly with regard to the availability
of and access to basic services.
5. Camps are overcrowded, with inadequate
infrastructure 7. Humanitarian presence in camps is limited
The overcrowded camp infrastructure in eastern The ability of humanitarian actors to respond to ref-
Chad, originally established to accommodate ugees’ needs is linked to funding, which is currently
refugees in 2004, exacerbates refugee women’s low. While the majority of the women surveyed
vulnerabilities.11 Limited capacity, combined with (73 percent) said they had not encountered any
the concentration of refugees and returnees in problems while dealing with aid workers, 20 percent
the region, has strained the ability of humanitarian reported not having any interactions with them and
actors, like the World Food Programme, to provide seven percent said they had experienced prob-
sufficient assistance to all those in need.12 Although lems. However, to gain a better understanding of
most refugees and returnees report having received these interactions, closer inspection of the findings
aid upon arrival, the lack of sustained support indicates that 69 percent of respondents – both
means the initial aid is only a temporary relief and Sudanese refugees and Chadian returnees – do
as their hardships persist, vicious cycles emerge in not know how to contact international humanitarian
which the risks related to the lack of food and water organisations. A similar proportion of respondents
– namely, bodily harm and sexual assault – are did not know how to contact Chadian humanitarian
exacerbated by the lack of medical care. organisations. Across camps in eastern Chad, many
interviewees reported not seeing humanitarian
actors at all. Shifting donor priorities and simultane-
ous humanitarian crises and armed conflicts have
10 UNOCHA Financial Tracking Services. ‘Chad 2004, coordinated plan snapshot for 2004’; UNOCHA Financial Tracking Services, Tchad
Plan de Réponse Humanitaire 2023.; UNOCHA Financial Tracking Services, ‘Tchad Plan de Réponse Humanitaire 2023’, Trends in
coordinated plan requirements.
11 Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) Luxembourg, ‘Sudan war survivors in refugee camps in Chad’, News, .
12 World Food Programme, ‘WFP races to preposition food in eastern Chad as funding crunch and looming rains threaten aid to Sudanese
refugees’, 12 Mar. 2024.

turned the armed conflict in Sudan into a ‘forgotten refugees (52 percent) and recently displaced
war’. refugees (40 percent) report ‘good relations’ with
Chadian locals, Sudanese refugees overall report
8. Gender roles upended by displacement access to resources (48 percent) and access to
land (23 percent) as the main potential triggers for
In the border regions of eastern Chad, armed tensions with local communities. This interconnect-
conflict and displacement impact the everyday lives edness of challenges highlights the delicate balance
of women and girls, transforming gender roles in necessary to maintain peaceful relations and foster
various ways. In many cases, women (particularly social cohesion – one that entails a comprehensive
those with children) who embarked on the flight approach addressing the urgent humanitarian needs
to eastern Chad without male relatives now face of displaced communities and ensuring the long-
the challenge of providing for their families, with term sustainability and resilience of both refugee
32 percent of women now heads of their families. and host populations.
Many take on new responsibilities and roles, such
as that of breadwinner and protector, in addition to
Policy implications and
their traditional tasks as caregivers. Women who
travelled with their husbands or male relatives often recommendations
find themselves in the camps alone, with children,
as men tend to migrate for work, sometimes for
extended periods. Strengthen gender responsiveness in human-
itarian programming. We have highlighted that
For most Sudanese refugee women, regardless the most pressing needs of displaced persons
of their household composition in the camp, the in eastern Chad are largely shared by both men
experience of displacement is marked by a drastic and women. However, some needs are specific
lifestyle adjustment. Most of them (64 percent) came to women, with most reporting that the particu-
from urban areas, where they had access to urban lar needs they have are not being adequately
infrastructure and services, including safe drinking addressed. In the context of displacement, it is
water, electricity and food. The armed conflict in essential to address the distinct gendered needs of
Sudan left them with no choice but to migrate and refugees, as well as their gender-specific vulnera-
endure dire conditions, with many feeling a sense bilities, including sexual and gender-based violence
of powerlessness due to the fact that they – as (SGBV), limited access to reproductive health ser-
mothers and caregivers – cannot provide for their vices and social pressure around traditional gender
children or relatives. Constrained mobility and lim- roles. The insights from our respondents about
ited privacy within the camps also represent major specific gendered challenges facing women and
shifts in women’s lives. Restricted by various factors girls in the camps in relation to water, healthcare,
like insecurity, social norms, and logistical barriers, and hygiene demonstrate that the infrastructure in
the reduced mobility these women now face not place is not currently gender-responsive. However,
only hinders their freedom of movement, but also beyond acknowledging gender disparities, inter-
their capacity to access economic opportunities and secting identities – such as age, disability, ethnicity,
improve their living conditions. social role, power dynamics, religion, etc. – should
also be considered. Understanding how identities
9. Rising refugee-host community tensions likely intersect would help humanitarian actors design
amid resource scarcity more comprehensive protection programmes.
Socio-economic and ethnic status shape the needs
The protracted displacement crisis poses significant of the women, just as they influence how these
challenges for the host population in eastern Chad, women approach and benefit from humanitarian
where infrastructure is limited and multidimensional assistance.
poverty high.13 With one of the largest refugee
populations per capita in Africa, service provision Address sexual and gender-based violence. The
and the availability of resources for host commu- significant incidence of sexual violence in the camps
nities in eastern Chad are under pressure. Under underscores the need for urgent protective meas-
these circumstances, the arrival of large numbers of ures and recovery services that ensure both immedi-
displaced people, has the potential to create or fuel ate safety for women and girls, as well as long-term
refugee–host tensions. Although most long-term rehabilitation for victims. Prevention must be built on
13 World Bank, Chad, Special Chapter. ‘Hosting Refugees in an Inclusive Manner, Economic Update ’. 2024.

early intervention – meaning when the camps are act decisively to support the millions of displaced
being set up – and can entail the creation of safe people at risk of starvation. Funding shortages
spaces and separate hygiene areas in the camps, also stand as a major obstacle impeding the work
as well as sufficient lighting at night. Such measures of humanitarian organisations: implementing a
would also help decrease certain risks associated gender-responsive approach requires resources,
with women’s movements – for example, leaving time, and trained staff. The work of national and
the camp to collect wood, which is considered an international humanitarian organisations in Chad
activity that involves a high risk of sexual violence. is appreciated, but the lack of resources leads to
Services should include psychosocial support, inconsistent programmes and unmet needs, leaving
medical care, legal assistance, and safe shelter. displaced children without schooling and vulnerable
Accounts of rape-related pregnancies highlight the people without care. The budget cuts in the United
lack of care, the risks to women’s health, and the States – and, to a lesser extent, the reduction of
social consequences for the children. The presence development aid by European countries, combined
and involvement of female humanitarian staff is with the reorientation of their priorities – are contrib-
also critical. Prevention needs to target men and uting to additional difficulties and condemning the
boys – not only as potential perpetrators, but also as most vulnerable to the worst of fates.
potential victims – to raise awareness of behaviours
and social norms that perpetuate violence, sexual
stereotypes, and power dynamics. To achieve this
in a conflict-sensitive manner, humanitarian organi-
sations must build proper infrastructure and ensure
their staff are properly trained according to prede-
termined requirements.
Prioritise work opportunities for displaced women.
In displacement contexts, women have limited
access to economic resources and income-generat-
ing opportunities. The lack of economic opportuni-
ties entrenches the vulnerability of women refugees,
leaving them exposed to abuse and exploitation.
Livelihood programmes implemented by NGOs can
contribute to supporting the everyday needs of
these women, while protecting them from exploita-
tion and discrimination so they can become more
self-sufficient. Beyond economic opportunities,
refugee women need income-generating opportu-
nities aligned with their educational backgrounds
and professional training. Women could effectively
contribute to the provision of services within the
camp, yet many who used to be nurses or teachers,
for example, find themselves working on the land.
Aligning income-generating opportunities with
women’s existing skills and experience should be
a basic principle in humanitarian responses – one
that enables these women to not only continue
their vocational activities, advance their skills, and
practice their professions and crafts, but also to fulfil
needs in the camps.
Fund the humanitarian response to match the
scale of the crisis. The lack of humanitarian funding
puts thousands of lives at risk, and the seriousness
of the Sudanese crisis warrants a coordinated and
international humanitarian response. The high
number of refugees in eastern Chad puts pressure
on neighbouring states at the security, economic
and social levels. The international community must

About the author About XCEPT
Prisca Nandoumabe is Coordinator of the Chadian The Cross-Border Conflict Evidence, Policy and
research centre, BUCOFORE. She has over eight Trends (XCEPT) research programme brings together
years’ experience in action research and scientific world-leading experts and local researchers to
research, mainly in areas of conflict and high vulnera- examine conflict-affected borderlands, how conflicts
bility, and has carried out some thirty studies. connect across borders, and the drivers of violent
and peaceful behaviour. Funded by UK International
Marie Riquier is a Research Assistant in the SIPRI Development, XCEPT offers actionable research to
Sahel and West Africa Programme, focusing on inform policies and programmes that support peace.
peace and conflict dynamics a well as humanitarian The views expressed in this material do not neces-
assistance in the region. sarily reflect the UK government’s official policies.

About SIPRI
Contact
The Stockholm International Peace Research Insti-
tute (SIPRI) is an independent international institute Contact for XCEPT:
dedicated to research into conflict, armaments, info@xcept-research.org.
arms control, and disarmament. Established in 1966,
SIPRI provides data, analysis and recommendations,
based on open sources, to policymakers, research-
ers, media and the interested public. SIPRI’s work
in Africa spans several regions and tackles many
cross-cutting themes—including security, govern-
ance, conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peace-
building.
About BUCOFORE
BUCOFORE (Bureau de Conseils, de Formations, de
Recherches et d’Études) is a leading research centre
in Chad, recognised for its multidisciplinary expertise
on issues of development, governance, peace, and
resilience. With more than ten years of experience,
BUCOFORE uses rigorous and participatory meth-
odologies to produce knowledge that is useful for
public decision-making and social change. Its work,
carried out in close collaboration with local commu-
nities, national institutions, and international partners,
has helped to inform public policy in the most fragile
areas of the country and the Lake Chad basin.
Partnership | Progress | Prosperity