RFI Response: Section 232 National Security Investigation of Imports of Robotics and
Industrial Machinery
Federal Register Document Citation: Docket No. 250924-0161
Reference Number: XRIN 0694-XC138
Agency Name: Bureau of Industry and Security, Office of Strategic Industries and Economic
Security, U.S. Department of Commerce.
Organization: Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET), Georgetown University
Primary POCs: Igor Mikolic-Torreira, Danny Hague
The Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET) at Georgetown University offers the
following comments in response to the Bureau of Industry and Security, Office of Strategic
Industries and Economic Security, U.S. Department of Commerce’s request for comments on
Section 232 National Security Investigation of Imports of Robotics and Industrial
Machinery. A policy research organization within Georgetown University’s Walsh School of
Foreign Service, CSET provides decision-makers with data-driven analysis on the security
implications of emerging technologies, focusing on artificial intelligence, advanced computing,
and biotechnology. We appreciate the opportunity to offer these comments.
This document is approved for public dissemination. The document contains no business-
proprietary or confidential information. Document contents may be reused by the government in
developing the Section 232 National Security Investigation of Imports of Robotics and Industrial
Machinery and associated documents without attribution.
Overview
Georgetown University’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET) presents the
following responses to the BIS RFC regarding the Section 232 Investigation on Imports of
Robotics and Industrial Machinery. These facts and observations are drawn from CSET’s wide
body of research and a forthcoming article examining AI-Robotics convergence and the underlying
supply chain supporting robotics. CSET notes that, while the investigation also requests
information about industrial machinery (to include CNC machines, metalworking equipment,
EDM machinery, and laser and water-cutting machinery), its research has focused more on the
robotics supply chain and as a result the comments below are limited to robotics topics and respond
to specific information elicitations where CSET research is responsive.
(i) The current, projected, and optimal demand for robotics and industrial
machinery, and their parts and components in the United States;
The leading international robotics association defines a robot as “an actuated mechanism
programmable in two or more axes with a degree of autonomy, moving within its environment, to
perform intended tasks.”1 Helpfully, it also explains specifically what they do not consider a robot:
software, drones, voice assistants, autonomous cars, ATMs, and smart washing machines are not
1 The IFR also explicitly states what a robot is not:
software, drones, voice assistants, autonomous cars, nor ATMS, smart washing machines etc.
 (5).

considered robots.2 Robots are often thought of as autonomous mobile robots (AMRs),
manipulator arms or humanoids.3 There are dozens of other types of robots, including quadruped
(dog-like) robots, medical robots (designed to assist with surgery, for example), and collaborative
robots (or “cobots,”) that work with a human-in-the-loop, typically in industrial environments. In
general, all robots typically consist of five core hardware systems:
- Structural components provide the physical framework, support, and protection for all
other systems. For humanoid robots, as the name implies, these structural components are
anthropomorphic and generally are designed to provide joint, weight distribution,
movement, and manipulation that mimics human form.
- Actuation systems generate and control physical movement. For industrial robotics,
these systems rely on precision motors that can operate repeatedly at high speeds,
manipulating heavy loads. For humanoid robots, these systems can require more
precision and less load-bearing ability.
- Power systems provide and distribute energy to all systems. Industrial robots are usually
connected to a fixed power supply, while humanoid robots and AMRs rely on batteries.
- Computing systems process sensor data and control robot behavior, with humanoid
robots having the most complex compute stack and industrial robots among the least
compute-intensive.
- Sensor systems perceive the environment in which the robot operates as well as its
internal state and include cameras, sensors for depth perception, torque/force, joint
position, and LiDAR.
Estimating current, projected, and optimal demand for robots and their components is nearly
impossible due a lack of a standardized bill of materials (Figure 1) as well as a lack of robust,
comprehensive, high-fidelity supply chain data. There are a variety of reasons this data does not
exist: most robotics transactions are B2B and private companies do not feel a need to share public
statistics on their current or future rate of robotic adoption nor their BOMs. Additionally, most
robotics development is still very nascent (especially in the humanoid sub-market). Thus demand
estimates are inherently speculative, and it is unclear if/when commercial adoption at scale will
occur.
2 There is room for disagreement about constitutes a robot based upon this definition, but for the sake of accurately
representing the data IFR collects, this paper uses the IFR definition when referring to statistics on robotics adoption
cited in subsequent sections.
3 

Figure 1. Hardware Bill of Materials for Three Types of Physical AI-powered Robots
Humanoid Robot Industrial Robot Autonomous
Mobile Robot
Example
Physical Full-body frame with ~20-30 Heavy-duty fixed Wheeled base
Structure degrees of freedom base platform
Anthropomorphic proportions and Rigid arm links (4-7 Payload structure
joint designs segments) Protective
Lightweight materials (carbon Industrial steel, bumpers/housing
fiber, aluminum alloys) aluminum)
Actuators 20-30+ high-performance electric 6-7 high-precision 2-4 drive motors
motors/actuators servo motors with wheels
Custom gearboxes with high Industrial gearboxes Optional lift
torque density Braking systems mechanism
Specialized joint mechanisms
(series elastic, direct drive)
Power High-density battery packs (2-4 Fixed power supply Battery pack (1-3
kWh typical) (typically no kWh typical)
Power distribution system battery) Charging interface
Thermal management system Electrical cabinet
Compute High-performance onboard Industrial controller Navigation computer
computer (often multiple) Safety PLC Motor controllers
GPU/TPU for AI inference Teach pendant Fleet management
Multiple microcontrollers for low- interface interface
level control
Sensors Stereo/depth cameras (2-4) Encoders at each LiDAR for
Force/torque sensors at key joints joint navigation (1-2
IMUs for balance Limited external units)
Tactile sensors for hands/grippers sensing Cameras for object
Microphones for audio input Optional vision detection
system for guidance Proximity sensors
Wheel encoders
Cost $50-$500k $20-150k $15-80k
Range
Sources: 

 
are-the-main-components-of-a-robot?; 
comprehensive-guide; 
much-does-a-humanoid-robot-cost/; 

The worldwide AI Robotics market is valued at $20-$23 billion in 2025.4 In the next ~10 year
period however industry analysts expect this market will reach, or exceed, $100 billion in value.5
Analysts at Goldman Sachs recently forecast that the total addressable market specifically for
humanoid robots will grow from $6 billion today to $38 billion in 2035, while analysts at Morgan
Stanley are even more optimistic, asserting the market will reach $5 trillion by 2050.6
These market numbers are speculative and lack definitional clarity. The “AI Robotics market” is
poorly defined and can refer to everything from autonomous mobile robots like those currently in
use by Amazon to the industrial robots used by automotive manufacturers. Scalable manufacturing
of humanoid robots faces myriad technical obstacles, some of which were discussed above. Much
of this markets’ forecast growth is contingent on unit costs going down as manufacturing
economies of scale are achieved (“the robots start to build robots”) and performance/reliability
increases dramatically as hardware and software improves. These breakthroughs are by no means
guaranteed.
Additionally, numbers cited by analysts and firms lack clarity and cannot be independently
verified. Some companies consider warehouse robots a form of industrial robots and report
numbers accordingly. Others maintain different definitions, leading to over (or under) counting
total deployment numbers. Relatedly, the numbers that are reported by firms are often speculative
and it is difficult to determine the validity of the claims without genuine on-the-ground
investigation. For example, in 2011 Foxconn announced a program to deploy 1 million robots in
its factories by 2014.7 By 2016 it had only managed to deploy 40,000 and more recent numbers
are lacking.8 Similarly, companies like Siemens (Germany) and JD.com (China) have announced
the creation of “dark” factories that are fully automated and can function without human
4 

Size-to-Worth-USD-124-26-Bn-by-2034.html; 
transforming-industries-with-smart-robotic-solutions/23005/
5 

Size-to-Worth-USD-124-26-Bn-by-2034.html; 
transforming-industries-with-smart-robotic-solutions/23005/
6 
accelerant/report.pdf (1); 
by-2050.html
7 
idUSTRE77016B/;
8 

intervention, but it is unclear how robot-dense these facilities are, if they are comparable, and by
what metrics to compare them.
(ii) The role of foreign supply chains, particularly of major exporters, in meeting
United States demand for robotics and industrial machinery, and their parts and
components;
The robotics hardware components ecosystem, especially the ecosystem of suppliers that can
deliver components at-scale cost-competitively (Figure 2), is largely controlled by firms in Asia
and Europe. Several recent reports cover this market in detail.9 This section summarizes these
reports, focusing specifically on firms that control one or more chokepoint technology that could
help or hinder AI-robotics convergence. There is no one country with a vertically integrated
robotics supply chain, and interdependence is high.
Robotics-specific hardware demand is rarely sufficient for firms to establish a business line,
meaning nearly all suppliers serve multiple end use markets (ex. automotive, aerospace). Japanese
and German component suppliers maintain notable market share, though there are also competitive
suppliers in the U.S., Europe, and China. This supply chain has many “hidden giants” that control
one or more key part of the market as well as COTS suppliers who offer best-in-class products. In
both cases, suppliers rarely produce products solely for the robotics end use market, though they
will optimize products for specific use cases if demand is sufficient.10
In the former category, Japanese firms like Harmonic Drive Systems, Nabtesco, Nidec, and
Sumitomo Heavy Industries offer precision mechanical gears, motors, and actuators that facilitate
robotic joint movements and maintain high market share worldwide.11 Notably, Harmonic Drive
Systems controls 80% of the market for the precision gears it produces.12 In Europe, German firms
like Bosch Rexroth Festo, SEW-Eurodrive, SCHUNK, and Schmalz offer robotics components for
“end effectors” (gripping), motors, and actuators.13 German firms are particularly competitive in
the supply of end-effectors (for dexterous manipulation), a key technical challenge that has yet to
be fully addressed for humanoid adoption.14
In the latter category, many firms offer commercial off the shelf products at competitive prices
with performance characteristics that make them suitable for robotics applications. For many
robotics manufacturers, access to CATL’s (China) batteries, Sony’s (Japan) cameras, and NXP’s
(Netherlands) microcontrollers are sufficient. This reliance on COTS parts comes with tradeoffs
9 For example: 
10 For example, ST Micro will not create an entirely new chip architecture for robotics users, but it will tweak
existing products for robotics use cases: 
accelerated-microcontroller/.
11 
12 (70)
13 

 
Reports/robot-end-effector-market-251736819.html
14 

however. Each robotics company is cobbling together their own unique bill of materials, meaning
suppliers cannot rely on large orders necessarily. If demand shifts in their core markets (ex.
aerospace), they are likely to prioritize production volume for these customers at the expense of
the high mix, low volume components required by robot manufactures. In addition to this
economic challenge, these COTS hardware solutions are frequently “good enough,” but not
necessarily technically optimal. Hardware optimized for robotics applications is costly to develop
and difficult to scale. And, once integrated in to actual robots, characterizing why the hardware
failed (fatigue, environment, tolerance) makes for a slow and expensive cycle of iteration. Other
industries have accelerated these cycles of “down time” by creating service and support businesses,
but that generally does not yet exist in robotics at scale.
Figure 2. Humanoid Robot Component Suppliers (Publicly Traded)
Source: 
_Mapping_the_Humanoid_Robot_Value_Chain.pdf
The robot manufacturing landscape features startups as well as established industry leaders spread
across several key countries. This section focuses specifically on relative national competitiveness
in three types of robots that are seeing the greatest interest in Physical AI integration: humanoid
robots, industrial robots, and autonomous mobile robots.
The humanoid robotics manufacturing landscape is diverse, with at least 38 companies developing
47 different robots listed as under development according to one source.15 There are no
“incumbent” humanoid manufacturers today (unlike other robotics sub-markets) and all the firms
mentioned below, with the exception of Boston Dynamics, entered the market in the last 5-10
years. The largest and most well-funded U.S.-based humanoid developers of humanoid robots
include Boston Dynamics16 (Atlas), Tesla (Optimus), Agility Robotics (Digit), Apptronik (Apollo)
and Figure AI (Figure 02). China has at least twice as many firms as the U.S. pursuing humanoid
robotics development, including Unitree (H1 and G1 models), UBTECH (Walker series), Xiaomi
(CyberOne), EngineAI (PM01), and Fourier (GR-1). Outside of the U.S. and China there are also
15 
16 Note: now owned by Hyundai (South Korea), though its operations remain in the U.S.

firms in Japan (Kawasaki), South Korea (Rainbow Robotics), and Canada (Sanctuary AI) with at
least one humanoid in development.
Industrial robotics continues to be dominated by the so-called “Big Four”: ABB (Switzerland),
FANUC and Yaskawa (Japan), and KUKA (Germany, now China).17 While these four firms are
estimated to control 75% of the global market for industrial robots, there are also notable suppliers
in Europe (Comau and Staubli) and Japan (Epson, Kawasaki, Mitsubishi).18 China has several
publicly traded industrial robot manufactures including Siasun Robotics, Efort [sic], and Etsun
Automation.19
At the same time, the warehouse robotics market continues to grow worldwide at a scale and speed
that exceeds other industry adoption. Amazon, which acquired Kiva Systems in 2012 to enter the
warehouse robotics market, reports having one million autonomous mobile robots in its factories.20
These robots consist of everything from AMRs capable of moving pallets around a warehouse to
“pick and place” arm-like robots that can sort boxes for transport. Other notable suppliers include
Geek+ (China), Daifuku (Japan), EK Robotics (Germany), and Balyo (France, publicly-traded by
majority-owned by SoftBank (Japan)).21
Finally, specialized robotics applications for hospital and medical environments are also seeing
increased development. In the U.S., firms such as Intuitive Surgical with its da Vinci system have
been commercializing human-in-the-loop surgical robots, while in China firms like Fourier are
manufacturing robots for medical rehabilitation.22
(x) The impact of the use or lack of use of robotics and industrial machinery on U.S.
manufacturing employment;
While humanoid robots get the headlines, the actual deployment numbers by volume are
dominated by industrial robots and, interestingly, the leading deployer of robots per capita is a
country not mentioned to this point: South Korea.23 Robots are most frequently installed by
automotive, aerospace, electronics, and food manufacturing OEMs.
17 
guide#:~:text=Who%20are%20the%20big%20four,bigger%20isn't%20always%20better.;

robotics-and-how-the-current-powers-came-to-be
18 
19 
20 

21 

22 

23 The reason for South Korea’s leading position in robotics adoption stems from several factors: a major push for
automation from OEMs seeking productivity gains, interest/first-mover advantages from the chaebol’s beginning
decades ago, and government policies to encourage robotics development/adoption as a means of mitigating rapid

The industrial robotics sector remains the most mature segment of the robot market, with
automotive manufacturing still leading global deployment. This is true in the U.S. (Figure 3) as
well as Europe and Asia. Japan's Toyota and Germany's Volkswagen Group consistently rank
among the highest-density robot users, while South Korea maintains the world's highest robot
density at 1,000 industrial robots per 10,000 manufacturing employees (with Singapore coming
in second).24 China has rapidly emerged as the largest overall market by volume, installing
nearly 290,000 industrial robots annually—more than Japan, the U.S., South Korea, and
Germany combined.25 These same trends of adoption are true for AMRs as well, with the U.S.
and Europe leading in installations to date, while Chinese firms see the highest growth rate in
installations in recent years.
Figure 3. U.S. Robotics Capital Expenditures by Industry, 2020-22
population aging + persistently low birth rates. 
korea-is-a-robot/.
24 
25 (17, 18)

Source: 
industries-2020-2022.html
The humanoid robotics sector remains largely in the experimental phase, with total shipments in
the hundreds compared with the hundreds of thousands of industrial robots and AMRs
mentioned above. Japan leads in research and development, with Honda's ASIMO pioneering the
field and newer platforms from SoftBank Robotics gaining traction in customer service roles.
Hospitals in Japan have been early adopters of humanoid assistants for patient monitoring and
basic care tasks. In Europe, automotive manufacturers including BMW and Audi are piloting
limited humanoid robot deployments for specific assembly tasks. Figure AI, the U.S. developer
of humanoid robots, announced a successful test with BMW in 2024.26 China has made
humanoid robotics a national priority, with companies like UBTECH deploying service robots in
retail, hospitality, and healthcare settings. Despite the attention humanoids receive, they
currently represent a small fraction (likely less than 1%) of the total robotics market by revenue.
(xiv) any other relevant factors.
The policy agenda around robotics is immature compared to other emerging technologies like
semiconductors, AI, and quantum, where substantial research has mapped the key players, their
comparative advantages, chokepoints, and supply chains. The robotics supply chain also lacks
robust datasets that provide signals on supply, demand, production, consumption, and the
intensity of robotics adoption (by country, by industry, by factory). As a result, the few data
providers today such as IFR and financial analyst reports play a disproportionate role in shaping
discourse. There is a need for a policy research agenda that develops mature analysis to cut
through the hype, identify genuine advances, and characterize the potential depth of robotics
adoption across economies.
Finally, from a national security perspective, a research agenda to address the gap between
physical intelligence and dexterous intelligence is critical. This gap is particularly problematic in
the aerospace and defense sectors, where high mix, low volume manufacturing lines necessitate
regular re-tooling and adoption of automated solutions is more difficult. Physical intelligence
(spatial awareness for pick, move, and place-capable robots) is not enough in environments that
require dexterous intelligence (insertion, threading, force feedback). Policies that address (in
particular) the acute lack of quality tactile sensors, kinematics, and real-world data would
facilitate the development and adoption of robotics in these key sectors.
26 
group-plant-spartanburg?language=en