Chapter 8:
Defence and National and
international Community

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

The Armed Forces and the National and International Community
In recent years the range of activities undertaken by the Armed Forces has expanded. In addition to the peacekeeping operations already en-
gaged in, other activities have been incorporated, including community support and assistance tasks, the defence and protection of natural and
economic resources, and even cooperation in public security. In this new defence arena other actions related to natural disaster and humanitarian
assistance tasks are also added, with the objective of responding to the increasingly frequent occurrence of catastrophes in the region.
PUBLIC SECURITY COMMUNITY SUPPORT
In 2014, 94% of countries in the region regularly performed an The operational and logistical capabilities of the Armed Forces are
activity or operation related to public security: dedicated, increasingly, to activities in support of the community. All
countries in the region present actions and campaigns that reflect
Combating drug trafficking / Urban patrols the participation of the forces in development, education, health and
infrastructure campaigns etc.
Permanent border control / Security at large events Some examples are:
• Distribution of benefits and subsidies, basic food and personal
Security at penitentiary centers / Pacification of violent areas hygiene goods, water for human consumption in areas affected by
water shortage, etc.
Beyond the fact that some defence ministries are responsible for • Health campaigns: assistance to disabled persons, vaccinations, health
airport security, special units, or control of private security, of the 17 controls during dengue epidemics and epidemiological surveillance,
countries covered, 4 of them (Guatemala, Mexico, Peru and development of medical brigades providing general medical services,
Uruguay) present within their budget classification programs and/or and pediatrics, dentistry, gynecology, ophthalmology, examinations of
diabetes, HIV, and other medical conditions.
actions in public security, such as support for citizen security and
combating drug trafficking. • Infrastructure support, conducting repair work and
maintenance of highways and rural roads, opening
of new roads, general carpentry work, etc.
• Between 2012 and 2013, approximately
• Assistance to the population for pruning
488,000 public security operations were and felling trees, cleaning canals, ditches
carried out in 5 countries.* Traditional and rivers.
Defence Activities • Job training, education, and
courses in particular skills to
civilians.
Military Activities
• Provision of storage facilities
Performance of 26 bilateral and 20 multilateral for agricultural machinery,
military exercises by the Armed Forces in the region during school materials,
2013-2014. During 2011-2012, 36 bilateral and 23 multilat- reforestation, cleaning and
eral exercises were held fumigation campaigns.
• Transport and logistics
Bilateral Agreements in areas affected by
During 2013-2014, 107 bilateral cooperation agreements were strikes or a lack of
signed in the area of security and defence. infrastructure
Confidence Building Measures
ASSISTANCE PEACE
4 countries presented reports on Confidence and Security Building
DURING NATURAL OPERATIONS
Measures to the Organization of American States in 2013,
DISASTERS signifying a reduction of 55% from 2010.
The Armed Forces of the
Between 2012-2014, Institutional Transparency region have been
attention to natural disasters 82% of the countries considered regularly present involved in peacekeeping
has been treated as a central reports outlining the management and activities of operations since 1948.
theme during the meetings and their Ministries of Defence. 11 countries from Latin
working groups of regional America participate in United
bodies dealing with the security in Nations peacekeeping missions,
the continent. In this context the contributing a total of 6,109
Conference of Central American Armed personnel deployed across 15 missions
Forces has a Humanitarian Allied Forces Unit (as of )
(FA-HUM), and the Cooperation System of
American Air Forces carried out a specific exercise for
attention to natural disasters, and it has also been a central
Personnel sent on UN peacekeeping missions
goal for the Conference of American Armies in their recent cycle.
4,710 6,111 6,378 7,484 7,150 6,109
The Armed Forces are also involved in the protection of natural
resources and economic activities, which include:
2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
• Hydrocarbon reserves and production
• Mining activities Some countries also participate within peacekeeping contingents
• Agriculturual activities outside of the United Nations system, such as through Military
• Forest reserves Observer Missions on the Sinai Peninsula, where Colombian and
Uruguayan personnel are deployed.
*Foot, motorized, amphibious and maritime patrols carried out by military personnel during this period are considered.
Source: Compilation based on offi cial reports for the countries considered in the publication.

Chapter 8: Defence and National and International Community

Military Personnel from Latin America deployed on Peace Operations
Haiti Lebanon Cyprus Israel and Palestine India and Pakistan
MINUSTTTAH UNIFIL UNFICYP UNTSO UNMOGIP
Argentina Argentina 3 Chile 2
Brazil Chile 3 Uruguay 2
Chile
Paraguay
Paraguay 116
Peru 373
Uruguay 615
Western Sahara
Darfur
MINURS
UNAMID
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Ecuador
El Salvador
Peru
Honduras
Paraguay 5
Colombia deploys 26
police to MINUSTTTAH,
as well as to the
Liberia Ivory Coast South Sudan Democratic Republic of Congo Abyei
UNMIL UNOCI UNMISS MONUSCO UNISFA Multinational Force
Bolivia 3 Bolivia 3 Bolivia 3 Bolivia 10 Bolivia 4 and Observer Forces
Brazil 4 Brazil 7 Brazil 8 Guatemala 168 Brazil 3 (MFO*) in the Sinai,
Ecuador 3 Ecuador 2 Ecuador 4 Paraguay 17 Ecuador 2 where it has
El Salvador 2 El Salvador 3 El Salvador 1 Peru 15 El Salvador 1 deployed 31 officers,
Paraguay Guatemala 5 Guatemala 4 Uruguay 1,190 Paraguay 3 58 NCOs and 265
Peru Paraguay 9 Paraguay 3 Peru 4 soldiers, totaling 364
Peru 3 Peru 2 personnel.
Uruguay 2
* The MFO is a mission that does not depend on the United Nations that was created as a result of the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel in 1979. Uruguay
also contributes 58 military personnel.
Comparative Evolution of the Participation of Latin American Countries in Peace Operations (2001-2014)
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Total Change
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2001 - 2014
Latin America 131.4% 43.6% 7.5% 127.1% -0.6% 5% 0.9% 1% -0.2% 16.9% 0.8% -5.3% -8.9% 777.5%
Rest of World 29% -6.2% 8.9% 34.8% 9% 15.5% 2.3% 10.3% 7.1% -2.7% 0.4% -3.4% 5.4% 168.7%
The percentage represents the growth in the participation with respect to the previous year. The initial year is 31st December2000 (742 personnel).
Close: 31st (6,511 Latin American personnel).
2004 % REGIONS % 2014
21,986 41.3% Asia 40.53% 3 5 ,114
20,607 38.7% Africa 42.49% 36,816
Latin America and
4,710 8.8% Caribbean 7.05% 6,109
3,719 7.0% Western Europe 5.74% 4,976
1,416 2.7% Eastern Europe 3.24% 2,803
258 0.5% Oceania 0.87% 751
544 1.0% North America 0.08% 73
53,240 TOTAL 86,642
Source: Compilation based on information provided on the websites of the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations, statistics taken from the “Archive
of countries that contribute soldiers and police”, for December of the corresponding years. For 2014, statistics are taken from May.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Peacekeeping Training Centers in Latin America
Argentina El Salvador
CCAAEECCOOPPAAZZ –– AArrggentine Center for Joint Training for Peace Operations EEOOPPFFAA –– PPeeaacceekkeeeeping Operations School (Armed Forces) –
(Armed Forces) – 27th 1st 
- UN Operational techniques - UN Military Observer
- UN Military Observer - UN Logistics and Finance
- Negotiating peace operations - Military Instructor for peace operations
- United Nations Logistics - Pre-deployment training for UNIFIL
- International Law of Armed Confl ict - Chief of Staff offi cer in peace operations
- Human Rights for Peacekeepers
- Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala and Nicaragua (based in Guatemala)
- Civil-military coordination in peace operations
- Humanitarian assistance in the context of peace operations CCRREEOOMMPPAAZZ – RReeggiioonnaall TTrraaiinniinngg CCeenntteerr ffoorr PPeeaacceekkeeeeppiinngg OOppeerraattiioonnss
- Training of trainers (Armed Forces) – 8th 
- “Train the Trainer” (issued by DPKO)
- Staff personnel task force in Cyprus - UN Terminology
- Task force in Cyprus - UN Staff
- UNFLIGHT for the aerial unit - Military Observers (national)
- Staff personnel joint Argentine Battalion in Haiti - Military Observers (international)
- Joint Argentine Battalion in Haiti - Contingent Head
- Basic MINUSTAH
CENCAPOPAZ – Training Center for Police Peace Operations (Police) - - Basic MONUC
 - UN Instructor
- Training of Police for Peacekeeping Missions - Logistics and Finance
- Security for Embassies and Diplomatic Buildings - Basic soldier of UN Battalion CFAC
- Police Offi cer of the United Nations
The School of Peacekeeping Operations (EOPAZ) provides training courses for ap-
- Intensive Preparatory Course for the UN exam for Peacekeeping Missions
proximately 150 military personnel, 140 military police, and 20 civilians. Of the total
In 2014 the Center prepared its sixth rotation for the police force that is de- number of those receiving training, approximately 95% are deployed in practice.
ployed on missions in Kosovo, with a total of 115 personnel in the contingent.
Paraguay
Bolivia
CCEECCOOPPAAZZ –– JJooiinnt Training Center for Peacekeeping Operations
CCOOMMPPEEBBOOLL –Peacekeeping Operations Center of the Bolivian Army
(Armed Forces) – 8th 
(Armed Forces) – 23rd 
- Training of the Bolivian Mechanized Infantry Company (CIMB) “Haiti” - Military decision-making processes in MINURSO
- Training of the Bolivian Mechanized Infantry Company (CIMB) “Congo” - Basic for UN Contingents
- Peacekeeping Operations for Military Observers - Advanced pre-deployment MINUSTAH
- War correspondents - Advanced pre deployment UNFICYP
- UN Military Observer
Brazil - Multinational Logistics
CCCCOOPPAABB – JJoint Center for Peacekeeping Operations of Brazil (Army) On the basis of regular courses and established vacancies, the number of gradu-
- 15th ates comprises 150 military personnel (offi cers and NCOs); 30 police personnel
(offi cers and NCOs) and 50 civilian staff: 50 (including journalists and volunteer
- Advanced Exercise for peacekeeping operations
fi re fi ghters). Following the courses, approximately the following numbers are
- Preparatory Course for peacekeeping
- Symposium of civil-military cooperation deployed annually: 40 military observers, 10 senior offi cers as staff members, 90
- Preparatory Course for Platoon Commanders of subunits and platoons personnel between junior offi cers and NCOs as part of a national contingent, and
- Preparatory Course for Chiefs of Staff 82 personnel between senior offi cers, junior offi cers and NCOs.
On average 3,000 persons (military, police and civilian) are trained annually.
Peru
EOPAZ- Naval Fusiliers Corps (Navy)
CCEECCOOPPAAZZ –– Joint Training Center for Peacekeeping Operations
- Staff (Armed Forces) – 11th 
- Mine clearance missions
- Military Contingent
- Preparation for MINUSTAH
- Military Observers
- Pre-deployment Haiti
Chile
- Peace correspondents
CCEECCOOPPAACC – Joint Center for Peacekeeping Operations of Chile - Lectures on Peacekeeping Operations
((Armed Forces and Police)) – 15th Julyyy 2002
- Military observers
- Peace Operations Uruguay
- Police Monitors EENNOOPPUU – NNaattiioonnal Peacekeeping Operations School of Uruguay
- Correspondents in peacekeeping missions (Armed Forces) - 28th 
- International Humanitarian Law in armed Confl icts for peace operations
- UN Military Observer
- Pre-deployment for national contingents
- UN multinational Chief of Staff
- UN Police Offi cers
Dominican Republic
- National contingent on UN missions
PPeeaacceekkeeeeppiinngg OOppeerraattiioonnss SScchhool – 29th - National contingent in the Sinai
(recently created) The total number of participants on the courses that were conducted from
 to were: United Nations Capacitation Operations
Ecuador Courses (UNCOC) 228 military personnel; in United Nations Military Ex-
UUEEMMPPEE –– PPeeaaccekeeping Mission School of Ecuador (Armed Forces) perts on Missions (UNMEM) 40 military personnel; Women in the fi eld of
10th Peacekeeping Missions 23 military personnel, 19 police offi cers and 5 civil-
ians; Protection of Civilians (POC) 33 military personnel, 30 police offi cers
- Peacekeeper
and 6 civilians; Children Protection (CP) 16 military personnel and 3 civilian;
- MINUSTAH
in Multinational Forces of Observers (MFO) Sinai 80 military personnel.
- Military Observer
- Staff CICAME –Peacekeeping Operations Instruction and Training Center of
- Police procedures in community and border actions the Police (Police)* 1st 
- Correspondents in peacekeeping operations - UN Police Observers
* The exact date of the Center’s creation was 1996/03/01 and it functioned until . Following this, it was reactivated on 1st , the date when
contributions of Police Observers to the Missions of Haiti and Ivory Coast were re-started.
Source: Information provided by the training centers and Armed Forces of each country.

Chapter 8: Defence and National and International Community

The Institutionalization of Civil Defence
When a disaster hits the response must be rapid, coordinated and appropriate to ensure the effective delivery of assistance to help mitigate
the crisis. In this regard, international experience has shown that in major disaster situations local emergency services are overwhelmed almost
immediately in terms of their capabilities, and hence that humanitarian aid is increasingly a key task for all defence forces. While the primary
responsibility for disaster response rests with civilian agencies from the country concerned, the Armed Forces possess personnel, equipment,
training and organization that contribute to the recovery effort.
Immediate Superior Institutional
Country Agency Legal Grounds
Authority Authority
Decreto Nº 1045/2001 establishing the objectives
National Civil Protection
Argentina and functions of the National Directorate. Ministry of Security Ministry of Security*
Directorate
Decree Nº 636-2013, modifi cations to the ministe-
rial law (2013/05/31).
The National Civil Protection Directorate is responsible for formulating policy and planning of civil protection, and to coordinate the support of the security forces, the Federal
Police and the Armed Forces in order to mitigate the effects of disasters. The Ministry of Defence participates in the response structure in cases of natural disasters within
the legal framework of the Federal Emergency System –SIFEM-(coordinated by the Emergency Cabinet –GADE-, which is in charge of leading and coordinating the
system in an emergency. The SIFEM is activated when the Executive declares a state of national emergency, and coordinates the actions of the competent bodies with the
provinces and municipalities. When the use of the Armed Forces is required, the Joint Staff (EMCO) takes up the coordination and leadership of operations and activities.
Ley Nº 1405 orgánica de las Fuerzas Armadas de la
Nación (1992/12/30).
Vice Ministry of Civil Ley Nº 2446 de organización del Poder Ejecutivo,reg- Vice Minister of Civil
Bolivia Defence ulated throughDecreto Supremo Nº 27230 (2003))))),, Defence Ministry of Defence
ratifi ed throughD.S. Nº 28631, Reglamento de la
Ley Nº 3351, and recognized by theNorma de orga-
nización del órgano ejecutivo D.S. Nº 29894.
It is governed by theNational System for the Reduction of Risks and Response to Emergencies and/or Disasters. The highest decision-making instance
in the system is the National Council for the Reduction of Risks and Response to Disasters (CONARADE); when dealing with fi nancial resources, the Ministry of
Development Planning; and in coordination and decision matters, the Ministry of Defence through the Vice-minister of Civil Defence (VIDECI). The Commander
in Chief of the Armed Forces coordinates the participation of the Armed Forces in the execution of civil defence plans with the VIDECI.
National Civil Ley Nº 12608, which establishes the national civil National Secretary of Ministry of National
Brazil Protection and Defence protection and defence policy and the CONPDEC Civil Protection and Integration
Secretariat (2012/04/10). Defence
The National Policy on Civil Protection and Defence is elaborated by theNational Council of Civil Protection and Defence (CONPDEC), coordinated by the Ministry of Na-
tional Integration and is formed by the Chief of the Presidential Staff, the Cabinet of Institutional Security and the Secretariat of Institutional Relations of the Offi ce of the Presi-
dent; the Ministries of Defence, Planning, Budget and Management, Cities, Social Development and Fight against Hunger, and of Health; and representatives of the States, of
civil society, and of the communities that were affected by disasters. TheNational System of Civil Protection and Defence (SINDPEC)acts across the entire national terri-
tory, coordinating with state authorities. The Ministry of Defence is part of CONPDEC and coordinates the combined operations of the special forces in civil defence activities.
Decreto Ley Nº 369, which created the National
National Emergency Emergency Offi ce (1974/03/18). Ministry of Interior and
Chile1 Offi ce Decreto Nº 156, which approved the National Director Public Security
Plan (2002/03/12).
TheNational Civil Protection Plan establishes multi-agency planning in civil protection in response to natural disasters. The provisions contained in the plan are
executed through the National Emergency Offi ce –ONEMI- that sets up Civil Protection Committees at the regional, provincial and local levels. For each of those
levels, within the Committees the different services, agencies and each of the branches of the Armed Forces and theCarabineros of the relevant area are repre-
sented. In 2009, a Civil Protection Academy was created in order to train specialists in the area
National Unit Ley Nº 1523, adopted the National Policy for Di- Director of the National
Colombia for Disaster Risk saster Risk Management and established the Na- Unit for Disaster Risk Offi ce of the President of
Management tional System (2012/04/24). Management the Republic
The National System for the Prevention and Response to Disasters (SNPAD) is coordinated by the National Unit for Disaster Risk Management. The Ministry of
National Defence forms part of the National Committee for disaster prevention and response (together with the President, the Ministers of Interior and Justice, Economy,
Social Protection, Communications, Transport, Environment, Housing and Territorial Development). It may delegate its responsibility to the General Command of the
Military Forces. They are responsible for training and preparation and for security in disaster areas, aerial control and the identifi cation of ports and heliports, as well as
providing assistance to them in disaster situations.
National Committee for
the Prevention of Risks and Ley Nº 8499, Ley Nacional de Emergencias y Pre-
Costa Rica Emergency Assistance. vención del Riesgo(2005/11/22) y su reglamento, Committee Offi ce of the President of
Center of Emergency Decreto Nº 2461-MPP (2007/11/21). Board the Republic
Operations.
The governing body of the National Risk Management System is the National Commission for Risk Prevention and Emergency Response. It articulates and coordinates
national policy concerning risk prevention and preparedness to respond to emergencies. The Emergency Operations Center (COE) is the permanent coordinating body,
attached to the Commission, that brings together at the national level all public institutions and non-governmental organizations working in the fi rst phase of emergency
response. Its responsibility is to prepare and implement the coordinated efforts of fi rst responders to emergencies.
* Until , it reported to the Ministry of Defence. Decree 660-96 reassigns the National Directorate of Civil Protection (DNPC) to the Ministry of Interior (1996).
1 At the closing of this edition () the bill creating the National Civil Protection Agency, successor to the ONEMI, was under consideration in Congress. It would
be responsible for coordinating and implementing emergency prevention activities and civil protection, and for advising the authorities in planning and coordination
of emergency response. The bill creates the National Council for Civil Protection as a multisectoral body responsible for advising the Minister of the Interior and Public
Security in the development of the National Strategy for Civil Protection.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Immediate Superior Institutional
Country Agency Legal Grounds
Authority Authority
National Civil Ley Nº 75 de la defensa nacional (1994/12/21) National Chief Offi ce of the President of
Cuba R D e e v f o e l n u c ti e o n St a a r f y f A o r f m th e e d and Decre d t e o - d L e e f y e N ns º a 1 c 7 iv 0 i l d ( e 1 l 9 s 9 is 7 t / e 0 m 5/ a 0 d 8 e ) medidas of Civ S il t a D f e f fence the S t t h a e t e R C ev o o u lu n t c i i o l, n t a h r r y ough Forces Armed Forces
The Civil Defence Systemencompasses all levels of military hierarchy including: the Ministry of the Revolutionary Armed Forces, National Civil Defence Staff,
armies and Provincial and Municipal Staffs. The presidents of the Provincial and Municipal Assemblies of People’s Power are the heads of civil defence in the
pertinent territory, and their work is supported by the civil defence bodies of the Chiefs of Provincial and Municipal Staffs. There are Defence Councils in each of
the 15 provinces and the special municipality. The National Chief of Staff of Civil Defence of the Revolutionary Armed Forces is the main body in the System of
Civil Defence Measures and is responsible for ensuring compliance with civil defence measures and coordinating international aid and cooperation programs in
the event of disasters.
National Risk Decreto Ejecutivo Nº 42(2009/09/10) which cre- Coordinating Ministry
Ecuador Management Secretariat ated the Technical Risk Management Secretariat. National Secretary of Security
The National Risk Management Secretariat leads the National Decentralized Risk Management System to ensure people’s protection from the negative effects of
disasters. Each region has an Operating Committee for Emergencies (COE) that includes, among others, members of the Armed Forces.
Decreto Nº 777, Ley de protección civil, prevención
National Civil Protection, y mitigación de desastres (2005/08/18)and Decreto
El Salvador Disaster Prevention and No 56 (2006/05/24) Reglamento de organización y General Director Ministry
Mitigation System funcionamiento de la dirección general de protec- of Interior
ción civil, prevención y mitigación de desastres.
TheNational Civil Protection, Disaster Prevention and Mitigation System is under the responsibility of the General Directorate of Civil Protection, Disaster
Prevention and Mitigation, which is under the Ministry of Interior. Depending on the contingency, the Directorate activates emergency operating centers, which
include the Armed Forces mainly through the deployment of human and material resources. The System is formed by the National Committee, provincial, municipal
and local committees. The National Civil Protection Committee is chaired by the Ministry of Interior, and is formed by the General Director of Civil Protection, the
representatives of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Public Health, Agriculture, Environment and Natural Resources, Public Works, National Defence and Education,
and the Director of the National Civil Police.
Decreto Legislativo Nº 109-96, Ley de la coordi-
nadora nacional para la reducción de desastres
National Coordinator for
de origen natural o provocado (1996/11/06) and
Guatemala the Reduction of Natural its regulation, Acuerdo Gubernativo Nº 49-2012 Minister of National Ministry of National
or Man-made Disasters Defence Defence
(2012/03/14) and Action Plan and National Man-
agement Strategy for Risk Reduction in Disasters,
Acuerdo Gubernativo Nº 06-2011(2011/05/18).
TheNational Coordinator for the Reduction of Natural or Man-made Disasters (CONRED) is made up of agencies both from public and private sectors. Its
highest body is the National Council, coordinated by the Ministry of National Defence. It is organized by the local, municipal, provincial and regional coordinating bod-
ies involved in the process of disaster reduction. It has established a National Policy for Risk Reduction in Disasters implemented through an Action Plan and National
Management Strategy for Risk Reduction in Disasters (((Acuerdo Gubernativo Nº 06-2011 -2011/05/18).
Decreto Nº 9-90-E, Ley de contingencias nacionales
Permanent Committee (1991/07/26) and Acuerdo No 661.91, Reglamento
Honduras of National de la Ley de contingencias nacionales (1990/12/12); National Commissioner Offi ce of the President
Contingencies Acuerdo Ejecutivo N° 151-099 (2009/08/28),Ley del of the Republic
Sistema Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos (SINAGER)
y su reglamento (Acuerdo Ejecutivo Nº 032-2010).
TheNational Risk Management System (SINAGER), created in 2010, has an Executive Council headed by the President and made up of, among others, the Permanent
Commission of National Contingencies. The Permanent Committee of Contingencies (COPECO) reports to the Government of Honduras. It is the body responsible for the
coordination of public and private efforts aimed at the prevention, mitigation, planning, care, and rehabilitation and rebuilding in case of emergencies or disasters at the
national level. From its creation in 1990, it had only had military leaders until 1999 when the fi rst civilian leader was appointed as Civil Commissioner. It is divided into 7
regional offi ces and is organized with the use of emergency plans. The Secretary of Defence is a member of the Permanent Committee. The Constitutional Law establishes
that the Armed Forces will cooperate with human resources and material to face natural disasters and emergency situations impacting people and goods. However, neither
the Constitutional Law nor the National Contingency Act details the levels of leadership or operational relationship with the National Committee.
ecnefeD
liviC
fo
noitazilanoitutitsnI
ehT
Dominican Civil Defence Ley Nº 257-66, que crea la Ofi cina de Defensa Offi ce of the President
Republic Offi ce Civill (1966/06/17). Executive Director of the Republic
The Civil Defence Offi ce is under the Secretariat of State of the President’s Offi ce and is chaired by an Executive Director. It is organized in a structure with mu-
nicipal and provincial directors and is responsible for the coordination, planning and operation of actions in case of emergencies, ensuring the overall control of
operations.
The Offi ce manages the National Disaster Prevention, Mitigation and Response System, which has an Emergency Operations Center made up of several
bodies including the Ministry of the Armed Forces.
The centre is also part of the National Council for Disaster Prevention, Mitigation and Response, chaired by the President of the Republic (or whoever he may ap-
point to that end), as well as the National Technical Committee for Risk Prevention and Mitigation.
The Armed Forces also have a representation in the municipal, state and regional committees for disaster prevention, mitigation and response.
National System of Decree of May 31st, 1986, attributing the re-
Director of Civil Ministry of Interior and
Haiti Disaster and Risk sponsibility for civil protection to the Ministry of
Protection Territorial Communities
Management Interior.
The National System of Disaster and Risk Management (SNGRD) is coordinated by the National Committee on Disaster and Risk Management. TheCivil Protection
Directorate is the implementing body of the system and also carries out international cooperation projects in the area.

Chapter 8: Defence and National and International Community

ecnefeD
liviC
fo
noitazilanoitutitsnI
ehT
Immediate Superior Institutional
Country Agency Legal Grounds
Authority Authority
Mexico National S C y i s v t i e l m Protection Ley general de protección civill (DOF 2012/06/06). o S f e I c n re te ta ri r o y r S o e f c I r n e t t e a r r i i o a r t
The National Civil Protection Systemestablishes the mechanism and procedures of the federal, state and city agencies and other bodies. The executive coordination is
under the responsibility of the Secretariat of National Coordination of the Secretariat of Interior. The National Civil Protection Council is a consultative governmental body
chaired by the President, and composed of the Secretaries of State, State Governors, Head of the Federal District Government, and Executive Board of the Civil Protection
Committees of the Senate and House of Representatives. The Secretary of Interior is its Executive Secretary. In an emergency situation, the National Defence Secretariat and
the Navy Secretariat implement the relevant assistance plans (Secretariat of Defence’s Plan for Assisting the Population in case of disasters, and the Navy Secretariat’s General
Assistance Plan to the Population).
Ley Nº 337, Ley de creación del sistema nacional para
National System for la prevención, mitigación y atención de desastres
Disaster Prevention, (2000/04/07) y su Reglamento, Decreto No 53-2000 Executive Secretary President of the
Mitigation and Response (2000/06/28). Ley de la defensa nacional (N° 748 – Republic
Nicaragua S C ta h f i f e o f f o t f h C e i v N il i c D a e ra fe g n u c a e n 2 Le 0 y 1 N 0/ º 1 1 2 8 /1 1 3 , C ). ódigo de organización, jurisdicción y pre- Chie S f t o a f f f C ( i E v M il D D e C f ) ence Nicaraguan Army
Army visión social militar (1994/09/02), last reform: Ley Nº
855 – (2014/02/11), and Ley Nº 337 y su Reglamento.
The National System for Disaster Prevention, Mitigation and Response (SINAPRED), under a National Committee headed by an Executive Secretary, directly reports
to the President of the Republic. It is made up of agency and government representatives and regional coordinators. The Commander in Chief of the Army is a member of
the Committee assisting the Minister of Defence. The Special Operations Committee (one of the eight Working Committees in the System) is chaired by a permanent Army
delegate. The Chief of Civil Defence Staff guarantees the effective participation of the various Army units and their coordination with State institutions and the population in
protection plans for natural disasters, catastrophes and similar events.
The Nicaraguan Army’s Civil Defence Staff established the Disaster Operation Centre included within the National System. The System’s Executive Secretariat, in coordination
with the Civil Defence Staff, declares the corresponding alerts.
Ley Nº 7 que Organiza el Sistema Nacional de
National Civil Protection General Director of Civil Ministry of Interior
Panama Protección Civil (SINAPROC), Resolución Nº 28
System Protection and Justice
(2005/02/11).
The National Civil Protection System is responsible for the implementation of policies and plans for disaster prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response
and recovery. It manages all risk management actions according to territorial divisions; it incorporates risk management into operational and development plans,
maintains an up-to-date database on risk information at the national level and manages resources to support the development of risk management plans, pro-
grams and projects. Through the National Risk Management Plan it defi nes the responsibilities of public and private entities for disaster and emergency prevention,
mitigation, preparedness and response, and follows up strategies, programs, and activities related to the plan. The General Directorate of Civil Protection is the
permanent entity of the System and is the coordinating body of the Emergency Operations Center (COE), a permanent structure of the system that is responsible
for promoting, planning and maintaining coordination and joint operation between the different levels, jurisdictions, and functions of the institutions involved in
the preparation and response to emergencies or disasters.
Paraguay Nati C on o a m l m Em iss e i r o g n ency L g e e y n c N ia º N 26 ac 1 i 5 o / n 0 all 5 ( 2 q 0 u 0 e 5 c /0 re 6 a /0 l 2 a ). Secretaría de Emer- Executive Director Ministry of Interior
TheNational Emergency Committee (CEN) was created by the Executive branch in 1990. It is managed by a Council made up of by the Minister of Interior, who
is the chair, a Secretary General of the President’s Offi ce, a General of the Armed Forces (Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff), a representative of the National
Police (deputy commander), and a representative of various ministries through their deputy Ministers, including: Economy, Public Health and Social Welfare, Public
Works and Communications, Education and Agriculture. The Armed Forces are the operational arm of the CEN, participating in deployment, human resources
and security, to respond to affected communities.
Ley que crea el Sistema Nacional de Gestión
del Riesgo de Desastres (SINAGERD), Nº 29664
Peru National Institute (2011/02/19), Decreto Supremo que aprueba el Council of Ministers National Defence
of Civil Defence Council
Reglamento de la Ley Nº 29664, Decreto Supre-
mo Nº 048-2011 (2011/05/26).
TheNational Institute of Civil Defence (INDECI)is a public body in charge of theNational System of Risk Management in Disasters (SINAGERD), chaired
by the Council of Ministers. It is the technical body responsible for coordinating, facilitating and inspecting the development and implementation of the National
Plan of Risk Management in Disasters, the process of development, response and rehabilitation. Among other tasks, it is in charge of supporting and facilitating
the joint operation of the actors participating in the response effort under the National Emergency Operations Centre and managing its facilities and support tools.
The Armed Forces are also part of SINAGRED, in relation to the preparation and response for disasters, according to their competences and in coordination with,
and support to, the authorities.
Ley Nº 18621, Sistema Nacional de Emergencias,
National Emergency Offi ce of the President
Uruguay creación como sistema público de carácter per- National Director
Directorate of the Republic
manente (2009/10/25).
TheNational Emergency System (SINAE) is a permanent government system created with the aim of providing protection in the event of disasters. It is formed
by the Executive, the National Emergency Directorate, and the National Advisory Committee for Risk Reduction and Response to Disasters, Ministers, independent
bodies and decentralized services, Emergency Department Committees and the Departmental Emergency Coordination Center. Its main body is the Superior Di-
rectorate, which is under the Offi ce of the President.
The Minister of Defence is a member of SINAE (chaired by the President of the Republic) and the National Emergency Council (chaired by the Secretary of the
President’s Offi ce). Other participants are the Commanders-in-Chief of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force, and the Director of the Permanent Technical Opera-
tional Directorate.
Ministryyy of the Peoppple’s
National Civil Power for Interior Relations,
Protection and Disaster Decreto Presidencial Nº 1557, Ley de la orga- Justice and Peace
Venezuela Management nización nacional de protección civil y adminis- Director General Vice-ministryyy for Risk
Directorate tración de desastres(2001/11/13). Management and Civil
Protection
The National Civil Protection and Disaster Management Directorate is under the Ministry of the People’s Power for Interior Relations, Justice and Peace. Its General
Director is responsible for the preparation and submission of a National Civil Protection and Disaster Management Plan, to be approved by the National Coordina-
tion Committee of Civil Protection and Disaster Management. It is organized into state directorates.
It also includes the National Coordination Committee of Civil Protection and Disaster Management, which is part of the National System of Risk Management
and National Coordination of Citizen Security. A high-level representative of the Ministry of Defence is also part of it. The Law does not make reference to
the Armed Forces.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

The consideration of mechanisms for assistance following disasters and the possible role of defence institutions in this
assumes issues such as frameworks regulating international troops, as is presented here.
The Entrance and Exit of Troops: the Question of Military Justice
Country Military Justice Norms
Criminal jurisdiction is exercised by the judges and courts established by the National Constitution and legislation, and extends to all offenses
committed in its territory or on the high seas on board domestic vessels, when these arrive at a port of the Capital, or on board aircraft in na-
tional airspace, and includes crimes committed abroad that produce effects in our country, or when they are executed by agents or employees
Argentina of Argentine authorities in the performance of their duties. It is non-extendable and extends to the knowledge of the offenses committed in the
same jurisdiction.(Anexo I, Modifi caciones al Código Penal y al Código Procesal Penal de la Nación, Sec. 18).
Aggravating circumstances. The following circumstances, in particular, will be considered as aggravating: 2. Committing the offense when part
of a peace missions or when commissioner abroad. (Anexo IV, Código de Disciplina de las Fuerzas Armadas, Sec. 25). Ley N° 26394, 2008/08/26.
The Criminal Code applies to “3) Those offenses committed abroad by Bolivian or foreign citizens, military or civilian, whose effects are produces
in places subject to military jurisdiction, provided that have not been processed abroad; 4) to those offences committed in Bolivian military aircraft
and ships, wherever they may be, or when occupied or held by legal order of the military authority or when in service of the armed forces, even
Bolivia if they are privately owned; 5) For offences committed on board foreign vessels or aircraft, when in places subject to Bolivian military jurisdiction;
6) to those offences committed abroad by military offi cials carrying out the service of the Nation; and 7) to those military offences that, pursu-
ant to treaties or conventions of the Republic, should be punished, even if they were not committed in their jurisdiction.” (Sec. 1).Código Penal
Militar, 1996/01/22. Last reform 2002/09/13.
Military criminal law is applied - without prejudice to international conventions, treaties or other rules of international law - to crimes committed
in whole or in part of the country or outside of it, even if the defendant is being tried according to foreign justice (Sec. 7). Among others, they are
Brazil
considered military crimes in wartime those covered in the military criminal code even if they are defi ned in the Civil Code, when committed by mili-
tary personnel on foreign territory where there is military action taking place. (Sec. 10).Código Penal Militar, 1969/10/21. Last reform 2011/06/30).
Military courts have jurisdiction over Chilean and foreign nationals, to judge all matters of military jurisdiction that may occur in the country.
They also have jurisdiction over the same issues occurring outside of the national territory, such as, among others, cases where the offence is
committed by military personnel in the exercise of their function or during commissioned service. (Sec. 3).Código de Justicia Militar, 1944/12/19.
Chile
Last reform 2010/12/30.
National troops, without prejudice to the norms set out in international law, will remain subject to the laws and regulations in Chile when abroad.
Ley N° 20297, 2008/12/13.
Crimes related to service. They are service-related offences those committed by members of the Public Force on active duty within or outside the
national territory, where these issues are derived directly from the military or policing functions outlined in the Constitution, law, and regulations.
(Sec. 2).
Prescription of offences initiated or completed abroad. When the crime is initiated or completed abroad the statute of limitations stated in the
Colombia previous section (76) shall be increased by half, without exceeding the maximum limit set out (Sec. 77).
For the purpose of trials under Military Criminal Justice, the territorial jurisdiction will be the following: Paragraph 2. When it is not possible to
determine the place where the offence was committed or, when it was carried out in several different places, one of which is uncertain or abroad,
the jurisdiction of the Presiding Judge is determined according to where charges are brought by the Military Criminal Prosecution, which will take
place where the key elements of the indictment are found. (Sec. 218).Ley No 1407, 2010/08/17.
All criminal proceedings following an unlawful act in which military personnel are accused apply to the Military Courts, even when some of the
participants or victims are civilians. They are competent to try crimes and offences committed in the territory where they exercise their jurisdiction,
Cuba
and when the act was committed abroad or where it is not possible to determine where it was committed, these cases will be presided over by
the Court in whose territory concluded the instruction. (Sec.11).Ley N° 6, 1977/08/08.
They are also within the jurisdiction of military courts those offences committed by military personnel in the performance of his/her duties, wher-
Dominican ever they are committed. If the offence was committed abroad, the procedure shall begin after the return of the accused to the Republic. (Sec. 3)
Republic Ley N° 3483, 1953/02/11. Last reform 02/07/2002.
Ecuador The crimes committed by military servicemen or women overseas, based on the principle of reciprocity, will be judged by the judges or courts
determined by Ecuadorian law (Sec. 602.24).Ley reformatoria al Código Penal, 2010/05/19.
The Code applies to members of the Armed Forces on active duty and in relation to purely military crimes and offences. The emergency service is
El Salvador that provided by the Armed Forces under abnormal circumstances that threaten to disturb the peace or public order. (Sec.1 and 32). DL Nº 562,
1964/05/29. Last reform: 1992/11/27.
Guatemala No reference.
Honduras The Courts of the Republic shall retain their jurisdiction over offences committed in foreign territory by Honduran nationals subject to military jurisdiction,
provided that such crimes affect the institutions and interests of Honduras. (Sec. 317).Decreto Nº 76, 1906/03/01. Last reform: 1937/01/22.
If the Army is in the territory of a friendly or neutral power, the rules stipulated in treaties or conventions with that power will be respected with
Mexico
regard to the jurisdiction of military courts. (Sec.61). DNL Nº 005,1933/08/31. Last reform DOF 2014/06/13).
Nicaraguan military criminal laws apply to military crimes and offences committed in Nicaraguan territory. (Sec.7). They are also applicable to
Nicaragua those acts foreseen in the crime, even where they have been committed outside the national territory, provided that those criminally responsible
are military personnel on active duty. (Sec. 9). Ley Nº 566, 2006/01/05.
Paraguay Military jurisdiction is special and during peacetime includes, among other things, crimes and offences committed by military personnel on active
duty or military employees on service during a stay in a foreign territory. (Sec.31).Ley Nº 844, 1980/12/19.
The norms laid out in military police criminal law apply to military or police personnel that commit an offence abroad, where:
1. The effects are produced in places subject to military or police jurisdiction, provided that they have not been processed abroad;
Peru 2. The agent is a military or police offi cer at the service of the Nation;
3. The act was against the security of the Nation; and,
4. Pursuant to treaties or international agreements. (Sec. 2)
DL Nº 1094, 2010/09/01.
Common crimes committed by military personnel in peacetime, regardless where they are committed, shall be subject to the jurisdiction of
Uruguay
regular courts. (Sec. 28). Ley Nº 18650, 2010/03/08. Last reform: 2012/05/10)
For military prosecution to occur in Venezuela in relation to offences committed outside the national territory, it is required that the alleged of-
fender has not served time overseas for the same offence, in accordance with the classifi cation established by this Code. (Sec. 8). In the cases
Venezuela foreseen in the previous article, when a person who has already been convicted abroad is convicted for the same offence, the portion of the
sentence and period of detention that has been served outside of the Republic shall be taken into account in accordance with the rule laid down
in Section 418 (Sec. 9).Código Orgánico de Justicia Militar, Gaceta Ofi cial N° 5263 Extraordinario de fecha 17 de septiembre de 1998.

Chapter 8: Defence and National and International Community

Humanitarian Assistance in Disasters Situations, Shared Civil-Military Responsibility in the Hemisphere
The recurrence of natural disasters worldwide and the growing demand for interna-
tional humanitarian assistance (IHA) to prevent and mitigate its devastating effects
have led to coordination among the following bodies: the International Movements of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent, the United Nations Offi ce for the Coordination of Hu-
manitarian Affairs (OCHA), the European Union’s Bureau for Humanitarian Aid (ECHO),
the OAS’s Inter-American Committee on Natural Disaster Reduction (CIRDN) and the
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO). These, and other agencies and nongov-
ernmental organizations, maintain a permanent and dynamic dialogue around the key
components of the natural disasters and humanitarian assistance agenda, while they
are producing, and have already produced, monumental amounts of related materials.
At the sub regional level, there are four different kinds of organizations that work in Conference of Central American
the fi eld of prevention, mitigation and response to disaster situations: theCaribbean Armed Forces
(CFAC)
Disaster Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA); the Coordination Center
for Disaster Prevention in Central America (CEPREDENAC); Andean Regional Founded in , CFAC is a special-
Program for the Prevention and Mitigation of Risk (PREANDINO); Andean Com- ized international military organization that was
mittee for Disaster Prevention and Attention (CAPRADE) and theRegional Seis- established to contribute to security, develop-
mological Center for South America (CERESIS). ment and military integration in the region. Three
years after its creation, and with the devastating
effects of Hurricane Mitch still being felt in the
Military Humanitarian Assistance subregion, at its III Regular Meeting the Higher
Council created the Humanitarian and Rescue
When a disaster hits the response must be rapid, coordinated and appropriate to en- Unit (UHR-CFAC, Act No 005/99) whose mission
sure the effective delivery of assistance to help mitigate the crisis. In this regard, in- it is to execute humanitarian relief and rescue op-
ternational experience has shown that in major disaster situations local emergency erations at the request of any Central American
services are overwhelmed almost immediately in terms of their capabilities, and hence country where a natural or man-made disaster
that humanitarian aid is increasingly a key task for all defence forces. While it is clear has occurred in order to save and protect human
that humanitarian assistance should continue to be primarily an essentially civil func- life and mitigate the effects of the disaster.
tion, there are international norms that regulate the use of military resources.
Each armed force in Central America -Guate-
mala, El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua – has
Concomitant with the aforementioned civilian efforts, the following military institutions
within its organic-functional structure a Humani-
in Latin America and the Caribbean have made progress in the planning, organization,
tarian Rescue Unit, which collectively form the
coordination and implementation of assistance that they are able to provide in the face of
UHR-CFAC. It is activated in a disaster/emergency
humanitarian disasters / emergencies in the hemisphere: theConference of American
under a minimal protocol that specifi es two phas-
Armies (CAA), the System of Cooperation among American Air Forces (SICOFAA),
es for execution:
theInter-American Naval Conference (CNI), the Conference of Central American
Armed Forces (CFAC),CARICOM’s Regional Security System (RSS).
Phase 1:
Mobilization
The Presidents of Member
States activate their respective President of tthhe counttry aff-
Each Member State UHR in support of the fected solicits the support of
sends to the affected affected country through CFAC Member States.
country a number representatives in the CFAC
of personnel, list of Higher Council.
equipment, and access
route.
Employment of UHR-CFAC
In , the Higher Council of CFAC created the Humanitarian and Rescue Unit
Phase 2: (UHR-CFAC), which is constituted by the UHR of each member Army. UHR-CFAC is
Deployment the only body of its kind in the Americas.
d c c o e u o E n p n u C a t l c d n o o r c o e o t h m y u r r l e y n n m o t d a w t h f a r t t e y h t n i o o h e o d a n t e r p e s h e a s r e U e i l s i r o H t U t a a f i R w t f n H i f t - g o e R h i C l . n c l e F i t a b s A e l e C d aaaaaaaaaaaaa s n m c t u p d o h p i C r g u e c p o F r n u U o v a A t s i r t H r C t d t i i o o e R e t m n s . o s a o a s f s s b T u e e o h c ( r n u b e u e t t o s r r c i r U y t t o d h y H s a u e ) a e n n R r a t c d t - t r a i C r o e t n y d s F r d i e A s a a n ) p f C u . p f f l o : t u o e h r r c b y m o o t m i e u c r e i d e t t d e n i e s t s C R H C o e i u n i F s m ( n m c C A t u m h O t a C a h e e n f a H e i f i O s n C R e t c a d i p e c - n o C r t n e o s i e u F a t r t f d n A a e a n U t t r l C l r i a e H o o ) y n d n f R d s - ddddddddddddddddd TT ee pp ww hh s e t r i e o o i m g t t o v c i h n b n p o i a d e f f t l u a o t o h e c e n c y s r e o i s t m m l U m r i n t t y h a e H a e p t n e a t c R i l e e f t o e - m f s C t n a i e s e t i F n c a s s d A t s d r e . i y C o d n
END OF
MISSION

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Conference of Defence Ministers of the Americas
X Conference of
IX Conference of Defence Ministers
Defence Ministers of “Strengggthening of the Americas
the Americas pppartnershippps
Punta del Este, Uruguay,
in supppppport of
Declaration of Santa Cruz humanitarian 8-10 
de la Sierra, Bolivia, 27th assistance and
 natural disasters”
Pursuant to the agree-
ments of Santa Cruz de la
Sierra, delegates from the
Ministries of Defence met
in Costa Rica (29-30 Au-
gust 2011).
Conclusions:
* Identifi es diffi culties and
a lack of coordination be- TThheemmaattiicc AArreeaa II:: NNaattuurraall
MMiinniisstteerrss ddeeccllaarree tthhaatt ttween States at the time Disasters, Environmental
of providing international PProtection and Biodiversity
* Recent natural disasters (earthquakes in Haiti and Chile) have highlighted the assistance.
need to strengthen our mechanisms for prevention, preparedness, response and Recommendations:
recovery, and the importance of improving early warning systems in the region. * There exists a duality of
* They support those international, regional and sub regional initiatives underway conditions in existing legis- ** Accept the proposal by Chile of “In-
in order to strengthen coordination, skills and hemispheric cooperation in the area lation of the various States fformation Exchange Mechanisms on
of natural disaster response. in responses to national CCapabilities for Natural Disaster Assis-
disasters. ttance”.
Recognize * Proposes that a Center
** The Ministries of Defence will submit
* The contribution that the defence sector and armed forces can provide of Military Collaboration tthe study proposal to national authori-
through specifi c support in response to natural or man-made disasters, in co- AAssistance (MACC) serves tties of each State with primary juris-
ordination with national and international humanitarian organizations and se- as a coordinating body ddiction over the matter. Participation
curity agencies. between the authorities of oof each country is voluntary in accor-
Agree to analyze the proposal “Strengthening partnerships in support of hu- each country, based on the ddance with its own legal system.
manitarian assistance and natural disasters” in working groups coordinated by laws of the country con-
the Pro-Tempore Secretariat, through voluntary and open participation, to be cerned. This center would ** The Pro Tempore Secretariat shall
held in 2011, to implement a mechanism for cooperation between the Minis- coordinate international as- pplace the issue in consideration and
tries of Defence with the aim of strengthening military capabilities for humani- sistance from an operation- nnotifi cation to hemispheric, region-
tarian assistance in support of civil authorities at the national level and of other al point of view, through aal and sub regional organizations
relevant actors, always in response to the request of a state affected by a natural tthe representatives of each tthrough the appropriate channels.
disaster, taking into account ongoing initiatives or those that may arise. country assigned to it.
Phase 2: Deployment
Conference of American Armies (CEA)
Member Armies of the CEA involved in Disaster Support Operations provide sup-
The CEA Procedural Guide for Disaster Assistance Opera- port through troops that will initiate their deployment towards the country affected,
where they will remain at the disposal of the affected country’s National Emergencies
tions of 2009 established an implementation procedure that is
Operation Center.
similar, albeit with some variations, to that of UHR-CFAC. The
During this phase, the Coordinating Support Body of the country affected will:
main difference is that it is set across four phases of which only
• Provide immigration and customs assistance (land, air and/or sea) to the troops.
three (I, II and IV) are outlined, with III corresponding to the
• Through its Military Police or relevant authority, ensure that its authorities, espe-
operation in itself.
cially border and public security offi cials at all levels, are informed of the arrival of
the troops, specifying entry routes, approaches and areas for deployment.
Phase 1: Mobilization • Provide the troops with the necessary information about the disaster, in order to
facilitate their employment and designate the mission to be accomplished.
The President of the country affected solicits the support of CEA
• On arrival of the support delegations, a meeting between the heads of each del-
member countries’ Presidents, normally through the Ministries
egation team and their counterparts will be held in order to brief them on the
of Foreign Affairs. These then make the Ambassador or its
prevailing situation, the capabilities of support teams, and the areas where they
equivalent available for informing them of the support required
by the country affected. will be deployed, taking into consideration:
In relation to personnel, the countries that provide support will o Designation of local guides.
determine if they send organized troops or simply experts. o Provision of information on local customs of the affected population.
o The employment of interpreters where ethnic groups are present in the
area affected.
Coordination mechanisms
- The country affected must organize a National Emergencies Opera-
tion Center in order to coordinate government actions at the national
level as well as all the support of contributing countries. This Center
will be responsible for organizing a structure destined to coordinate
and regulate civil-military disaster assistance through the Coordinating
Support Body (ORCAP). Phase 3: Operation
- The contact and coordination between the Support Implementation
Once the mission has been received, the troops providing assistance will begin their
Units and the affected country’s civilian authorities will be carried out
operations and will send to the ORCAP of the country affected a daily monitoring
through the Coordinating Support Body and/or with its authorization.
report outlining their activities.
Command, control, liaison, coordination and other relations must be
specifi ed in a Memorandum of Understanding signed by national au-
thorities as a bilateral or multilateral agreement.
Budget:The costs inherent in the operations of the Members Armies
Phase 4:: DDeemmoobbiilization
of the CEA should not involve costs to the affected country
The Coordinating Support Body of the affected country, through their Military Police
Command and control:CEA Members Armies will be in constant co- or corresponding security force, will provide physical security through an escort to
ordination with the Coordinating Support Body of the affected country, those units implementing assistance up to the exit points of the country.
within which a Senior Offi cial shall be appointed as Mission Coordina- Furthermore, they will provide migration and customs assistance to those units with-
tor. The Coordinating Support Body defi nes missions and the employ- drawing (via land, air or sea).
ment priorities of the Support Implementation Units. The commanders of these units will provide a fi nal operations report, which will be
presented to the National Emergencies Operation Center.

Chapter 8: Defence and National and International Community

System of Cooperation among American Air Forces (SICOFAA)
SSSIIICCCOOOFFFAAAAA has normative documents in relation to humanitarian assistance in disaster
situaations:Combined Aerial Operations Manual in Humanitarian and Disaster
Assssistance, and the Memorandum of Understanding for Cooperation and
MMMutual Assistance in Disasters.
Command and Control
TThe operation is based on the formation of a force integrated by the air forces of
SICOFAA Member States, which would then act in response to a disaster at the
Inter-American Defence
rrequest of the country affected by the catastrophe. This combined Force would
Board (IADB)
bbee commanded by a Joint Commander of the Aerial Component of the Com-
bineed Forces (C/JFACC). The Memorandum stipulates the relations between the Af-
fffeeecccttteeeddd Party and the Intervening Parties, identifi ed according to AP and IP respectively. The IADB prepared a “Plan to Im-
prove the Guidance and Advise
provided by the IADB to the Inter-
American System in Disaster Situ-
Entrance Exit Coordination Mechanisms Logistical Assistance and Support that
ations” in 2012, and committed
Procedure Procedure and Norms of Conduct the Affected Party should provide
itself to carrying out an annual
The AP will take the steps to obtain authorization Coordination Mechanisms: Assistance:
meeting with all those involved in
so that the IP can enter the country and deploy its The Joint Command of the Aerial The AP will provide, without cost the Plan in order to update knowl-
forces to the areas designated for the Humanitarian Component of the Combined to the IP, the following services
edge and improve the system of
Assistance Operation. It will make known in a clear, Forces (C/JFACC) will coordinate for the planning, implementation
expeditious and timely fashion all the requirements air movements in the area of op- and evaluation of air operations: support for mitigating the effects
established by the AP’s domestic law that the IP must erations through the Combined Air • Identifi cation of areas, facilities of disasters.
meet, relating to immigration requirements for the Operations Centre. Participating and operational bases.
forces will maintain operational
entry of personnel to be deployed by the IP, customs, control while C/JFACC will have • Traffi c control / air traffi c services
agricultural, and environmental requirements relat- tactical control over the resources in the areas of landing and park-
ing to the entrance of material, equipment, instru- allocated. ing of aircraft in military areas.
ments or elements of the IP to be interned in the • Internal military communica-
territory of the AP, etc. Norms of conduct: tions systems and computer in-
The IP will comply with all of these required proce- - The military authorities of the IP formation.
dures and any other requirements defi ned in legis- have the right to take disciplin- • Security for personnel, systems,
lation during the entrance and exit of the territory ary actions conferred to it under installations material, equipment,
the domestic laws of the state, instruments or elements of the IPs.
where the operation is conducted.
within the scope of this clause
• Allocation of offi ces and han-
and the provisions established in
gars to IP personnel serving in the
the national laws of AP, over the
1. This phase extends from 1. Upon the personnel deployed in the territory designated areas.
the time the air assets of termination of of the AP. • Primary health care services
e t c t 2 r h o a . a e c u O n h n z s n f o t a c e r n y i e r r e u t f t o o h o n r e f t t c i h l o e d e t p e h b e c a e e i r f s i g a f r i e o t i a n i c n o r t r t n e i i h s v d s e a . l at o d p S f n o I p e a e C r c r e e c O t i d r e s ic a i F s s o i t A , p i a n o o a A r n e r t o i s a n w f m i g b r t h h e y e t e n - i t t s n h h h e e o M t y h u l i e e l l w d i g t o a i i l r s p r l e l y a e b s t p r e i a p o e t e s c n io u r t s n b o o t j h f n e m e c t n h u t e r . e s e l t S g A i p c u m P o a l , a i r m l t t a t i i o p c r o l i l y n p y w , s a w , t h t h i i o n i c e t r h h g y - • t m o a a e f r e L r y a o n a n d t p i r d r e c n o r r e a s m a o c n f e e n t d s s n . s a l e a a i l r r n y a d t n r e f a d o d n r f s o p t a r h o t e t r h t a r e f l e t o e e c r o r q n m v u a e i i p t l r i e y - - H o an p a d e vi r n a in g ti o a f n u s lfi o i l n n lm e e d o n i f s t a it s o s t f e o r A b j c p e t c r iv e t i i v t v e y e n s 2 ti c . o D o n - .
taken to use the air forces in the country ders and instructions of the Host of the Action Plan 2012 of the
of SICOFAA members for concerned, Air Force, Intervening Air Forces The services listed are subject to South American Defence Council,
h e d to a u e c p m o h l p o a m e y n r e i a e t d a t m e r w i b a w i e n th i r t a h w t s i h n s il i e l s t t b h a a e b e n i c li e ty , c b o th o e rd e o c e r w a d r r i i t r n t o i h e a d d e ti r x o a o e n w u c u t w a t i l n i . e ll a t t l w a e h n w i n e t d h t s p c o t t o i h v f h i a i n t e l t i h t a e t n la o h A w f e c P y o s v , m i o a e a r r w m n e a d u r a o e n p r f i i e t p n y t g l , h i a u c e t c a l o a c b t n o l i t e o a r h d t n e i f a o s r n o n e c o m x a e - f l t a d T v h i n h o s e i d e m o fi A n e c n s s P o a t o m i s n c h f c p l a i a t a l l h i w l a l , e n a s p . v c l u e a e r g i s l a a u w l b a i f i t n l r h i t a t y m t a o o e p f t w p h t l e h o ic e r a p k b r A o i l n P e - t e M h ra e in t i i o w st n r o i e r m k s s e h o c o f h p a D : n e i “ f s e P m n ro s c p e b o e o s t e f w d M e e e c n m o o t b h p e e - r
conditions stipulated. 2. The principal the country of origin of the respec- their national legislation, provide Countries in order to respond im-
3. The initial response tasks include: tive IP. all assistance to the IP necessary mediately to natural and man-
to enable the removal of these
should not consider • Prepare and - Intervening military person- materials, equipment, facilities, made disasters of magnitude”,
only the aircraft but issue specifi c nel who contravenes the laws or mediums or elements from their was held in in the city of
also its contents, such orders to regulations of the AP or of the re- territory.
as equipment, ground redistribute spective IP, will be separated from Lima. Delegations from Argentina,
support personnel, tasks specifi c operations, so that the IP may take Logistical support: Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
planning and crews. to support and d re is la c t ip in li g n a to ry s o u r c h a d a m b i r n e is a t c r h a . tive action The IP will provide operational, Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay
maintenance. logistical, administrative and legal
4. The main tasks and - No disciplinary action may be tak- support to AP, to support the de- and Venezuela participated.
activities during the • Redistribution en by the AP against IP deployed in velopment of the operation. The The Peruvian delegation present-
deployment phase are: of specifi c tasks its territory part of a Humanitarian support does not constitute can
command, control, to be performed Assistance Operation. This is under- cannot be construed as being a ed for consideration a proposed
movement and deployment in a manner stood without prejudice to civil or continuing obligation on the part protocol, and fi nally the proposal
of support elements and allowing for a criminal sanctions and measures, of the IP to the AP, nor does it to “Protocol for Cooperation be-
will be detailed in the coordinated and/or others that may be imposed the exercise or collaboration in
operations plan issued by withdrawal, by the Courts of Justice of the AP, the exercise of the sovereign state tween the South American Min-
the country affected by the especially of their in accordance with domestic legis- functions of the AP istries of Defence in the case of
disaster. means. lation. natural and man-made disasters”
Budget was passed. It will be presented to
The IP will cover the costs of all the consumptions and inputs of their forces, in terms of transportation, meals and/or lodging the Ministers of Defence and gov-
incurred by them during the operations performed and that are not covered by the AP. Outside of the services provided at no ernments of UNASUR.
cost by the AP, it will be the required and exclusive responsibility of the respective IP to cover any payment for services and/or
goods contracted, used, or consumed by its aircraft or personnel in connection with the operation. In all cases, the cost of such
payments shall not exceed the amounts the AP usually pays for these services or, alternatively, the market price at the time they
are used or consumed by the IP.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Relations between Defence and Public Security in the Regional Context
Current areas and initiatives Mexico
Cuba
Citizen Security
(prevention of criminal activity, public order,
patrols, control of riots or demonstrations) Guatemala
• Creation of a new body for public security tasks: the Honduras
Military Police of Public Order in Honduras
• Establishment of Mixed Operational Bases by SEDENA in areas defined
Nicaragua
as at high-risk of presenting security problems. Realize mobile and fixed
surveillance operations in Mexico.
Dominican Republic
• Deployment of the Bolivarian National Armed Force in patrol tasks and
checkpoints as part of Patria Plan Segura (Safe Nation Plan) in Venezuela.
• Implementation of the Internal and Citizen Security Operations Plan
2013, in order to support the National Police in public order operations, in
Dominican Republic Venezuela
Prevention and repression activities in border areas
• Implementation of Operation Escudo Norte (Northern
Shield) for the surveillance and control of border areas,
in Argentina.
El Salvador
• Joint military-civil task forces to protect border areas in
Colombia and Venezuela.
• Deployment of Guatemalan military personnel belonging to the
Tecún Umán Task Force in the area bordering Mexico.
• Aerial and land surveillance in order to impede the entrance of
arms, munitions and groups that aim to attack state infrastructure,
promote drug trafficking, and/or guerilla operations, in Ecuador.
Colombia
Actions against organized crime and drug trafficking
• Operations against drug trafficking and organized
crime developed by SEMAR, where they eradicate
marijuana plants and decommission firearms, in
Mexico. Ecuador
• Development of the plan against drug trafficking and organized
crime in Nicaragua.
• Joint tasks to neutralize drug trafficking, organized crime, human
trafficking, and the trafficking of arms and other goods, by the
Armed Forces of Paraguay. Brazil
Peru
• Joint task force that carries out eradications of coca cultivations in
Bolivia.
• Development of the Plan Espada de Honor in Colombia.
• Integrated patrols and humanitarian assistance in VRAEM (Valley of
the Apurímac, Ene and Mantao rivers) in Peru.
Paraguay
Bolivia
Perimeter control in penitentiary centres
• San Carlos Operational Plan for external and intermediate
security in 18 penitentiary centres and 3 rehabilitation
centres for minors, and Penal Centre Assistance Groups
(GAAP): perimeter security in the rest of the penitentiary
centres.
• Access and exit control, revision and inspection of persons, vehicles and
Uruguay
objects that enter into jails in Uruguay.
Chile
• 65% of the Armed Forces considered possess some program
related to citizen security.
• 76% of the Forces possess regular programs for combating drug
trafficking or organized crime. Argentina
• 29% carry out security tasks in penitentiary centers.
Source:Press releases of the Offi ce of the President of the Nations; comunicado 107/13 of the Ministry of Defence of Argentina.Memoria Institucional del Ministerio de
Defensa de Bolivia (2013).Memorias al congreso del Ministerio de Defensa Nacional de Colombia (2012 – 2013). Informe de Gestión de las Fuerzas Armadas de Ecuador
(2013). Informe de Labores de las Fuerzas Armadass (2012-2013) and the Dirección de Política de Defensa del Ministerio de la Defensa Nacional de El Salvador. Memoria
de Labores del Ministerio de la Defensa Nacional de Guatemala(2012-2013). Memoria Anual de la Secretaria de la Defensa Nacional (2012),Ley de Policía Militar del
Orden Publico (DL 168 - 2013); Ley Estrategia Interinstitucional en Seguridad y Toma Integral Gubernamental de Respuesta Especial de Seguridadd (TIGRES) (DL 103 – 2013)
of Honduras. Primer Informe de Laboress of SEDENA and SEMAR (2013) Mexico.Memoria Anual del Ejército de Nicaragua (2013). Memoria del Ministerio de las Fuerzas
Armadass (2012) and information provided by the Ministry of Defence of the Dominican Republic. Informe andMemoria Anual de la Gestión del Gobierno Nacional de
Uruguayy(2013). Website of theGran Misión A toda vida Venezuela: Plan Patria Segura de Venezuela.

Chapter 8: Defence and National and International Community

Regular Internal Order Programs
Country Program, Body or Legal Basis Activities of the Armed Forces
Operation Escudo Nortee (North-
- Surveillance and control of border areas, especially in reference to the entrance of drugs, contraband and
Argentina ern Shield) – Border surveillance
human traffi cking. (The decree allowing for the participation of the defence sector was passed in 2012 and
(Decree N° 1091/2011, 269/2011,
again in 2013, amplifying its validity until the end of 2014).
2689/2012 and 2221/2013)
- The Ministry of Defence is part of the Inter-ministerial Citizen Security Committee, which is responsible for
Citizen Security System Act
coordinating prevention policies, plans, and programs in relation to citizen security.
“Por una Vida Segura”” (For
a Secure Life) (Act Nº 264 – -The Air Service of Citizen Security exclusively develops comprehensive tasks for prevention and mainte-
2012/07/31) nance of citizen security.
Joint Task Force (JTF) Executive - Eradication of excess coca crops.
order for the Regulation of the
Law of Amendment of the Tax
Code and General Customs Act - Involvement in customs controls.
Bolivia Plan Cerrojo (Lock Plan) - To prevent the entry of non-documented vehicles into the national territory, as well as the smuggling of
fuel and food, particularly through the Chilean border.
- Institutional coordination mechanisms for the implementation of comprehensive development and secu-
Border Security and De- rity policies at border areas.
velopment Act (Nº 100 -
- Border Development and Security Council.
2011/04/04)
- Armed Forces, through Joint Commands, implement action plans approved by the Council.
Manual for the Use of Force - Provision of the Armed Forces for deployment internally in order to maintain public order when the legally
in Domestic Confl icts (De- constituted authorities are insuffi cient to respond.
creto Supremo Nº 279777 –
- Control of riots and demonstrations.
2005/01/14)
- Engage in preventive and repressive activities in border areas against border and environmental crimes
Lei Complementar N° 136
through patrols and searches of persons, vehicles and other means of transport.
(25/08/2010)
- Organization of the Pacifi cation Force (FPAZ) for the recuperation and control of marginalized areas within
Diretiva Ministerial N° 15 the Maré complex, Rio de Janeiro.
(2010)
- Organization of FPAZ to carry out actions in high-risk cities, such as the missions in Salvador and Recife
Brazil Manual for Operations to due to the Police strike in 2014.
Guarantee Law and Order - Provision of security in large events, on the occasion of the visit by the Pope for the World Youth Day in Rio
de Janeiro, and at the national level for the Confederations Cup and the World Cup of football.
Strateggic Border Plan (Opera- - The Strategic Border Plan aims to prevent and impede crimes in border areas, prevent the entrance of
tionÁgata,Centinela, and Ca- arms and drugs into the country, and to improve the living quality of the close to six million persons that
deado) live in remote municipalities.
- Strategic guidelines for public order: maintain and update strategic capacities; create civil defence organi-
National Development Plan
zations at municipal levels; reconstruction of strategic highways; strengthen intelligence and counterintel-
2010-2014
ligence actions.
- Reduce national drug production. Strengthen interdiction capabilities. Dismantle criminal groups.
Comprehensive Security Poli- - Dismantle illicit armed groups that operate at the margin of the law. Integrate and adapt security schemes.
cy and Defence for Prosperity Implement a border security model.
- Advance towards a system with a credible, comprehensive, interoperable dissuasive capacity
Colombia
Espada de Honorr (Sword of
- Dismantle the FARC and ELN on three levels: command and control, armed structures, and support networks.
Honour) Campaign
- Management and patrolling of national highways is shared between the Army, Navy and National Police,
National Highway Program
with patrols and controls tasks carried out in regions under their responsibility.
‘Republic’ and ‘Republic Plus’ - Territorial control, security and defence operations implemented across the entire national territory (to-
programs gether with the National Police), in order to anticipate, neutralize and/or dismantle terrorist plans against
critical infrastructure.
Decreto del Poder Ejecutivo - Support to the National Police in the prevention of criminal activities and guaranteeing citizen security:
Nº 310-06 preventive patrols that integrated some 600 military personnel into daily patrols in 2013.
Manual of Joint Doctrine of
- Anti-drug activities supported by the military.
the Armed Forces
- Actions to protect the lives and property of public and private entities in strategic points of the national
territory in support of the National Police. Responsible for maintaining public order and law enforcement
Huron Operational Plan
during protests that surpass the response capacity of the police, through which the Armed Forces seek to
Dominican provide greater support and security to the entire population.
Republic
Operation Obra Santa - During , the Armed Forces provided support to the National Emergency Committee, which
was implemented to provide assistance and security to the general population during Easter.
Operational Plan Seguridad In-
- In order to continue supporting the National Police, carrying out public order operations in support of
terna y Ciudadana (Internal and
citizens.
Citizen Security) 201
Plan Conjunto “Navidad Tran-
- Plan designed to support the National Police in citizen security.
quila 2012/2013”
- The Armed Forces, through Operational Command Structures, participate directly, continuously, and in a
complimentary fashion in support of the National Police, the Customs Service, members of the Judiciary,
and other governmental organizations in internal security (citizen security, fi ghting organized crime, and
Ecuador Comprehensive Security System maintaining public order).
- Contingent dedicated to the provision of assistance during emergencies as part of the Comprehensive
Security System.
- The National Police and the Armed Forces carry out interdiction operations as part of drug combating efforts.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Country Program, Body or Legal Basis Activities of the Armed Forces
- Zeus commands: searches of persons and vehicles, establishment of vehicle checkpoints; detention in case
Nuevo Amanecer (New Dawn)
of in fl agrante crimes, referring those detained to the National Civil Police, and performing joint operations
Military Campaign
to reduce crime.
Prevention and Community - Joint Community Support Groups (GCAC): searches of persons and vehicles and provide support to territo-
Support Plan rial control operations.
El Salvador - Support to the General Directorate of Penitentiary Centres (DGCP) in reinforcing perimeter security.
San Carlos Command - Prison Support Groups (GAAP), periodic and permanent patrols outside of prisons during day and night.
Apprehension of persons trying to smuggle elicit objects when entering prison facilities or throwing them
over perimeter walls.
- Support to the General Directorate of Migration and Foreigners (DGME) through the deployment of person-
Sumpul Command nel in the national border to prevent elicit activities.
- Support to regions with high levels of violence in order to increase the security of the local population, and
PlanBarrios (Neighborhoods) to maintain security on the public transport system.
- Formation of Inter-agency Task Forces integrated by the Police, Intelligence Directorate, and the Army.
Government Plan 2012 (Emerg- - Neutralize organized crime, gangs, and common crime.
ing Citizen Security Plan) - Land, aerial, and maritime interdiction to avoid the entry of drugs into national territory.
- Evaluate the vulnerabilities of offi cial and non-offi cial border crossings and logistical routes used by criminals.
Acuerdo Gubernativo N° 40- - Perimeter security at detention centres.

Operation Martillo (Hammer) - Combating the passage of drugs along the Pacifi c Coast.
Acuerdo Gubernativo N° 63-
2012 (Creation of Military - Interdiction of external threats and the neutralization of illegal armed groups. Recuperation of control over
Brigades for combating drug air, maritime and land spaces.
Guatemala traffi cking)
Citizen Security Operations - Plans of action in which the Armed Forces are directly engaged.
Kaminal and Maya Task Forces - Actions for the recuperation of public spaces and patrols in different zones within Guatemala City.
Operation Atarraya - Actions to demobilise criminal structures and to apprehend arms and narcotics.
- Support provided by the Armed Forces to the work of electoral commissions, acting as logistical support and
Operation Apoyo a la Democ-
providing protection to government employees.
racia(Support to Democracy )
- Operations to guarantee the change of offi ce in unstable regions.
Operation Omega -Tasks in support of the National Police for the registration and protection of persons during New Years.
- Joint operations with the National Police to combat gangs, patrols, surveillance, stop-and-search, and cap-
Bases of the National Defence tures of criminals.
Policy - Support to the fi ght against organized crime.
- Support to the fi ght against drug traffi cking.
-Mobile operations in different sectors of the capital, Tegucipalga; making arrests and patrolling jointly with
Operation Relámpago
the police inside neighborhoods, and citizen security operations in bus stations.
Honduras Ley de Policía Militar del Or-
den Publico (DL 168 - 2013);
Ley Estrategia Interinstitu- - Creation of a new Special Command of the Armed Forces: the Military Police of Public Order. Acts in circum-
cional en Seguridad y Toma stances where insecurity affects public order and constitutes an emergency situation.
Integral Gubernamental de
Respuesta Especial de Seguri-
dad (TIGRES)(DL 103 – 2013)
Operation Xatruch - Preventive patrols in order to decommission drugs and arms.
- Patrols and military security checkpoints; orders for suspects to hand themselves in, apprehensions in support
Mixed operations of ministerial authorities; support to the local civilian population when witnessing in fl agrante crimes or in
response to crime reports; collaboration in the fi ght against drug traffi cking.
Mexico
Protection of strategic instal-
lations - Permanent security posts and coordination of activities with sectors present in the area.
The “México en Paz”” (Mexico
in Peace) Initiative, within the - The Armed Forces cooperate together with public security forces in order to carry out crime fi ghting tasks.
Development Plan
Seguridad en el Campo (Rural - Protection against theft of livestock and other activities that threaten the life, property, and economic activi-
Security) Plan ties of the coffee and livestock zones.
Enfrentamiento a la Delincuen-
cia Rurall (Confronting Rural
Nicaragua Crime) Plan, in coordination - Combined efforts in rural security.
with the National Police
Plans against organized crime
and drug traffi cking - Operations carried out by land, naval and air force components with the aim of combating drug traffi cking.
Protection of the Coffee Har-
- Protection and security during the coffee harvest.
vest Plan
Paraguay Involvement of the Armed Forces in joint tasks in order to neutralize drug traffi cking, organized crime and the traffi cking in persons, arms or other goods.
Congress has approved reforms to the Internal Security and Defence Law, creating an Internal Operational Command integrated by the National Police and
the National Anti-Drugs Secretariat in the departments of Conception, San Pedro and Amambay, which operate under the coordination of the new command.

Chapter 8: Defence and National and International Community

Country Program, Body or Legal Basis Activities of the Armed Forces
Peru Plan for the Valleys and Rivers - Promotes greater state presence in the region, which has been declared under a state of emergency. The
of Apurimac, Ene and Man- operations are developed by the Special VRAE Command, which executes counter-terrorism operations and
taro (VRAEM) joint actions with the National Police.
- Decreto Legislativo N° 1095 (2010/09/01) establishes rules for the employment of force within the national territory by the Armed Forces.
Ley del personal militar con
funciones de guardia perim-
- Entrance and exit control tasks, including searches and inspections of persons, vehicles and objects entering
Uruguay e u t n r i a d l ad y e s c o d n e t ro in l te d rn e ac a ió cc n e s p o a ra a into prisons.
personas privadas de libertad
(Nº 19081 – 2013/06/13)
- Bolivarian National Guard. Cooperate in the investigation and prevention of crimes relating to drugs and
Ley orgánica de la Fuerza Ar- psychotropic substances, kidnapping and extortion, border and rural security, road security, surveillance of
mada Nacional Bolivariana strategic industries, ports and airports, immigration control, public order, public security, criminal investiga-
(GO Extraordinaria Nº 6020 – tion; support, custody and surveillance of facilities and the property of the Legislative and Judicial Branches,
21/03/2011) the Citizen and Electoral Powers, and support to Civil Protection and Disaster Management agencies.
- Plans to detect and control illegal mining activities; operations to detect and prevent smuggling of fuel in
Venezuela border areas, security plans and urban development; deployment, security and surveillance of refuges in gar-
Proyecto 111594 to imple- risons affected by weather conditions in the country; security and order in farms recovered by the National
ment military operations for Government; participation in the Bicentennial Security Operation (DIBISE).
security, defence and compre-
- Military operations of safeguard and surveillance against crimes in maritime and river areas; interdiction com-
hensive development of the
missions in drug matters at ports and airplanes in the country; destruction of illegal landing strips used with
Nation
airplanes for the transport of narcotic and psychotropic substances, operations for the control of illegal traffi c
of fuels at border and coastal states.
Great MissionA toda vida Ven- - Defi ned as a comprehensive inter-institutional policy of citizen security with participation of the Bolivarian
ezuela National Armed Force, deployed with the objective of reducing crime levels.
Military operations in border - Security in border areas - Operation Boquete y Látigo (Hole and Whip operations)
areas
Boquete Jaque Mate Military - The Armed Forces participate in actions as part of the National Anti-Drug Strategy.
Operation 2012
Chile In Chile a State of Exception was declared in areas affected by the 2010 earthquake in order to guarantee public order.
The President of the State Advisory is able to employ the Revolutionary Armed Forces in order to maintain internal order, including when a State
Cuba
of Emergency has not been declared.
Source:Compilation based on the legislation, plans, policies, planning guides and manuals mentioned; Press Releases by the Offi ce of the President of the Nation; comunicado 107/13 of the Ministry of Defence of
Argentina.Memoria Institucional del Ministerio de Defensa de Bolivia(2013). Memorias al congreso del Ministerio de Defensa Nacional de Colombia (2012 – 2013).Informe de Gestión de las Fuerzas Armadas de Ecua-
dorr (2013).Informe de Labores de las Fuerzas Armadass (2012-2013) and of the Dirección de Política de Defensa del Ministerio de la Defensa Nacional de El Salvador. Memoria de Labores del Ministerio de la Defensa
Nacional de Guatemala (2012-2013).Memoria Anual de la Secretaria de la Defensa Nacional (2012),Ley de Policía Militar del Orden Público (DL 168 - 2013);Ley Estrategia Interinstitucional en Seguridad y Toma Integral
Gubernamental de Respuesta Especial de Seguridad (TIGRES) (DL 103 – 2013) of Honduras.Primer Informe de Labores de SEDENA y SEMAR (2013) Mexico. Memoria Anual del Ejército de Nicaragua (2013). Memoria del
Ministerio de las Fuerzas Armadass (2012) and information provided by the Ministry of Defence of the Dominican Republic.Informe y Memoria Anual de la Gestión del Gobierno Nacional de Uruguay (2013). Website of
the Great Mission for a Long Life Venezuela: Safe Nation Plan Venezuela. Website of the Senate of Paraguay.
Protection of National Resources
The region is rich in natural resources, and given their strategic character, the armed forces have gone incorporating the
safeguarding of the environment and natural resource protection into their strategic objectives.
Principal Resources Country Principal Programs and Activities
- Service of Environmental Security of the Navy, to cooperate with the national environmental policy.
AArgentina - Conservation of natural reserves that were historically assigned to the Armed Forces for military use. With conser-
vation spaces, they are joint-managed by the Ministry of Defence and the Environmental and Sustainable Develop-
ment Secretariat with the objective of guaranteeing their conservation and perpetuation.
- “School for the Protection of Tipnis” Battalion, for the protection of the environment and natural resources of
Isiboro Secure National Park.
Bolivia - The Armed Forces participate in programs involving forestation through the Army and Naval ecologic battalions.
- Implementation of training programs for ecological promoters (soldiers and seamen) who develop actions related
to environmental protection.
- The nuclear propulsion submarine project also has the aim of contributing to the defence and preservation of
national interests in the maritime fi eld and the protection of natural resources on the continental shelf.
- Amazonia Azul Management System: surveillance, control and protection of the Brazilian coast. It includes man-
Brazil
agement of activities related to the sea, such as surveillance, control, pollution prevention, and natural resource
protection, among others.
- 2012-2013 Antarctic Campaign. Support to Antarctic operators and scientifi c activity of the Chilean Antarctic
Institute.
Chile - Navy Environmental Policy. Engages in activities that contribute to environmental objectives according to the
legal powers given to the General Directorate of Maritime Territory and National Merchant Marine (DIRECTEMAR).
Key:
Fishing Forests Mining Hydrocarbons Water resources

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Principal Resources Country Principal Programs and Activities
- The Ministry of Defence, along with other bodies, works on the development of a policy to address the issue of
illegal mining activities.
Colombia
- The Army engage actions to recuperate control of mining areas, as part of Plan Sword of Honour, through
this removing one of the resources employed by organized criminal groups and guaranteeing the use of these
resources. (2012-2013)
Cuba - Civil Defence: observation and control of biological, radioactive and chemical pollution.
- Coordination of activities between the Environmental Ministry and the Navy for the management of coastal, land
and maritime public assets. Aims to strengthen controls and prevent the degradation of marine, geological, and
biological resources, including the fl ora and fauna that inhabit these ecosystems.
DDominican - Actions for the protection of forests and reforestation.
Republic
- Relámpago Operational Plan: support activities that the Armed Forces engage in with the civilian population
during disasters, for example during Tropical Storm Chantal, which caused fl ooding and the overfl ow of rivers as
a result of heavy rains (2013).
- Operational Maritime Command Nº 2 executes operations for the protection of maritime borders in coordina-
tion with the National Police and with the participation of supporting bodies, thus protecting national strategic
resources.
Ecuador - The Armed Forces Joint Command is responsible for hydrocarbon security through control of the System of Trans
Ecuadorian Oil Pipelines (SOTE).
- Hydrocarbon Security and Energy Sovereignty Plan, that involves supporting the maintenance and security of
resource installations deemed necessary to the country (2013).
EEl Salvador -Plan Castor: Activities related to cleaning principal waterways and highways.
- Reforestation and cleaning of lakes, carried out by the Armed Forces.
- Environmental protection in the Maya Biosphere, Izabal.
GGuatemala
- Formation of Green Battalions for environmental protection in Petén.
- Support of Armed Forces in the National Plan for Jaguar preservation.
- Air and land patrols in Hombre Reserve and the Platano River, Tahuaca and Patuca Biospheres.
- Command actions for the environment, under which various programs to prevent the illegal exploitation of natu-
Honduras ral resources are developed, including forest protection and ecosystems conservation.
-The Armed Forces, by decree, is permitted to engage in reforestation of areas under their management and to
utilize these products to the benefi t of themselves, for example through the Military Pension Institute.
- The National Defence Secretariat participates in the production of trees in military-run nurseries, reforestation
activities at National Parks, protected natural areas, and military-owned rural areas.
- Comprehensive program of inspection and surveillance as part of the fi ght against illegal fi shing. Land and mari-
time patrols, which include the deployment of marines, are performed in coordination with federal bodies, fi shing
Mexico producers and municipal governments.
- Provision of security at the strategic facilities of PEMEX and the Federal Power Committee, through maritime, air
and land patrols.
- The Naval Secretariat maintains permanent cooperation programs with industries responsible for the production
of strategic resources, such as fuels and hydrocarbons.
- Bosawas Ecologic Battalion contributes to the protection and control of natural resources as well as to the Secu-
rity Plans in Rural Areas, ensuring the security of productive activities in the country’s rural areas.
NNicaragua - Reforestation plan and Operation Green Gold, carried out in distinct areas of the country as part of the overall
mission to protect and preserve the country’s principal natural reserves.
- Plan for the Protection of Natural Resources and Protected Areas: resource protection and preservation activities
in order to ensure environmental protection.
- Reforestation plan of the Armed Forces.
- The Environmental Military Advisory Council coordinates actions of the Armed Forces in defence of the environ-
Paraguay
ment through an Environmental Defence Battalion (Green Helmet), which is under the authority of the Military
Forces Command.
- Preservation of the environment in general, and biodiversity in particular, forms one of the national security objec-
tives, as defi ned according to national interests.
Peru - Antarctic Policy: develops scientifi c research programs. Promotes compliance with environmental conservation
treaties and protocols, with the ecological balance, and the protection of Antarctic resources.
- One of the strategic objectives of the Army is environmental protection within its territory. Management, preser-
vation, operation and improvement of national parks and protected areas through the Army Park Service in Santa
Teresa, Rocha department.
Uruguay - Cleaning and reforestation activities, as well as campaigns promoting environmental preservation.
- Mitigation of pollution from ships and maritime facilities, such as the neutralization of the adverse impact of
marine pollution.
- Combined exercises for the defence of the South and Orinoco, with the aim of verifying the operational capacity,
functional effectiveness, and response levels of teams of the Bolivarian National Armed Forces.
VVenezuela - Reforestation and support to the Bolivarian National Guard in the Tree Mission, promoted by the Ministry of the
People’s Power for the Environment.
Source:White Papers: Argentina (2010), Brazil (2012) and Peru (2005);Memoria Institucional del Ministerio de Defensa de Bolivia (2013);Memorias del Ministerio de Defensa Nacional de Colombia al Congreso (2012-
2013);Informe de Gestión de las Fuerzas Armadas de Ecuador (2013); Informe de Rendición de Cuentas del Ministerio de la Defensa Nacional de El Salvadorr ( - ); Informe de Gobierno de Guatemala;
Primer Informe de Labores de la Secretaría de Marina de México (2013);Memoria Anual del Ejército de Nicaragua(2013), Memoria del Ministerio de las Fuerzas Armadas de República Dominicana (2012) and the websites
of the Offi ce of the President of Argentina, Peru, and Uruguay; Environmental and Sustainable Development, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Air Force of Argentina; Navy of Chile and Ecuador; Ministries and Secretariats of
Defence of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile , El Salvador, Honduras, Paraguay, and Venezuela; Management and Operational Centre of the System for the Protection of the Amazon of the Ministry of Defence of Brazil, and
the Brazilian Environmental and Natural Resource Institute; Ministry of Mining and of the Environment of Chile; Environmental Information System of Colombia; Colombian Area Committee; National Offi ce of Information
and Statistics of Cuba; Revolutionary Armed Forces of Cuba; Dominican Republic Armed Forces; Ministry of Natural Resources of Ecuador; Secretariat of State of Natural Resources and the Environment of Honduras; Army of
Nicaragua; Vice-ministry of Mining and Energy of Paraguay; Joint Command of the Armed Forces of Peru; Ministry of the People’s Power for Communication and Information, for the Environment, and for Interior Relations
and Justice, of Venezuela; United Nations Environmental Program; United Nations Organization for Food and Agriculture, Economic Commission for Latin America (CEPAL) and the Organization of American States (OAS).

Chapter 8: Defence and National and International Community

Strategic Mining Resources for Defence
Latin America is one of the richest regions of the world in terms of natural resources, with the location of some of the largest reserves of a number
of different minerals that can be considered to be strategic assets, as they are by the majority of the region’s countries. These materials possess a
broad range of application, from economic to defence, are diffi cult to replace with equivalent materials, and possess a high level of concentration
or a large reserve in a single locality, thus creating a major risk to supply.
Regional production Main regional Largest global Examples of Defence
as a percentage of
Material Use producers concentration Production in Latin
global production
(2012) America
Aluminium Structures and metallic alloys. 4% Argentina, Brazil, China (42%)
Venezuela.
• UUndder a UUNNAASSUURR iiniitiiatiive
Antimony Batteries, glass and ceramics. 3% Bolivia, Guatemala China (79%) production of an airplane base is
being developed for training and
Argentina, Bolivia,
Copper Am m m at u e n ri i a ti l o s n a , n b d a c ll a is r tic 45% Brazil M , C ex h i i c le o , , C Pe o r lo u m , bia, Chile (32%) u • n In m c a o n o n p e e d r a a t ir io cr n a f w t. ith China, Bo-
components. Dominican Republic. livia has launched its fi rst satellite.
Chrome Airplane components. 1.5% Brazil. South Africa (40%) • Guatemala produces the Kalil
SMG-Kukulgan Assault Rifl e and
ammunition.
Ammunition, ballistics
Molybdenum material, engine 25% Argentina, Chile, China (42%) • Argentina develops the ‘Gau-
components and aircraft. Mexico, Peru. cho’ Lightweight Air-transport-
able Vehicle.
Magnetic materials, radars
Niobium and communication 93% Brazil. Brazil (93%) • As part of the program to build
systems. submarines in cooperation with
France, in the Bra-
Platinum Electronic components. 0.8% Colombia. South Africa (72%) zilian government opened an in-
Lead Ammunition. 12% Argentina, Brazil, China (48%) dustrial complex in Itaguaí, which
includes a unit for the production
Rhenium Electronic components. 52% Chile. Chile (52%) of structures and shipyards re-
sponsible for the construction of
Tantalus Electronic components. 14% Brazil. Rwanda (28%)
submarines.
Titanium Bo la a n t, d a v ir e p h la ic n le e , s m tru is c s t il u e r , e a s. nd 0.5% Brazil Australia (19%) • la u I n n c h 2 e 0 d 1 2 th , e th H e e x B a r fl a u z o ili r a id n e N U a r v a y -
nium Pilot Unit, the production
Tungsten Am m m at u e n ri i a ti l o s n a , n b d a c ll a is r tic 2% Dom Bo in li i v c i a a n , B R r e a p zi u l, blic China (83%) c fu e e n l t e cy r c f l o e r . completing the nuclear
components.
Uranium Nuclear energy. 0.4% Brazil. Kazakhstan (36%)
The 5 countries with the largest share of mining within
their export income (between 2010-2012)
Chile Peru Bolivia Brazil Colombia Energy
62% 41% 29% 24% 20% Resource
Reserves in Oil reserves Natural gas Coal reserves
Latin America (millions reserves (in tonnes)
of barrels)) (billion
cubic meters)
Argentina 2.4 0.3 -
Bolivia - 0.3 -
Brazil 15.6 0.5 6,630
The 5 countries with the largest contribution
Chile - - -
of mining to GDP (between 2010-2012)
Colombia 2.4 0.2 6,746
Chile Ecuador Peru Bolivia Argentina
14.7% 12.6% 8.9% 8.6% 3.4%
Ecuador 8.2 - -
Peru 1.4 0.4 -
Trinidad and Tobago 0.4 0.4 -
Venezuela 298.3 5.6 479
Other countries 0.5 0.1 786
Total 329.6 7.7 14,641
Source:Compilation based on the Report on Critical Raw Materials for the EU (2014) by the European Commission; World Mining Data volume 29 (2014) of the
International Committee of the World Mining Congress;Relatório Finall (2014) of the Temporary Subcommittee for the Elaboration of the Regulatory Framework Bill
for Mining and the Exploration of Rare Metals in Brazil, of the Federal Senate of Brazil; Mineral Commodity Summaries (2014) of the Department of the Interior of
the United States;Recursos naturales: Situación y tendencias para una agenda de desarrollo regional en América Latina y Caribe (2013) of the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean; websites of the Offi ce of the President of the Republic of Brazil, of the Ministries of Defence of Brazil and Guatemala. Statistical
Review of World Energy (2014), British Petroleum.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Total Renewable Water Resources (cubic meters per capita, per year)
“Rare Earth Elements”
‘Rare earth elements’ is the term applied to a series of 15 lanthanide metals which have a wide
range of applications in industrial production. They exist in relatively large amounts in the world, but
are now considered to be highly strategic resources due to their military and civilian industrial uses,
combined with the density of their production.
World production of rare earth elements reached 110,000 tons in 2013, and of this amount China is
responsible for 100,000 tons and has an estimated reserve of 55,000,000 tons. Between Latin Amer-
ican countries, Brazil has the second largest mineral reserves in the world at 22,000,000 tons, which
corresponds to 16% of total world reserves of these minerals. Brazil contributed 140 tons in 2013.
Element Industrial Uses
Cerium Glasses and glass pigments.
Dysprosium High power magnets.
Scandium Light metals for the aerospace industry
Europium Guided weapons systems and communications.
Erbium Laser, glass pigments.
Water Resources in Latin America
(Km3 per year) Gadolinium Contrast agent in magnetic resonance.
Holmium Most magnetic element known to man.
External Internal Total
Argentina 584.2 292 876.2 Lanthanum L c i a g t h io t n m . U et s a e l d s, in la s c e o r m , t m em un p i e c r a a t t io u n re s s a e n n d s o g r u s i , d m ed ic a ro rm w a a m ve e s n a t t s e . llite communi-
Bolivia 270.5 303.5 574 Lutetium Phosphor for X-rays.
Brazil 2.9 5.6 8.6
Hydraulic fracturing, magnetic computers and lasers. Used in communi-
Chile 38 885 923 Neodymium cation devices, electric motors and guided weapons systems.
Colombia 90 2270 2360
Praseodymium Refl ectors, lights and aviation signals.
Costa Rica 0 113 113
Prometheus Source of beta radiation, catalysis of hydraulic fracturing.
Cuba 0 38.1 38.1 Samarium High-temperature magnetics, reactor control rods. Used in control sys-
Dominican Republic 0 21 21 tems and electric motors.
Ecuador 15 442.4 457.4 Terbium Screens and phosphor lighting.
El Salvador 10.6 15.6 26.2 Thulium High power magnets.
Guatemala 18.7 109.2 127.9 Ytterbium Fiber optics, solar panels, light metals, lazers and portable X-ray radia-
tion machines.
Haiti 1 13 14
Honduras 1.5 90.6 92.1 Regulatory Framework Law for Rare Metals in Brazil
Mexico 52.8 409 461.8 At the time of publication, a law that aims to regulate and order the sale and extraction of rare earth
elements in Brazil was under consideration in the Congress of Brazil.
Nicaragua 8.3 156.2 164.5 Based on a report produced by the Temporary Committee for the Regulatory Framework of Rare
Panama 2.7 136.6 139.3 Earths, the law outlines measures to increase the country’s productive capacity. Only 30% of the
country’s geological reserves are known. It also seeks to increase penetration into a market that is
Paraguay 270.8 117 387.8
almost entirely dominated by China. Government investment and fi scal incentives would then be
Peru 253.8 1641 1894.8 routed to decrease dependence on imported materials through the processing of crude resources,
Uruguay 80 92.2 172.2 which would then recuperate its strategic and monetary value.
Venezuela 520 805 1325 Country Reserve Production in 2013
Approximate
Actual external renewable water resources: the Reserves of CChina 55,000,000 100,000
share of the country’s annual renewable water resources Rare Earth BBrazil 22,000,000 140
that are not generated within the country.
Elements in UUnited States 13,000,000 4,000
Actual internal renewable water resources: corre- the World
spond to long-term average annual fl ow of rivers and (tons) MMalaysia 3,100,000 100
the recharge of aquifers generated from endogenous OOther countries 41,000,000 No data
precipitation. TTotal 140,000,000 110,000
Source: Compilation based on an evaluation of national statistics on hydrocarbon resources of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, the Mineral
Commodity Summaries (2014) of the United States Geological Service,Relatório Finall (2014) of the Temporary Subcommittee for the Elaboration of the Regulatory
Framework Bill for Mining and the Exploration of Rare Metals in Brazil, of the Senate of Brazil.

Chapter 8: Defence and National and International Community

Antarctica
The Antarctic Treaty was signed in Washington in , establishing that Antarctica will be ex-
Bases in Antarctica as of 2014
clusively used for peaceful purposes and prohibiting the establishment of military bases, although military
Country Bases Personnel(1) presence for research or any other peaceful purpose is not prohibited.
America
Argggentina 12 508
States joining the Antarctic Treaty
Brazil 1 60
Chile 17 413 China / India
Ecuador 1 32
Peru 1 30
United States 3 1,,495 1961: Original countries South Korea
Urugggguayyyy 2 60
Africa Argentina Norway
Australia Poland
South Africa 1 80 Belgium Russia
Asia Chile South Africa
China 3 164 France United Kingdom
Japan United States
India 2 70 New Zealand Brazil Bulgaria Spain Ukraine
Japppan 4 144
Uruguay
South Korea 1 100 Finland / Sweden
Oceania Australia 4 200
New Zealand 1 85
Europa
Belgggium 1 31 Bulgggaria 1 25 Territorial claims Czech Repppublic 1 20 The countries with
Finland 1 16 territorial claims include:
France 2 180 Argentina, Australia,
Germanyyy 6 176 Chile, France, New Zealand,
Italyyy 3 196 Norway and United
Norwayyy 2 28 Kingdom.
Poland 1 35 The grounds for the claims
Russia 10 395 include: discovery,
Sppain 2 56 permanent occupation,
Sweden 3 25 territorial continuity or
Ukraine 1 15 historical presence. United Kingggdom 4 222
Shared bases
Australia and Romania 1 11
France and Italy 1 70
(1) The personnel category refers to the maximum
number of personnel authorized.
Source: Websites of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ecuador, of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Agreement, of the Scientifi c Committee on Antarctic Research, Ar-
gentine Navy and Argentina Antarctic Institute, of the Department of Sustainability, Development, Water, Population and Community of the Government of Australia,
and the Antarctic Treaty (1959).
2691 3691 4691 5691 6691 7691
Holland
8691 9691 0971 1791 2791 3791 4791 5791 6791 7791 8791 9791 0891 1891 2891 3891 4891 5891 6891 7891 8891 9891 0991 1991 2991
Peru / Italy
Germany Ecuador
U NI T
A
E R
C
D
H
G
I
L E
E
K
N
I
N
TI
G
N
D
A
O M
A N
N
TA
O
R
R
T
W
IC
A
A
Y
R
A LI
A
T
S U
A FRA
N
CE
NEW
ZEALAND
Analysis
Natural Disasters and the Armed Forces,
a Piece on an Unfi nished Route
Roberto Cajina
Founding Member of RESDAL
to natural or non-natural disasters” and to support the
of the Americas (Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Bolivia, 22- efforts of the OAS and UN OCHA. However, at the IX
25 ) the relation between the Armed CDMA there was no follow-up to the agreement, nor
Forces and natural disasters had been addressed in a results or continuation.
somewhat marginal manner. By Banff, Canada (Sep- The earthquakes in Haiti () and Chile
tember 2008), the subject began to take shape. Minis- (, with the subsequent tsunami) brought
ters agreed there to “explore the possibility of estab- into focus the role of the military in disaster situations.
lishing an inventory of capabilities and the creation of In the case of Haiti, because its lack of an Army meant it
a regional working group in support of civilian relief had to rely on military assistance from the United States;
agencies and organizations, with the aim of improving and in Chile, because there was a delay in ordering the
communication, coordination, planning and response deployment of troops to safeguard public security and

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

order, and to support civil defence tasks through miti- ommendation, noting that “the Ministries of Defense
gation and search and rescue tasks. will submit the proposal for the consideration of the
In 2009, RESDAL agreed with the Ministry of Defence responsible national authorities of each State with pri-
of Bolivia, host of the IX CDMA, to the development mary competence in the matter. Countries’ participa-
of a consultancy to train ministerial staff in the dynam- tion will be voluntary in compliance with their own le-
ics and procedures of the Conference, and to assist in gal system”. They also commissioned “the Pro-Tempore
the development of events organized by the Ministry, Secretariat to make this matter known and to submit it
which aimed at constructing the proposed Thematic for consideration through the relevant channels of oth-
Agenda. Considering that each CDMA has its own per- er organizations at hemispheric, regional, sub-regional
sonality, and given the impact of both tragedies and levels, which have competence over matters of natural
recurrent natural disasters that affect the region’s coun- disasters.” Since the paragraph did not receive unani-
tries, the actors consulted throughout this process con- mous agreement, a vote was called: 19 in favor, seven
cluded that the XI Conference would address the issue against and two abstentions.
of the Armed Forces and Natural Disasters. One of the main limitations of the system of the
This materialized in the third thematic pillar of the Conferences of Defence Ministers of the Americas is
Agenda: “Regional Security and Natural Disasters. that their “sole purpose [is] to promote mutual under-
Strengthening Hemispheric Cooperation”, which was standing, analysis, discussion and exchange of ideas
developed into two sub-themes: Regional capacity to and experiences in the fi eld of defence and security,
respond to natural disasters: Risk management and or any other interaction mechanism that allows this to
inventory response capabilities, protocols for coordi- be achieved”; the other limitation is that their closing
nation and cooperation; and Experiences and lessons statements are not binding. Although Article 18 of the
learned in Haiti and Chile. Regulations refers to “commitments and provisions
In Santa Cruz de la Sierra ministers reached the fi rst adopted by the Conference of Defence Ministers of the
commitment in the history of the CMDA: they agreed Americas”, Santa Cruz de la Sierra saw this assumed for
“to analyze the proposal entitled `Strengthening part- the fi rst time since Williamsburg 1995.
nerships in support of humanitarian assistance and From Banff to Santa Cruz de la Sierra, and from there
disaster relief’ in working groups coordinated by the to “Mechanism of Exchange of Information” some
Pro-Tempore Secretariat of the CDMA, with voluntary progress was made, but not enough, nor with the
and open participation by the member States, to be speed and urgency that cooperation in disaster situ-
held in 2011, for the implementation of a collabora- ations demands. While exchanging information about
tion mechanism among the Ministries of Defense to capabilities is the fi rst step, what is needed is a prac-
strengthen military capacities for humanitarian assistance tical protocol for inter-ministerial cooperation and its
to support civilian authorities at the national level as well immediate application. For this, the Oslo Guidelines
as other pertinent entities.” provide an important platform.
Under the Agreement a meeting was held to discuss Unlike the ministries of defence, the Conference of
the proposal (San Jose, Costa Rica, 29-30 ) American Armies has a “Guide to Procedures. Support
in which it was proposed, albeit without consensus, Operations in Disasters” and the System of Coopera-
“that a Military Assistance Collaboration Center (MACC) tion among American Air Forces has the “Combined
would serve as a Coordination Body between the au- Air Operations Manual of the System of Cooperation
thorities of each country, based on the laws of the Among the American Air Forces for Humanitarian and
country affected [that] would coordinate international Disaster Assistance”.
assistance from an operational point of view”. Ideally for CDMA XI (Peru 2014), the proposal that
In the X CDMA (Punta del Este, Uruguay, 8-10 Octo- the ministers agreed on at the X CDMA will have been
ber 2012) the Commission of Thematic Area I – Natural studied by the national authorities of each state that
Disasters, Environmental Protection and Biodiversity - hold primary jurisdiction on the matter. This would
recommended that the parties “accept the ‘Mechanism give a fi rst taste of their real and effective commitment
of Exchange of Information on Capacities in support to the benefi t of the peoples of the Americas and the
of Natural Disasters’, presented by the rapporteur of Caribbean, repeatedly affected by all kinds of disasters,
the Working Group [Chile], for its eventual adoption”. both natural and manmade, through extensive loss of
In the Final Declaration, ministers accepted the rec- lives and millions of property damage.
etuoR
dehsinfi
nU
na
no
eceiP
a
,secroF
demrA
eht
dna
sretsasiD
larutaN
/
anijaC
otreboR