Annual Report 2023
Stanford Institute
for Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence

Letter from the HAI Leadership Team
In the realms of Policy & Society, we experienced a music. HAI is committed to growing our intellectual
surge in demand among global policymakers for our capital by appointing additional Senior Fellows.
educational programs and briefings on critical AI
In a year of unprecedented AI innovation and growth, Stanford HAI was As we look ahead to our fifth anniversary and the
topics. Our breakthrough accomplishments include:
unrelenting pace of AI development, we remain true to
well positioned to shape the increasingly urgent conversation about the
— The success of our leadership efforts with top our mission of advancing AI research, education, policy
computer science universities and a bipartisan, and practice to improve the human condition. We
need for a human-centered approach to AI. While the world pondered
bicameral group of lawmakers to bring the National AI appreciate the ongoing support and encouragement
the implications of generative models like Stable Diffusion and ChatGPT, Research Resource (NAIRR) to fruition, as well as the of the extended HAI community, including our faculty,
pivotal role we played in advancing the CREATE AI Act affiliates, students, donors, advisory council members,
we drew on many years of prior thinking and interdisciplinary scholarship
and above all, our staff. We realize that we could not do
— Fei-Fei and Rob Reich holding a meeting with
to further establish the institute as a leading voice in guiding the this important work without all of you.
President Biden in to encourage him to
development of fair and ethical AI across society. adopt a moonshot mentality when thinking about AI
— The ability to help shape EU perspectives on the EU AI Act
Contents
During the Academic Year 2022-23, HAI took great through our technical research on foundation models
strides forward in our primary focus areas of Research
— The launch of the Tech Ethics & Policy summer
1 Letter from the HAI Leadership Team & Education and Policy & Society to guide and build
fellowship program, with notable placements in
2 HAI Research Focus the future of AI as it applies to medicine, government,
the White House, Senate Committee on Homeland
education, and many other aspects of daily life. Our
3 HAI Conferences Security and Governmental Affairs, American
network of Stanford-funded faculty continued to grow,
Enterprise Institute, USAID, and Brookings Institution
with more than $40 million distributed to date through
Research & Education
our grant programs. Research & Education highlights We’re excited to announce several new collaborations John Etchemendy Fei-Fei Li
5 Education from the past year include: on campus and beyond. For example, HAI has Patrick Suppes Family Sequoia Professor, Computer
7 State of AI Reports partnered with Stanford Medicine on an initiative called Professor in the School of Science Department
— A new holistic framework for evaluating large
Humanities and Sciences
Responsible AI for Safe and Equitable Health (RAISE- Denning Co-Director,
8 Grant Programs for AI Research language models across a wide range of criteria,
Health), which seeks to address critical ethical and safety Denning Co-Director, Stanford HAI
developed by HAI’s Center for Research on
12 Research Centers Stanford HAI
issues in AI for health and medicine. We’re also working
Foundation Models
with the Cyber Policy Center (CPC) on convenings and
Policy & Society
— The latest edition of the AI Index Report, which programs to address AI in the Global South.
garnered widespread media coverage and
19 Policy Engagement
HAI’s relationship with industry partners is evolving,
demonstrated significant growth in global AI
23 Education and Training for Policymakers too. From finance and retail to food and beverage, the
legislation (from 25 countries in 2022 to 127
institute has begun to shape how industries think about
24 Policy Research countries in 2023)
AI and to play a critical role in ensuring that industry
27 Policy Convenings
— Support for various new Student Affinity Groups and implements AI in a human-centered, responsible
28 Society Graduate Fellows to help develop young AI scholars way. In the last academic year, we welcomed five
new corporate members into our affiliate program:
— Involvement in a range of theme-specific research
About HAI
McKinsey, SCBx, PepsiCo, LVMH, and SAP. James Landay Russell Wald
communities across Stanford, including in the areas
30 People of safety, healthcare, and education, to promote the Within the institute, we’ve expanded the HAI team Anand Rajaraman and Venky Deputy Director,
Harinarayan Professor, School Stanford HAI
38 Events importance of a human-centered AI approach to include three new faculty Associate Directors: of Engineering, Professor of
Julian Nyarko from the Stanford Law School brings
40 Industry Programs — Through our cloud credit program, scholars Computer Science
experience applying machine learning to explore
42 Content and Communications launched DSPy, an open-source project that enables Denning Co-Director and
contract design under U.S. and international law; Amy
Faculty Director of Research,
researchers to build powerful systems with small,
44 Financials Zegart joins us from the Hoover Institution, where she Stanford HAI
inexpensive language models (LMs).
directs the Robert and Marion Oster National Security
Affairs Fellows program; and Ge Wang, Professor of
Music, specializes in the art of design and computer

HAI Research Focus Spotlights
HAI Conferences
Hoffman-Yee Symposium
Each year HAI hosts an annual conference
All of HAI’s research initiatives are tied to at least one of three
on a relevant or emerging AI topic, in order
The Hoffman-Yee Grant Symposium highlighted the
imperatives that were identified at the institute’s founding: understanding to catalyze new interdisciplinary research
work of six research teams that received funding in
collaborations, discussions, and conversations.
the human and societal impact of AI, augmenting human capabilities, 2022 to solve some of the most challenging problems
By convening leading experts from computer
in AI. Each team presented its results to date and
and developing AI technologies inspired by human intelligence. science, engineering, ethics, law, and the
competed for additional funding of up to $2 million
social sciences, the institute takes a holistic
over the next two years. Grant recipients from 2021 also
look at how AI is transforming our world. These
presented their work to date and plans for the future.
conferences allow researchers who may not
normally interact to exchange ideas, identify
Human Impact RAISE-Health: Responsible AI for Safe shared interests, and form new partnerships.
and Equitable Health
In , “AI in the Loop: Humans
To develop equitable and trustworthy technology, we
In response to rapid advances in AI for health and in Charge” challenged participants to rethink
must understand how AI performs in practice and medicine, HAI collaborated with Stanford Medicine the phrase “human-in-the-loop” and consider
affects humanity. Our multidisciplinary research on this to launch a new initiative that seeks to address critical a future where humans remain at the center
ethical and safety issues. Co-led by Stanford School of all AI technologies. HAI’s 2023 Spring
technology’s human impact aims to realize this vision.
of Medicine Dean Lloyd Minor and Fei-Fei Li, RAISE- Symposium, titled “Creativity in the Age of AI”
Health has articulated three goals: and supported by the Doris Duke Foundation,
focused on the impact of these technologies
— Enhance clinical care outcomes through responsible
on the creative field.
integration of AI
— Accelerate research to solve the biggest challenges The 2022 Fall Conference, organized by James Landay and
in health and medicine Russ Altman on the topic of “AI in the Loop, Humans in Charge.”
Photos: Christine Baker
Augmenting Human Capabilities
— Educate patients, care providers, and researchers to
navigate AI advances
Research efforts that augment human capabilities have
the potential to educate, train, and support individuals
HELM: Holistic Evaluation of
in ways that lead to progress in health care, education,
Language Models
sustainability, automation, and other domains.
In an effort to improve transparency across the
commercial AI landscape, HAI worked with the
Center for Research on Foundation Models (CRFM)
to introduce a holistic framework for evaluating large
language models. This new framework covers a broad
range of use cases and evaluates applications across a
comprehensive set of relevant metrics such as fairness,
Intelligence efficiency, robustness, and toxicity.
Intelligence initiatives aim to develop AI that understands
human language, emotions, inventions, behaviors, and
interactions at multiple scales.
2 3

Research & Education Education
HAI is committed to fostering a diverse range of voices, which
Led by Vanessa Parli, Director
includes an intentional investment in the next generation of AI thinkers.
HAI is developing the following programs to strengthen the young
of Research, HAI continued to
scholar AI community.
seek out and fund projects with
the potential to develop AI that is
Student Affinity Groups
In , HAI launched a pilot student affinity
collaborative, augmentative, and
group program that invites students from any of
Stanford’s seven schools to identify a topic of
interest to pursue and recruit their own small group
enhancing to human productivity
of interdisciplinary teammates. Projects run for the
academic year and are eligible for funding to cover
and quality of life. basic expenses. Results from the inaugural six teams
included a comedian-moderated AI panel, an interview
series profiling individuals working at the intersection
of AI and creative expression, and a position paper on
intelligent writing agents, which was accepted into
In2Writing, a workshop on intelligent writing assistants.
Graduate Fellows
HAI offers a three-quarter fellowship program
for Stanford graduate students to encourage
interdisciplinary research conversations, facilitate
new collaborations, and grow the HAI community of
graduate scholars who are working in the area of AI. The Isabelle Levent and Lila Shroff, participants in this year’s HAI Student Affinity
Group pilot project. Photo: Jeanina Casusi
program fosters collaboration among engineers, social
scientists, humanists, and others researching the future
of purposeful, intentional, and human-centered AI.
Human-Centered AI Course by
AI Literacy in K-12 Schools Peter Norvig
HAI’s K-12 programs focus on enhancing AI literacy for In its second year, CS139: Human-Centered AI
educators and students. For example, the AI4ALL emphasized the intersection of AI development and
summer camp immerses students in hands-on AI human impact, delving into how advanced tools
research and mentoring at Stanford. Together, these must be designed with consideration for their effects
K-12 initiatives equip teachers and youth with the on users and communities. Open to graduate and
knowledge, skills, and access needed to shape AI undergraduate students, the curriculum aims to foster
innovations in ways that reflect community needs. a thorough understanding of the importance of safety
and positive outcomes in the field of AI. The course was
recorded and is intended to become a signature HAI
online course for professionals.
4 5

Executive Education Theme-specific Research Communities State of AI Reports
Offered in-person and virtually, HAI’s executive HAI supported the following activities to grow theme-
education programs are designed to cultivate synergy specific interdisciplinary research communities across AI100 AI Index
and strengthen connections between academic campus and beyond:
The One Hundred Year Study of Artificial Intelligence HAI and the AI Index Steering Committee published the
endeavors and industry in alignment with HAI’s
mission. These programs provide a platform for faculty, AI+Safety (AI100) is a 100-year effort to study and anticipate 2023 AI Index report in . The latest edition
how AI will affect every part of human life. The study included data from a broad set of academic, private,
postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and other To foster human-centeredness and values of safety,
is administered by HAI and managed by a standing and nonprofit organizations as well as more self-
participants to engage with real-world use cases. The trust, and responsibility when developing AI methods
committee of AI leaders from institutions around the collected data and original analysis than any previous
aim is to not only test but also develop human-centered and solutions, HAI continues to partner with labs and
world, chaired by Vincent Conitzer at Carnegie Mellon edition. The latest report included new analysis on
AI applications, fostering a collaborative environment centers across campus. This work includes the 2023
University. AI100 releases reports every five years with foundation models, including their geopolitics and
that aligns academic expertise with practical, Stanford Data Science Conference, for which HAI
the goal of documenting AI developments and their training costs, the environmental impact of AI systems,
industry-driven challenges. In 2022-23, HAI delivered judged and sponsored an award to Xiao Ge for her
ethical implications for society, as well as providing a K-12 AI education, and public opinion trends in AI.
executive education programs to a diverse set of work on How Emotion Shapes Creative Collaborative
through line that marks the trajectory of the field. The AI Index also broadened its tracking of global AI
organizations, including Barclays London, Accenture, Work; Stanford’s Trust and Safety Research Conference
legislation from 25 countries in 2022 to 127 in 2023.
Wells Fargo, and SCBx. 2023, where HAI organized and moderated a panel In 2023, AI100 launched an essay competition to hear
on Mental Health and AI; and Stanford’s Center for AI directly from the next generation of AI scholars as The AI Index received positive press coverage around
Course Highlight
Safety, for which HAI supported many collaborative a way of laying the groundwork for the next report the time of the launch and throughout the rest of the
HAI’s inaugural on-campus executive education activities including the center’s Annual Meeting. scheduled to be released in 2026. After reviewing 54 academic year. Highlights included pieces from The
program, “Executive Upskilling for HR,” was conducted submissions, the AI100 Standing Committee selected Washington Post, Bloomberg, IEEE Spectrum, and the
for Barclays London over three consecutive days. AI+Health Care University of Texas at Austin Assistant Professor San Francisco Chronicle. In 2023, website visits and
Attendees included Barclays Executive Committee in HAI co-organized the second AI+Health Conference, Samantha Shorey’s essay as the winner. Shorey’s report downloads also tripled.
HR, totaling 15 executives. Topics ranged from human- in collaboration with the Center for Artificial Intelligence essay advocates for greater attention to the labor of
Estimated Training Cost of Select Large Language
centered AI, AI for financial services, data privacy, and in Medicine and Imaging (AIMI), and the Center for AI integration performed by essential workers. Shorey
and Multimodal Models The AI Index estimates
security to structuring AI Initiatives. Continuing Medical Education (CME). The December will serve on the next study panel tasked with writing
validate popular claims that large language and
2022 event brought together leading experts from the 2026 AI100 Report. In addition to the winner, AI100
Seminar Series multimodal models are increasingly costing millions
academia, industry, government, and clinical practice released a collection of five essays that thoughtfully
of dollars to train. For example, Chinchilla, a large
Each academic year, HAI organizes research seminars to explore critical and emerging issues related to AI’s consider AI at the intersection of morality, regulation,
language model launched by DeepMind in ,
to bring the AI community together around common impact across the spectrum of health care. love, labor, and religion.
is estimated to have cost $2.1 million, while BLOOM’s
interests. In AY 2022-23, HAI hosted 15 seminars
AI+Education training is thought to have cost $2.3 million.
featuring scholars from Stanford and beyond across
a wide range of topics, from collaborative robots to HAI partnered with the Stanford Accelerator for Estimated training cost of select large language & multimodal models
ethical AI and health care AI applications to embodied Learning to organize the AI+Education Summit: AI in
intelligence. This year’s seminars included computer the Service of Teaching and Learning in .
scientist and entrepreneur Yoav Shoham’s discussion The summit showcased the latest research in AI and
around “Understanding, Understanding,” and HAI education from Stanford faculty and researchers, offering
Visiting Artist Lauren Lee McCarthy’s innovative work networking opportunities with industry partners, VCs,
titled “I Heard Talking Was Dangerous.” On average, and government and civic society organizations. Given
about 300 attendees joined for each seminar (virtually ChatGPT was just released, the summit asked how AI can
and in-person) representing over 100 countries transform teaching and learning in an ethical, equitable,
throughout the year. and safe manner. The conference offered a platform
to inspire structured roundtable discussions and team
formation toward HAI/GSE seed funding, where HAI
contributed $225K to fund 10 faculty-lead projects. Other
conference outcomes included a Seminar on Generative
AI and Education, a student-led paper reading group, and
student affinity groups.
tsoC
gniniarT
)sralloD
fo
snoilliM
ni(
2-TPG

2019 2020 2021 2022
B11-5T aneeM GLN
gniruT
B571
3-TPG
E-LLAD -oaD
uW
nauY
neW
oeN-TPG B6-J-TPG avolCrepyH 0.3
EINRE
xedoC gniruT-nortageM B035
GLN
rehpoG edoCahplA B02-XoeN-TPG allihcnihC )B045(
MLaP
noisuffiD
elbatS
)G-8-LK-MDL( B571-TPO )B045(
avreniM
B031-MLG MOOLB
11.35
Mid High Low
8.55
8.01
1.97 1.47 1.80 2.11 1.69 2.29
1.03
0.05 0.11 0.23 0.02 0.09 0.43 0.27 0.01 0.14 0.09 0.24 0.60 0.16
Source: Al Index, 2022 I Chart: 2023 Al Index Report
6 7

Grant Programs for AI Research 2018-2023, >$40M to faculty in all seven schools
Funding by School
Since its founding, HAI’s grant programs have supported over 300 faculty
members from all seven Stanford schools focusing on projects aligned with
three research focus areas: human impact, augment human capabilities, and School of Engineering—$16.3M
intelligence. Many of these projects span multiple departments, in keeping
with the commitment to support interdisciplinary AI research. School of Humanities & Sciences—$10M
School of Medicine—$8.8M
The HAI network of funded The chart below illustrates the interdisciplinary growth of the HAI
faculty continues to grow research network. Over the years, more dots (faculty) appear and they
cluster closer together demonstrating that they are more often working Graduate School of Education—$2.3M
together. Importantly, the clusters are more than one color meaning that
the connections are increasingly interdisciplinary. Through the grant
programs, HAI has distributed over $40 million in funding across Stanford. Law School—$1.3M Seed
Cloud
2018 2019 2020
Hoffman-Yee
44 faculty 102 faculty 199 faculty
AIMI-HAI
Graduate School of Business—$924k
HAI-Precourt
HAI-SAL
HAI-WuTsai
School of Sustainability—$581k
Many faculty who have been
The best part was being able to think
involved in the grant programs
big and abstract and have a supportive
express how impactful this funding
has been in incentivizing the group helping to make a solution a reality.
2021 2022 2023
265 faculty 325 faculty 364 faculty interdisciplinary work that’s so
essential to human-centered AI: Christian Rose, Emergency Medicine
An injection of funds into the The best part of the program is that it
research ecosystem, especially for provides funding for new and riskier
interdisciplinary projects, is much projects.
needed and appreciated.
Jackelyn Hwang, Sociology
Faculty members Sustainability Law Education H&S Medicine Engineering Business
Mike Frank, Psychology
Funded connections
8 9

HAI runs four types of grant programs with specific and disparate objectives:
Seed Research Grants Project Highlight Partnership Grants Project Highlight
The Mineral-X initiative was developed based on In , a team of researchers from HAI and AIMI
The Seed Research Grants, supported early on by Steve In 2023, HAI partnered Artificial Intelligence in
relationships that emerged from an HAI seed grant published their work on “The shaky foundations of large
and Roberta Denning and for the past four years by Medicine and Imaging (AIMI) and the Stanford
project. The project uses Partially Observable Markov language models and foundation models for electronic
Dalio Philanthropies, are dedicated to supporting new, Accelerator for Learning on grant programs. These
Decision Processes to build intelligent agents for two health records.” The project examined 84 foundation
ambitious, and speculative ideas with the objective of partnership grants enable the institute to quickly initiate
use cases: (1) safely and efficiently storing CO2 and (2) models trained on non-imaging EMR data and created a
getting initial results. Since the program’s start in 2018, new research in key areas as AI advancements continue
safely and efficiently discovering battery metals required taxonomy delineating their architectures, training data,
approximately $12 million in awards has attracted over to accelerate. For example, in , after the
for technologies such as electric vehicles. This initiative and potential use cases. Researchers found that most
$17 million in external funding creating a multiplier launch of ChatGPT, in collaboration with the Stanford
is working to develop an Intelligent Agent by formulating models are trained on small, narrowly scoped clinical
effect. This outcome demonstrates the program’s Accelerator for Learning, HAI quickly launched a
sequential decision problems in a real-world setting that datasets or broad, public biomedical corpora and are
promise in identifying high-reward, speculative, and grant program focused on exploring how generative
can address the speed and urgency of climate change. evaluated on tasks that do not provide meaningful
early-stage research. Additionally, due to the breadth AI can be applied in novel ways to support learning or
insights on their usefulness to health systems.
of proposals the institute receives from across campus, investigate critical issues in learning contexts.
Considering these findings, the authors proposed an
the seed grants provide a bellwether for what is to
improved evaluation framework for measuring the
come in the field of AI.
benefits of clinical foundation models that is more
closely grounded to metrics that matter in health care.
Hoffman-Yee Grants Cloud Credit Grants Project Highlight
DSPy is an open-source project that enables
The Hoffman-Yee Grants, generously supported by Reid The Cloud Credit Grants support emerging research
researchers to build powerful systems with small,
Hoffman and Michelle Yee, fund “asteroid shot” ideas that requires advanced computational resources
inexpensive language models (LMs). It is a framework
to address significant scientific, technical, or societal provided by the commercial cloud. In FY 2022-23, HAI
for algorithmically optimizing LM prompts and weights,
challenges. HAI believes the results of these projects distributed $1.2 million in cloud credits with generous
especially when LMs are used one or more times within
will play a significant role in defining future work in gifts from Microsoft Azure and Google Cloud. While
a pipeline. DSPy is rapidly gaining popularity with a
AI from academia to industry, government, and civil the institute is only able to support a small portion
large and growing community of contributors.
society. In FY 2022-23, 12 funded projects produced of the requests it receives, the program continues
over 35 publications in top AI journals and conferences, to make an outsized impact across the social sector,
including NeurIPS, IEEE, ICLR, and ICML. government, and industry, resulting in widely adopted
models (BioMedLM) and algorithms (FlashAttention),
Project Highlight
leveraging social media to measure well-being, and
AddBiomechanics is part of a project titled, detecting neighborhood gentrification at a large scale.
“Intelligent Wearable Robotic Devices for Augmenting
Human Locomotion.” This team aims to build an
AI-enabled human exoskeleton. In order to do this, a
model first needs to be created that fully understands how Ethics and Society Review
humans move. AddBiomechanics.org is an effort to construct
As a HAI grant program standard, all research
such a dataset, which includes physical details such as
proposals undergo multiple rounds of rigorous faculty
force magnitudes and body properties. AddBiomechanics
review as well as an Ethics and Society Review to
provides an automated platform that helps practitioners
assess for any potential negative impact on society
process motion capture data; in exchange, they agree to
before being green-lighted for funding. Due to its
publish the anonymized processed motion results under a
demonstrated success, the Ethics and Society Review
Creative Commons license. Within the first few weeks of the
is now scaling to other research domains at Stanford,
project, over 100 universities across a dozen countries had
Photos: Christine Baker
beyond HAI and AI.
uploaded 4,000 motion files totaling 13Gb of data.
10 11

Research Centers Regulation, Evaluation, and Governance Lab (RegLab)
Daniel E. Ho, Faculty Director | Christine Tsang, Executive Director
Collaboration with labs, centers, and
Stanford RegLab builds high-impact partnerships for data science and AI in
institutes across and beyond the Stanford
the public sector. RegLab envisions a future where government can leverage
campus continues to be essential to the
state-of-the-art advances to address society’s most urgent challenges.
realization of HAI’s mission.
Over the past year, RegLab made significant progress across AI Policy Highlights
five areas: Environmental Governance, Tax Administration,
— Testimony, U.S. Senate Committee on Homeland
Health Equity, Mass Adjudication, and AI Policy.
Security and Governmental Affairs
Research Highlights
— Testimony, U.S. House Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and
Modernizing Tax Administration
Government Innovation
Developed an active learning system to reduce the annual
$500B tax gap and uncovered the first direct evidence — Service on National AI Advisory Committee and the
of differences in audit rates by race, sparking an IRS Administrative Conference of the United States
“overhaul” of auditing around the Earned Income Tax Credit
— Letters to OMB on risk management and
Improving Worker Protections open innovation
Designed and evaluated an NLP assistance tool to — The AI regulatory alignment problem
improve the adjudication of workers’ compensation
— The Bureaucratic Challenges to AI Governance
claims in a randomized trial with U.S. Department of
Labor, affecting a $3-4B claims system
Summer Institute
Detecting Pollution The RegLab Summer Institute is an experiential learning
Piloted a near real-time system for identifying illegal fellowship designed to train the next generation of
dumping under the Clean Water Act using computer vision leaders in public sector AI. We hosted 11 PhD, masters,
and aerial imagery to modernize environmental compliance and undergraduate students from 8 universities, with
research areas ranging from LLMs to computer vision
Benchmarking Law and satellite imagery to responsible AI.
Developed a test suite showing that LLMs generate
Research Leadership
“legal hallucinations” 60-90% of the time and a
benchmark for legal reasoning (LegalBench) in LLMs Kit Rodolfa
Research Director
Derek Ouyang
Research Manager
RegLab has a core research staff of over twenty individuals and
has worked with hundreds of law, graduate, and undergraduate
students across all of Stanford’s seven schools.
Photo: Christine Baker Daniel E. Ho, Director of RegLab
12 13

Center for Research on Foundation Models (CRFM)
Percy Liang, Director
The Center for Research on Foundation Models (CRFM) was founded in
, bringing together more than 400 students, postdocs, engineers,
and faculty across Stanford to make fundamental advances in the study
of foundation models. In AY 2022-23, the center made progress across
three areas: technical research, applied research, and societal research.
CRFM scholars celebrating the one-year anniversary of its founding. Photos: Jeanina Casusi
Technical Research Applied Research Societal Research Percy Liang
Associate Professor of Computer Science and, by
CRFM makes core technical contributions toward CRFM builds foundation models and other artifacts that CRFM shapes policy and clarifies the societal impact courtesy, of Statistics; Senior Fellow, Stanford HAI;
building, using, and understanding foundation models: provide value in specific application domains such as of foundation models to facilitate the responsible Director, CRFM, Stanford University
medicine and law: governance of this new technology:
— Holistic Evaluation of Language Models Rishi Bommasani
— BioMedLM — Ecosystem Graphs: The Social Footprint of Society Lead, CRFM; PhD Candidate of Computer Science,
— Alpaca: A Strong, Replicable
Foundation Models Stanford University
Instruction-Following Model — Language-Driven Representation Learning for Robotics
David Hall
— Stanford-Princeton Response to the US National
— Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of — Anticipatory Music Transformer: A Controllable Research Engineering Lead, CRFM, Stanford University
Telecommunications and Information Administration
Human Behavior Infilling Model for Music (NTIA) on AI accountability policy, drafted in Yifan Mai
Research Engineer, CRFM, Stanford University
partnership with Princeton University’s Center for
— Hungry Hungry Hippos: Toward Language Modeling — LegalBench: A Collaboratively Built Benchmark for
Information Technology Policy (CITP) Ivan Zhou
with State Space Models Measuring Legal Reasoning in Large Language Models
Masters Student in Computer Science,
— Sophia: A Scalable Stochastic Second-order — Levanter—Legible, Scalable, Reproducible — Do Foundation Model Providers Comply with the Stanford University
Draft EU AI Act?
Optimizer for Language Model Pre-training Foundation Models with JAX Julian Quevedo
Student, Computer Science and Mathematics,
— Foundation Models and Fair Use
Stanford University
— Whose Opinions Do Language Models Reflect?
Josselin Somerville
Masters Student in Computer Science,
Stanford University
Tony Lee
Research Engineer, CRFM, Stanford University
Percy Liang, director of CRFM. Photo: Jeanina Casusi
14 15

Stanford Digital Economy Lab (DEL) Erik Brynjolfsson
Director
Erik Brynjolfsson, Director | Christie Ko, Executive Director
Jerry Yang and Akiko Yamazaki Professor
and Senior Fellow at HAI, Ralph Landau
The Stanford Digital Economy Lab (DEL) is an interdisciplinary research group
Senior Fellow at the Stanford Institute for
Economic Policy Research (SIEPR), and
studying how digital technologies are transforming work, organizations,
professor, by courtesy, at the Stanford
and the economy—toward a world of shared prosperity. DEL leverages the Graduate School of Business and
Stanford Department of Economics
expertise and interests of Stanford faculty, researchers, and students to initiate
Christie Ko
and support a wide range of projects on the most pressing topics related Executive Director
to the digital economy. As an integral part of Stanford HAI, DEL pursues a
multidisciplinary approach that encourages dialogue and collaboration across
the domains of economics, business, technology, policy, and beyond.
DEL has made significant strides over the past year. Research Highlights Student Engagement Advisory Group
It welcomed a new lead research scientist to further
DEL launched a new Stanford course, “The AI The Stanford Digital Economy Lab’s Advisory
the pursuit of providing better measures of the digital ADP National Employment Report
Awakening: Implications for the Economy and Society,” Group convened twice during the academic year.
economy and launched the Pol.is project, aimed at This ongoing collaboration with the ADP Research
which hosted visionary researchers and industry leaders in In , the group discussed economic
enhancing transparency and consensus building in Institute measures the monthly changes in U.S.
technology, economics, and business on topics including measurement and decision making in the digital age
democratic processes. employment and pay based on payroll data from ADP.
foundation models, vision and robotics, work and and AI and the future of work. In , members
It also features the Pay Insights report, which provides
Areas of Research employment, bias and explainability, AI and geopolitics, explored digital platforms, society, and progress as
a view of the wages and salaries of nearly 10 million
and a world without work. The course culminated in well as opportunities and risks of generative AI. In AY
employees over a 12-month period.
Measuring the Digital Economy a session where student teams pitched their policy or 2022-23, Steve Denning became chairman emeritus,
Creating better methods of measuring the health of an research proposals and business plans in front of an and Sarah Friar (CEO, Nextdoor) took the post as co-
Generative AI at Work
increasingly digital economy audience with a “shark tank”-like panel of guest judges. chair with James Manyika. The group also welcomed
This working paper explores the productivity impacts
four new members: Dario Amodei (Anthropic), Jon
of large language models on knowledge work, such as Cross-Campus Collaboration
AI & The Future of Work Levin (Stanford GSB), Mira Murati (OpenAI), and Nela
customer support, and found measurable gains in the
Understanding the future of the workforce in a rapidly Stanford University became a founding partner of the Richardson (ADP).
percent of issues resolved per hour.
changing global economy Project Liberty’s Institute, a consortium of experts in
Visiting Faculty
Beyond the Turing Test—New Benchmarks for AI law, policy, social sciences, economics, ethics, and
Digital Platforms and Society
technology working together to shape a new internet
This continuing research effort builds on Erik Brynjolfsson’s Alex “Sandy” Pentland
Exploring how digital technologies can transform platforms designed for the common good. Stanford’s activities MIT Media Lab
exploration of augmentation versus automation in creating
and social media infrastructure to benefit society related to the institute are enabled by a generous
AI benchmarks to guide technology development toward Research Team
gift from Frank McCourt, Jr., and anchored in three
more equitable economic outcomes. The work included a
university hubs: the Stanford Digital Economy Lab, the Wang Jin Jae Joon Lee
roundtable of technologists and economists, and the Lab
McCoy Family Center for Ethics and Society, and the Research Scientist Postdoctoral Researcher
continues to shape a strategy for the development of new
Freeman Spogli Institute’s Cyber Policy Center.
AI benchmarks. David Nguyen Gabriel Unger
Research Scientist Postdoctoral Researcher
Support from Project Liberty will allow DEL to expand
NSF Pilot on National Network for Critical its research into how digital technologies, particularly AI, Andrew Wang Wajeeha Ahmad
Technology Assessment Research Scientist PhD Candidate
affect society and the economy—and shape the global
DEL joined this pilot, aimed at advancing national conversation about transforming social media and other Max Feng Rebecca Janßen
strategy and policy surrounding AI investments institutions for the betterment of society. Data Engineer Visiting PhD Student,
and planning. University of Zurich
Ruyu Chen
Postdoctoral Researcher
16 17

Policy & Society Policy Engagement
In response to an unprecedented surge in inbound requests from policymakers,
The policy and society initiative
HAI further strengthened its engagement with policymakers across California,
the United States, the European Union, and beyond with the goal of enriching
at HAI continued to guide the
the AI policy discussion with evidence-based research from Stanford.
responsible development and
governance of AI worldwide.
National AI Research Resource (NAIRR)
In late 2019, Fei-Fei Li and John Etchemendy were the
The team engaged with global
first to call for the U.S. government to create a close
partnership between academia, government, industry,
and civil society to provide researchers equitable
policymakers on cutting-edge,
access to high-end computational resources, large-
scale government datasets. Since then, HAI has led
multidisciplinary AI research, efforts with 22 top computer science universities and a
bipartisan, bicameral group of lawmakers to bring the
NAIRR to fruition. This includes the National AI Research
accompanied by custom educational Resource Task Force Act of 2021, which established
a federal task force in which Fei-Fei Li participates. In
addition, she was a member of a policy practicum with
training, multi-stakeholder
Stanford Law School that led to a white paper with an
exhaustive study on precisely how the United States can
create, implement, and maintain an NAIRR.
convening, and briefings on key
As of 2023, one of the most significant U.S. policy
advances in AI is the introduction of the legislation to
AI policy issues. The team also
authorize the creation of NAIRR. The U.S. Congress
has introduced the bipartisan and bicameral “Creating
supported the needs of leaders Resource for Every American to Experiment with
Artificial Intelligence Act of 2023 (CREATE AI Act),”
an important step toward establishing the NAIRR
in mission-driven civil society to provide federally funded compute resources and
access to government datasets for academic research.
Senator Martin Heinrich, the co-chair of the Senate
organizations to leverage AI better
AI Caucus, recognized the important role HAI’s study
played in advancing the concept.
for social impact.
Rep. Anna Eshoo (CA-16), Fei-Fei Li, Russ Altman, and Jennifer King speaking
at an HAI Seminar, Unlocking Public Sector AI Innovation: Next Steps for the
National AI Research Resource. Photo: Don Feria
18 19

Meeting with President Biden U.S. Engagement Congressional Offices and Committees Congressional Testimony
Congressional and Senate AI Caucuses
HAI Policy in Washington, D.C.: The HAI policy and
Fei-Fei Li and Rob Reich met with President Daniel E. Ho testified before the Senate
Biden at the consequential meeting on AI society team led Stanford faculty members and Congressional Black Caucus Committee on Homeland Security and
researchers to hold briefings and congressional
in . Fei-Fei Li set the tone of the Governmental Affairs in on Artificial
House Committee on Energy and Commerce
testimonies for policymakers, including the following:
conversation by encouraging the President to Intelligence in Government.
House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
adopt a moon shot mentality when thinking
U.S. Federal Agencies Fei-Fei Li testified before the Senate Committee
about AI. House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology
on Homeland Security and Governmental
Central Intelligence Agency
House Committee on the Judiciary Affairs in on Governing AI
Department of Commerce (National Institutes
through Acquisition and Procurement.
of Standards and Technology, National Office of Representative Jake Auchincloss
Telecommunications and Information Association)
Office of Representative Jamaal Bowman
Department of Defense
Office of Representative Yvette Clarke
Department of Labor
Office of Representative Anna Eshoo
Department of State
Office of Representative Derek Kilmer
Federal Trade Commission
Office of Representative Frank Lucas
National Economic Council
Office of Representative Jay Obernolte
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
Office of Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer
National Institutes of Health
Office of Senator Cory Booker
National Science Foundation
Office of Senator Chris Murphy
National Security Council
Office of Senator Alex Padilla
Office of the U.S. Trade Representative
Office of Senator Gary Peters
U.S. Agency for International Development
Office of Senator Mike Rounds
White House Domestic Policy Council
Senate Committee on Appropriations
White House Office of Management and Budget
Senate Committee on Commerce, Science,
White House Office of Science and Technology Policy and Transportation
Senate Committee on Health, Education,
Labor and Pensions
Senate Committee on Homeland Security and
Governmental Affairs
Senate Committee on the Judiciary
20 21

Education and Training for Policymakers
California Governor’s Office European Union (EU) Engagement
California Governor Gavin Newsom signed an The HAI policy and society team worked with the
executive order on AI, which officially named institute’s Center for Research on Foundation Models HAI’s policymaker education program has made significant strides
HAI as a partner of the State of California on (CRFM) and Marietje Schaake, HAI’s international
in bridging the gap between the rapid advancements in AI and a
AI and announced a co-hosted summit to take policy fellow, to guide the world’s first comprehensive
place in 2024. AI regulation, the EU AI Act, as it enters the final comprehensive understanding of the technology at the policymaking level.
negotiations stage. This effort included a series of
meetings in Brussels, during which Marietje Schaake,
Rishi Bommasani, and Daniel Zhang presented their
recent research on the EU AI Act, with key players
leading negotiations on the act in the European Congressional Boot Camp on AI Online Training Series for Federal
Parliament, the European Commission, and the Employees with the White House
In , HAI hosted the 2023 Congressional
European Council.
Boot Camp on AI with a diverse cohort of 28 senior,
In , HAI held a six-session Online
HAI also hosted meetings at Stanford with delegations bipartisan, and bicameral staffers at Stanford and
Training Series for Federal Employees with the White
from the European Commission Directorate-General for participation from more than 20 Stanford faculty
House, in partnership with the White House Office
Communications Networks, Content, and Technology; across disciplines, as well as Silicon Valley leaders
of Management and Budget (OMB) and General
members of the European Parliament; the Presidency and pioneers from civil society organizations. HAI
Services Administration (GSA). This was a unique, high-
of the European Commission; and Spanish Secretary of designed the boot camp to equip congressional staff,
impact opportunity for HAI to help fulfill an important
State for Digitalization and Artificial Intelligence. who play a key role in shaping and developing AI policy,
congressional mandate of the AI Training Act of 2022.
with the comprehensive knowledge needed to think
HAI was the sole academic institute to help teach more
International Governments
critically about regulating and governing this emerging
than 8,000 registered federal employees.
and Organizations technology. The event attracted more than 140
applications, a 40 percent jump from the previous year.
In , Fei-Fei Li was appointed to the U.N.
Secretary General’s Scientific Advisory Board. Also
during the academic year, Marietje Schaake was
appointed to the U.N. High-Level Advisory Body on
Artificial Intelligence.
HAI also hosted a number of visits from high-level
representatives to engage and inform government
officials on AI policy, including Singapore’s deputy
prime minister and the Ministry for Communication and
Information; U.K.’s Department for Science, Innovation
and Technology; Brazil’s Ministry of the Economy; and
other tech representatives from governments of Japan,
South Korea, Estonia, and Norway.
Emma Brunskill presenting at the 2023 Congressional Boot Camp. Photo: Christine Baker.
22 23

Policy Research Responses to Federal Requests for Faculty-led Original Research
Information (RFIs)
Implementation Challenges to Three Pillars of
HAI leverages the university’s strength across disciplines—including computer America’s AI Strategy
Response to FTC’s Advanced Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking on Commercial Surveillance and In collaboration with the RegLab and led by Daniel
science, business, economics, education, law, literature, medicine,
Data Security E. Ho, this white paper systematically examined the
neuroscience, philosophy, sustainability, and more—to create innovative Led by Jennifer King, the research and filing of a response implementation status of two AI-related executive
to the FTC on its ANPR is a first step toward the agency orders and the AI in Government Act. The authors
policy research on AI. We translate cutting-edge, multidisciplinary AI
potentially adopting specific rules to advance consumer performed a comprehensive search across more than
research for the policy audience and produce original AI-related policy privacy and protect the public from commercial 200 federal agencies to assess implementation of
surveillance practices. Co-authors include Daniel key requirements to identify regulatory authorities
research to equip policymakers with tools to understand and govern the
Zhang, James Zou, and Stanford graduate students pertaining to AI and to enumerate AI use cases.
technology. Such initiatives facilitate the communication of research Caroline Meinhardt, Abel Ribbink, and Pete Warden.
ChatGPT and Physicians’ Malpractice Risk
findings to policymakers, ensuring that policies are enriched with
Responses to NTIA’s Request for Comment on Led by Michelle Mello, this research analyzes how
AI Accountability Policy physicians should evaluate applied AI applications, such
cutting-edge research insights and enabling them to be more effectively
Led by researchers from CRFM and the Princeton as large language models, for clinical use, and how
aligned with real-world needs and challenges. University’s Center for Information Technology Policy clinicians will need to navigate uncharted liability risks.
(CITP), this response argues that pervasive opacity
Open Source Analysis of Newly Available Thermal
compromises accountability for foundation models and
Satellite Imagery
recommends the federal government invest in digital
supply chain monitoring for foundation models, invest in Led by Amy Zegart, this research compiled the
Policy Briefs
public evaluations of foundation models, and incentivize first-ever training dataset to detect nuclear proliferation
research on guardrails for open-source models. activities based on commercially available thermal
Promoting Algorithmic Fairness in Clinical Algorithms and the Perceived Legitimacy of
satellite imagery.
Risk Prediction Content Moderation
Foundation Model Policy Research
Led by Nigam Shah, this brief discusses how fairness Led by Michael Bernstein, this brief dives into this The Privacy-Bias Trade-off: Data Minimization and
In collaboration with the CRFM, HAI presented a
techniques could impact clinical predictive models and problem by surveying people’s views of Facebook’s Racial Disparity Assessments in the U.S. Government
series of issue briefs on key policy issues related to
suggests the best way forward in developing fairer ML content moderation processes, providing a pathway for
Led by Daniel E. Ho and Jennifer King, who co-authored
foundation models. Drawing on the latest research and
tools for a clinical setting. better online speech platforms and improving content
this award-winning paper at the 2023 FAccT
expert insights from the field, this series aims to provide
moderation processes.
conference, this paper examined the U.S. government’s
Using Algorithm Audits To Understand AI policymakers and the public with a clear and nuanced
recent efforts to introduce government-wide equity
Using AI To Understand Residential Solar Power understanding of these complex technologies and to
Led by Jeffrey Hancock, this brief reviews the history of assessments of federal programs. It further considered
help them make informed decisions about how best to
algorithm auditing, describes its current state, and offers Led by Ram Rajagopal, this brief showcases how to a range of policy solutions to address the tension
regulate and govern their development and use.
best practices for conducting algorithm audits today. use AI to analyze variations in solar panel adoption in U.S. between data minimization principles and racial
households and help policymakers tailor incentive The first two briefs in this series are Improving disparity assessments.
Balancing Fairness and Efficiency in Health mechanisms. Transparency in AI Language Models: A Holistic
Plan Payments
Evaluation—led by Percy Liang, this brief introduces
Led by Sherri Rose, this brief discusses how to realign Whose Opinions Do Language Models Reflect? Holistic Evaluation of Language Models (HELM) as
the health care market’s incentives in favor of patients, Led by Tatsu Hashimoto, this brief introduces a a framework to evaluate commercial application of
recommending interventions that shape companies’ quantitative framework that allows policymakers to AI use cases—and Do Foundation Model Providers
incentives around the pricing models they deploy. evaluate the behavior of language models to assess Comply with the Draft EU AI Act?—also led by Percy
what kinds of opinions they reflect. Liang, this research identified early adoption of the
most recent version of the EU AI Act and how current
foundation model providers would not be compliant
under the proposed regulations.
24 25

The Stanford Tech, Ethics, and Policy (TEP) Fellowship Policy Convenings
Co-hosted with the McCoy Family Center for Ethics and Society,
HAI hosts a diverse array of policy events and convenings, which serve
this fellowship aims to build a talent pipeline between tech students
as pivotal platforms for thought leadership in the realm of AI and its
at Stanford and Washington, D.C.
impact on society. These gatherings bring together a unique blend of
experts from academia, industry, government, and civil society to engage
The fellowship trains 10 Stanford graduate students
studying a variety of STEM subjects—from AI to in deep, insightful discussions to foster an environment of interdisciplinary
I always knew I wanted to work in tech
computer science to bioengineering—on public
collaboration and open dialogue.
policy via a spring course and places them in policy in D.C., but I didn’t know I’d be
congressional offices, government agencies, and think
part of this program with other fellows
tanks in Washington, D.C., for a summer fellowship
and a network of connections, building
to apply their technical knowledge to real-world
policy challenges and applications. This is a unique a foundation for the future. I think there’s
In 2023, we hosted the following events: AI Index Reception
opportunity for students to gain firsthand experience
an appetite for this on campus, and it’s HAI collaborated with the British Consul General’s
at the intersection of technology, ethics, and policy; National AI Advisory Committee Field Hearing
a model that means students end up residence to officially roll out the 2023 AI Index report.
contribute to the development of policies and
HAI hosted NAIAC’s second hearing and first field The event was attended by 70 foreign government
regulations that will shape the future of technology; working in really exciting places.
hearing with Stanford Law School. officials, including consuls general and tech
and develop their own professional networks and gain
ambassadors.
valuable skills in communication, collaboration, and Liana Keesing, who worked at the Senate Committee Advancing AI Audits: Project Showcase and
problem-solving. on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Lessons Learned Decoding the EU Artificial Intelligence Act
For our inaugural 2023 cohort, placements include HAI hosted an event, led by Marietje Schakke, that HAI hosted a panel joined by Marietje Schaake, Rishi
the White House Office of Management and concluded the Stanford AI Audit Challenge with Bommasani, Irene Solaiman of Hugging Face, and
Budget, Senate Committee on Homeland Security Coming to D.C. imbued me with a presentations from winners of the challenge. Dragos Tudorache of the EU for a virtual program to
and Governmental Affairs, Senate Appropriations explain the latest development in the EU AI Act. There
sense of possibility that there’s an
Committee, Georgetown University’s Center for were 600+ attendees for the program.
intersection to be found here and there
Security and Emerging Technology, Brookings
Institution, American Enterprise Institute, USAID, are collaborations to be made. So, did
and more.
it make me want to work in and with
government public policy and adjacent
areas for the public and civic interest?
Definitely yes.
Regina Ta, who worked at the Brookings Institution
The National AI Advisory Committee Field Hearing. Photo: Christine Baker Congressional staff members engaged in a session during the 2023
Congressional Boot Camp. Photo: Christine Baker
26 27

Society
In early 2023, HAI’s policy team expanded its engagement to civil society
organizations, both at home in the U.S. and across the world in global south
countries. Building on the success of the policy portfolio, HAI’s emerging
society activities are driven by the objective of ensuring that diverse
communities that are otherwise underrepresented in AI feel empowered
to influence the design, development, and governance of this technology.
To do this effectively, the sector needs to learn more about cutting-edge AI
issues and inform the conversation from the lens of social impact.
Through closed-door multi-stakeholder convenings, The Asia Foundation Workshops
course development, educational webinars, and HAI launched the first-of-its-kind strategic partnership
custom training programs, the HAI society portfolio with the largest international development organization
aims to meet the needs of community-serving in Asia to expand the global footprint beyond Europe
organizations, such as nonprofits and philanthropic and North America. The goal of this partnership with
organizations. This work also is expanding HAI’s The Asia Foundation is to co-design and implement
footprint and impact for policy and society stakeholders custom educational training for policymakers and civil
in global south countries that are home to some of the society organizations in Asia and the Pacific. Additional
largest democracies in the world, with a majority youth activities will include joint publications and events on AI
population that is actively experimenting with AI. issues of relevance to the policy and society audiences
in Asia and of strategic importance for the United
Global South Convenings and Workshops
States. HAI’s policy and society initiative launched this
partnership on October 16, with AI Primer Workshop
Program Mapping
for The Asia Foundation’s senior leadership team across
In partnership with the Freeman Spogli Institute’s Cyber
country offices in the Asia Pacific region, including
Policy Center (CPC), HAI was awarded an in-kind
Nepal, Vietnam, Cambodia, Pakistan, Thailand, Fiji,
donation as part of The Rockefeller Foundation’s
Bangladesh, and the Philippines.
competitive Bellagio Convening Center Program to host
a closed-door global convening in Italy in . Special thanks to the Patrick J. McGovern Foundation
The event brought together 22 senior scholars and civil for its generous gift that helps fund most of the policy
society leaders from countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin and society initiatives at HAI.
America to discuss the role in the global south. The goal
of the convening was to catalyze new programming at
HAI and CPC and further solidify our relationships with
current and prospective funders. Insights from this effort
led to the development of the program team’s plan for a Right: Nobel Peace Prize Winner and journalist Maria
Ressa shares remarks on the impact of AI on the
Global Technology Regulation initiative at Stanford and
information ecosystem at a civil society roundtable
ongoing fundraising efforts. hosted by HAI at Stanford. Photo: Jeanina Casusi
28 29

About HAI
HAI Leadership Team
John Etchemendy James Landay
Denning Co-Director Denning Co-Director and Faculty Director of Research
Provost, Emeritus, and Patrick Suppes Family Professor in the School of Humanities and Sciences Anand Rajaraman and Venky Harinarayan Professor, School of Engineering, Professor of Computer Science
John is a professor of philosophy and symbolic systems, teaching the Philosophy James co-hosted the 2022 HAI Fall Conference with Russ Altman on “AI in the
of Artificial Intelligence to undergraduate students. Along with Russ Altman, he Loop: Humans in Charge.” He was named Vice Director and Faculty Director of
co-chaired the search for HAI Junior Fellows, which resulted in the hiring of Shriti Research for HAI, and he continued to lead HAI’s grant programs and to co-
Raj, HAI’s newest Junior Faculty Fellow, in . He also serves on the AI Index lead the Hoffman-Yee Symposium. James also co-hosted the 2023 HAI Spring
Steering Committee. In his 35 years as a Stanford faculty member, John has served Symposium with HAI Senior Fellow Michele Elam on “Creativity in the Age of AI:
as the director of the Center for the Study of Language and Information, chair of AI Impacting Arts, Arts Impacting AI,” a conversation about creativity in the age of
the Philosophy Department, senior associate dean for the School of Humanities and AI from aesthetic, technical, social, ethical and legal perspectives. James was also
Sciences, and was Stanford University’s twelfth provost. He is also the author or co- a panelist at a TIME100 talk where he emphasized the important role that humans
author of seven books and numerous articles in logic, and has been co-editor of the play in AI safety.
Journal of Symbolic Logic and on the editorial board of several other journals.
Fei-Fei Li Russell Wald
Denning Co-Director Deputy Director
Sequoia Professor, Computer Science Department Russell oversees HAI’s research, education, communications, administrative
During the AY 2022-23 Fei-Fei held public conversations with many leaders in AI, activities, industry programs, and policy and society hub. He collaborates with
including Demis Hassabis, Eric Horvitz, and Geoffrey Hinton. She also met and HAI’s co-directors and faculty leaders to shape the strategic vision and human-
advised President Biden in during a convening on AI, as well as testified centered mission of the organization. From 2020 to 2022, he served as HAI’s
to the U.S. Senate Committee on the subject of Governing AI Through Acquisition first Director of Policy and later as Managing Director for Policy and Society.
and Procurement. Fei-Fei also won the Intel Innovation Lifetime Achievement During this time, he established HAI’s policy and society initiative, engaged with
Award, which recognized her for her significant contributions and advancements in policymakers at the state, national, and international levels, created the impactful
the field of AI. Notably, Fei-Fei published her memoir, The Worlds I See: Curiosity, congressional boot camp, and co-authored several AI policy publications,
Exploration, and Discovery at the Dawn of AI, which details her upbringing as an including Enhancing International Cooperation in AI Research: The Case for a
immigrant in America, where her childhood love of science evolved into her adult Multilateral AI Research Institute and The Centrality of Data and Compute for AI
calling to help advance the AI movement into what it is today. She also co-hosted Innovation: A Blueprint for a National Research Cloud.
the “AI+Education Summit: AI in the Service of Teaching and Learning,” which
showcased the latest research in AI and education from Stanford faculty and
researchers and examined how AI can be used to advance human learning through
new pedagogies, new modalities of assessment, new foundation models, and more.
30 31

Associate Directors & Senior Fellows
Russ Altman Julian Nyarko
Kenneth Fong Professor and Professor of Bioengineering, of Genetics, of Medicine (General Medical Discipline), of Associate Professor of Law and Center Fellow at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research
Biomedical Data Science, and, by courtesy, of Computer Science
Center Fellow
Russ co-hosted the HAI Fall Conference, “AI in the Loop: Humans in Charge,” with James
Julian Nyarko is dedicated to exploring the intersection of computational methods and legal
Landay and co-chaired the search for HAI Junior Fellows with John Etchemendy, which
studies. He brings his expertise in quantitative methods, natural language processing, and
resulted in the hiring of Shriti Raj, HAI’s newest Junior Faculty Fellow, in . During
machine learning to the leadership team. His research delves into the intricacies of contract
the AY 2022-23, Russ organized the Senior Fellow by-laws and process documents, working
design under U.S. and international law, encompassing commercial and consumer contracts,
with leadership. In , he participated in the 2023 HAI Symposium on “Creativity
smart contracts, and treaties. Julian’s commitment to interdisciplinary collaboration is further
in the Age of AI: AI Impacting Art, Art Impacting AI.” He also was appointed to the faculty
evidenced in his work with fellow researchers across a wide array of additional topics, including
leadership group of RAISE-Health, a joint effort of HAI and the School of Medicine focusing
causal inference, algorithmic fairness, and criminal justice.
on responsible use of AI in medicine.
Surya Ganguli Ge Wang
Associate Professor of Applied Physics and, by courtesy, of Neurobiology, of Electrical Engineering, Associate Professor, Center for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics (CCRMA); Department of Music and, by
and of Computer Science courtesy, of Computer Science, Stanford University
Surya was awarded and named to 2023 Schmidt Science Polymaths Program cohort, where Ge Wang has made significant contributions to the intersection of computer science and music,
he will pursue an interdisciplinary research program to understand how nonlinear elements with a focus on the creation of computer-mediated tools, instruments, games, and toys that
within neural networks, both biological and artificial, interact to yield remarkable emergent enable new forms of creative expression. Ge is the author of the ChucK music programming
computational capabilities. “Beyond neural scaling laws: beating power law scaling via data language and the founder of the Stanford Laptop Orchestra (SLOrk). Ge is also the author of
pruning,” a paper that Surya co-authored, won the Neural Information Processing Systems Artful Design: Technology in Search of the Sublime, a photo comic book about how we shape
Foundation’s Outstanding Paper Award in . He also published “Catalyzing technology—and how technology shapes us. His creative endeavors have reached millions of
next-generation Artificial Intelligence through NeuroAI” in Nature Communications. users, and he has been recognized as a 2016 Guggenheim Fellow. Among other Stanford courses,
Ge teaches Music 356/CS 470: “Music and AI (a critical making course)”. Ge participated in the
“HAI Embedded Ethics Conference,” which was co-sponsored by HAI and McCoy Family Center
Curtis P. Langlotz for Ethics in Society, as well as the “AI+Education Summit: AI in the Service of Teaching and
Learning,” which was co-sponsored by HAI and the Stanford Accelerator for Learning.
Professor of Radiology, Medicine, and Biomedical Data Science; Director, Center for Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine & Imaging
As the director of the Center for Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging (AIMI Center) and
Amy Zegart
associate director of Stanford HAI, Curtwas instrumental in launching RAISE Health, a joint AI
initiative of HAI and the School of Medicine. Curt also helped organize the 2022 Stanford AI+Health Senior Fellow at the Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies; Morris Arnold and Nona Jean Cox Senior
conference, which convened experts and leaders from academia, industry, government, and clinical Fellow at the Hoover Institution; Professor, by courtesy, of Political Science
practice to explore critical and emerging issues related to AI’s impact across the spectrum of health Amy Zegart brings a wealth of experience and insights in the fields of emerging technologies,
care. Curt serves as a reviewer for HAI-AIMI grant programs and the HAI Startup series. Curt was U.S. national security, and global political risk management. Her distinguished academic career at
elected as the President of the Radiology Society of North America in . Stanford and UCLA includes several award winning books about U.S. intelligence agencies and the
recent bestseller, Spies, Lies, and Algorithms: The History and Future of American Intelligence, which
was nominated by Princeton University press for a Pulitzer Prize. She has advised senior US foreign
Christopher Manning policy officials for more than two decades, served on the National Security Council staff, and writes
frequently in Foreign Affairs, the Atlantic, and other media outlets.
Thomas M. Siebel Professor in Machine Learning, Professor of Linguistics and of Computer Science;
Director, Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (SAIL)
In AY 2022-23, Chris was awarded an honorary doctorate from the University of Amsterdam
for his pioneering research contributions in the field of Natural Language Processing. His
work on DetectGPT, at ICML 2023, has been covered in Science and The Financial Times.
“Backpack Language Models,” and “Recursive Deep Models for Semantic Compositionality over
a Sentiment Treebank,” both co-authored by Chris, won the Outstanding Paper Award and Test-
of-Time Paper Award at ACL 2023, respectively. Chris also appeared in and helped organize
the short video “AI at Stanford: 1962-2022,” which received a Northern California Emmy Award.
Additionally, the Stanford Chirpy Cardinal team, advised by Chris, won first place for scientific
innovation in the Alexa Prize Socialbot Grand Challenge 5.
32 33

Senior Fellows Faculty & Fellows
HAI currently has more than 200 affiliated Stanford faculty from across
Michele Elam
all seven schools. Each year, the institute aims to support the work of
William Robertson Coe Professor of Humanities, Department of English, Center for Comparative Studies in Race &
Ethnicity, African & African American Studies
researchers who focus on the intersection of multiple disciplines. In the
After cycling off her term as Associate Director, Michele continues to serve HAI as a Senior
Fellow. In her role at HAI, Michele served as the faculty lead of the HAI Visiting Artist program
2022-23 academic year, HAI welcomed 16 graduate fellows from an
and for the Arts+Tech Salon series. Michele co-led the HAI 2023 Spring Symposium, “Creativity
in the Age of AI: AI Impacting Arts, Arts Impacting AI,” which featured conversation among array of disciplines, facilitating collaboration between engineers, social
technologists, scholars, and creatives from both commercial and non-commercial sections.
This conference focused on creativity in the age of AI from aesthetic, technical, social, ethical scientists, humanists, and others researching the future of
and legal perspectives, including two HAI Visiting Artists. In AY 2022-23, she taught Black
Mirror: Representations of Race & Gender in AI, Mixed-Race Politics and Culture, James Baldwin & human-centered AI. HAI also partnered with the McCoy Family Center
Twentieth Century Literature, and A.I.-Activism-Art.
for Ethics in Society to host four Embedded Ethics postdocs, a program
Daniel E. Ho that embeds the teaching of ethics directly into the core undergraduate
William Benjamin Scott and Luna M. Scott Professor of Law; Professor of Political Science; Professor of Computer courses of Stanford’s computer science curriculum.
Science (by courtesy); Senior Fellow, SIEPR; Faculty Fellow, CASBS; Faculty Director, Stanford RegLab
Daniel serves as the director of the Stanford RegLab, which partners with government agencies
to design and evaluate programs, policies, and technologies that modernize government. In HAI Faculty Fellows
2022, the lab collaborated with the U.S. Department of the Treasury to uncover the first direct
evidence of differences in audit rates by race, sparking the IRS to overhaul tax administration
around the Earned Income Tax Credit. He spoke at the Stanford HAI Congressional Boot Camp
Peter Norvig
on Artificial Intelligence and testified in the U.S. Senate Committee on Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs on AI policy. He additionally serves on the National AI Advisory Distinguished Education Fellow
Committee to advise the White House on AI policy.
Peter is the HAI Distinguished Education Fellow, where he helps to develop a human-focused
AI curriculum and broaden access to education. A longtime innovator in the field, he co-wrote
Rob Reich Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, an introductory textbook used by 1,500 universities
worldwide. He has taught hundreds of thousands of students through his courses on the online
Professor of Political Science, Faculty Director of the McCoy Family Center for Ethics in Society, and the Marc and education platform Udacity.
Laura Andreessen Faculty Co-Director of the Stanford Center on Philanthropy and Civil Society
Rob helped organize the inaugural “Embedded Ethics Conference,” which was co-sponsored by
HAI and the Stanford McCoy Family Center for Ethics in Society. This conference offered broad
discussions applicable to creating effective ethics education programs, covering the full life cycle
of program creation, development, and implementation. He also met with President Biden during
an AI convening in . Additionally, he spoke at the “AI+Education Summit: AI in the Service Hariharan Subramonyam
of Teaching and Learning,” which showcased the latest research in AI and education from Stanford
faculty and researchers and examined how AI can be used to advance human learning through new Ram and Vijay Shriram HAI Faculty Fellow
pedagogies, new modalities of assessment, new foundation models, and more. This summit was Hari is an Assistant Professor at the Graduate School of Education and Computer Science
co-sponsored by HAI and the Stanford Accelerator for Learning. (by courtesy). He is a Ram and Vijay Shriram Faculty Fellow at HAI. Hari’s research resides at
the intersection of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and the Learning Sciences. He studies
methods to enhance human learning through AI by engaging in cognitively informed design
practices, co-designing with learners and educators, and developing transformative AI-
enabled learning experiences. Additionally, through this research, Hari contributes tools and
methodologies that emphasize ethical considerations, responsible design practices, and human
values in the creation of AI experiences.
34 35

Research Centers and Partners
Johannes Eichstaedt
Ram and Vijay Shriram HAI Faculty Fellow
HAI Centers and Labs Open Virtual Assistant Lab (OVAL)
Johannes is a computational social scientist jointly appointed as a Ram and Vijay Shriram HAI
OVAL is creating an ecosystem founded on open virtual assistant
Faculty Fellow and Assistant Professor of Psychology. His lab in Computational Psychology &
AI100 technology that (1) democratizes AI for linguistic user interfaces,
Well-Being is currently focused on using LLMs to develop interventions for well-being and mental
(2)creates an open and non-proprietary web, and (3) promotes
The One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence, or AI100,
health to augment therapy and support therapists. Johannes also analyzes big social text data
sharing with individual data ownership.technology that (1)
is a 100-year effort to study and anticipate how the effects of
(Twitter, Facebook, Reddit) with NLP and AI to understand and measure psychological processes
democratizes AI for linguistic user interfaces, (2) creates an
artificial intelligence will ripple through every aspect of how
for individuals and populations—for example, to build early warning systems for the opioid
open and non-proprietary web, and (3) promotes sharing with
people work, live, and play.
epidemic and mental health. Across these lines of work, Johannes’ overall focus is on using AI and
individual data ownership.
NLP to improve the well-being and health of the population. AI Index
Regulation, Evaluation, and Governance Lab (RegLab)
The AI Index is an effort to track, collate, distill, and visualize data
Stanford’s RegLab partners with government agencies to
relating to artificial intelligence. It aspires to be a comprehensive
design and evaluate programs, policies, and technologies that
Shriti Raj resource of data and analysis for policymakers, researchers,
modernize governance.
executives, journalists, and the general public to develop intuitions
HAI Faculty Fellow
about the complex field of AI.
Responsible AI for Safe and Equitable Health
Shriti is a human-centered computing researcher. Her work focuses on augmenting health-
Center for AI Safety (RAISE Health)
related data reasoning and decision-making. She is jointly appointed as a HAI Faculty Fellow
and an Assistant Professor in the Department of Medicine Center for Biomedical Informatics The mission of the Stanford Center for AI Safety is to develop Artificial intelligence stands to revolutionize health and medicine
Research. Shriti received her PhD in Information from the University of Michigan, where she rigorous techniques for building safe and trustworthy AI systems —from advancing drug discovery to personalizing patient care.
was advised by Dr. Mark Newman. Shriti’s research develops and evaluates human-centered and establishing confidence in their behavior and robustness, As AI innovation keeps accelerating, we must act now to ensure
methods and tools to help people make health data and algorithms actionable. thereby facilitating their successful adoption in society. it advances with intention and purpose.
Center for Research on Foundation Models (CRFM) A joint initiative between Stanford School of Medicine and the
Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
The Center for Research on Foundation Models is an
guides the responsible use of AI across biomedical research,
interdisciplinary initiative born out of Stanford HAI that aims
education, and patient care.
to make fundamental advances in the study, development, and
deployment of foundation models for AI. Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (SAIL)
HAI Policy Fellows Caroline Glidden Luwen Wan Center for the Study of Language and Information (CSLI) SAIL has been a center of excellence for artificial intelligence
HAI Postdoctoral Fellow HAI Postdoctoral Fellow research, teaching, theory, and practice since its founding in 1962.
CSLI serves Stanford faculty and students who are engaged
Jennifer King
Alex Goldmark Zhecheng Wang in research involving computational, logical, and stochastic
Privacy and Data Policy Fellow, Stanford Partners
HAI Journalist-in-Residence HAI Postdoctoral Fellow modeling of cognitive functions and processes.
Stanford HAI
Farnaz Jahanbakhsh Benji Xie Data Analytics for What’s Next (DAWN) Black in AI Innovation and Research (BlackAIR) Center for AI
Rohini Kosoglu
HAI Postdoctoral Fellow HAI-EIS Embedded EthiCS Fellow Despite incredible recent advances in machine learning, building in Medicine & Imaging
Policy Fellow, Stanford HAI
machine learning applications remains prohibitively time-consuming
Christopher Kelly Center for Comparative Studies in Race and Ethnicity Center
Marietje Schaake Advisory Council and expensive for all but the best-trained, best-funded engineering
HAI Postdoctoral Fellow for Ethics in Society
HAI International Policy Fellow; organizations. DAWN is a five-year research project to democratize
International Policy Director, JJ Lee The HAI Advisory Council consists AI by making it dramatically easier to build AI-powered applications. Center for International Security and Cooperation Cyber
Cyber Policy Center, Stanford University Stanford Digital Economy Lab of leaders in science, civil society, Policy Center
Digital Economy Lab (DEL)
Postdoctoral Fellow and business who provide HAI with
Digital Civil Society Lab
2022–23 HAI Fellows expert advice on issues relevant to the The Digital Economy Lab at the Stanford Institute for Human-
Juan Pava institute’s mission and programs. Reid Centered AI is an interdisciplinary research group studying how Hoover Institution
Tech, Ethics & Policy Rising Scholar
Ruyu Chen Hoffman serves as chair of the council, digital technologies are transforming work, organizations, and the Institute for Diversity in the Arts
Stanford Digital Economy Lab Gabriel Unger along with vice chairs Steve Denning economy. An engine for research and education, the lab brings
Postdoctoral Fellow Stanford Digital Economy Lab and Srinija Srinivasan. together an unprecedented group of stakeholders to analyze data, John S. Knight Journalism Fellowships
Postdoctoral Fellow run experiments, develop theories, and provide actionable insights. Office of the Vice President for the Arts
Nicholas A. Coles
CSLI Fellow and Director, Luca Vendraminelli Golub Capital Social Impact Lab Stanford Aging and Ethnogeriatrics (SAGE) Research Center
Psychological Science Accelerator HAI Postdoctoral Fellow The Golub Capital Social Impact Lab uses digital technology and
Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR)
social science research to improve the effectiveness of leading
Yuchen Cui Kaveh Waddell
social sector organizations. Based out of Stanford GSB, the lab is
HAI Postdoctoral Fellow HAI-JSK Fellow External Partners
a research initiative of affiliated academics and staff, as well as
Dapeng Feng researchers and students, who are passionate about conducting
AI4All
HAI Postdoctoral Fellow research that guides and improves the process of innovation.
36 37

HAI Events Creativity in the Age of AI
Several HAI events on the theme of Creativity & AI,
featuring HAI Visiting Artist Lauren Lee McCarthy:
Each year, HAI convenes a wide range of participants from academia,
2023 Spring Symposium
government, and industry through its two signature conferences and numerous
Artist showcase
workshops and seminars. During the 2022-23, a total of 119 events reached
Arts & Tech Salon
27,655 attendees, including both in-person venues and virtual platforms.
HAI Seminar with Lauren Lee McCarthy Performance by Enongo Lumumba-Kasongo, Professor
of Music at Brown University, at the 2023 Spring
Symposium. Photo: Christine Baker
July 23
April 23
Decoding the EU AI Act
Photo Credit: Christine Baker
Fei-Fei Li in Conversation with
Photo Credit: Christine Baker
January 23 Demis Hassabis: Using AI to May 23 This webinar brings together a
Photo Credit: Christine Baker November 22 Tanner Lecture: AI and Human Accelerate Scientific Discovery AI and Human Values: A distinguished panel of leading AI policy
October 22 HAI Fall Conference Values with Seth Lazar Conversation with Fei-Fei Li and researchers and policymakers from the
In this discussion, Demis Hassabis, United States and the European Union who
Inaugural HAI Orientation HAI signature event Eric Horvitz
The 2023 Tanner Lecture was given by co-founder and CEO of DeepMind shed light on the key provisions in the draft
The inaugural Stanford HAI Orientation During this conference, the participants Seth Lazar, Professor of Philosophy at the Technologies, shared his company’s efforts In this conversation, Tanner Lecturers EU AI Act, implications for the tech industry
gave attendees the opportunity to learn were challenged to rethink the phrase Australian National University, an Australian on the topic of how AI is rapidly changing Fei-Fei Li and Eric Horvitz discussed the and transatlantic relationship, and what’s
more about HAI’s work, meet faculty and “Human-in-the-loop” and consider a Research Council (ARC) Future Fellow, the speed and breadth of scientific discovery. topics of AI and Human Values. This talk next as EU enters trilogue negotiations
peers, and find out more about the ways future where humans remain at the and a Distinguished Research Fellow of the This was followed by a conversation with featured topics covered during both Fei- among the Parliament, Commission, and
in which to get involved. center of all AI technologies. University of Oxford Institute for Ethics in AI. Fei-Fei Li on the future of AI. Fei and Eric’s Tanner Lectures. Council to finalize the EU AI Act.
October November December January February March April May June July August
December 22 February 23 March 23 June 23 Aug 23
AI+Health Conference AI+Education Summit Embedded Ethics Conference Advancing AI Audit: Project Congressional Boot Camp on AI
Showcase and Lessons Learned
At this wide-ranging online event,
HAI, Artificial Intelligence in Medicine This event spotlighted the four award
and Imaging (AIMI), and Center for winning-entries of the AI Audit Challenge
Continuing Medical Education (CME) and featured insightful discussions from
convened experts and leaders from participants and AI experts on effective
academia, industry, government, and practices and valuable lessons learned from
clinical practice to explore critical and Photo Credit: Trever Tachis Photo Credit: Trever Tachis the Challenge. The Challenge, launched Photo Credit: Trever Tachis
emerging issues related to AI’s impact This summit showcased the latest The conference offered broad discussions by HAI and the Cyber Policy Center, is During the bicameral, bipartisan Boot
across the spectrum of healthcare. research in AI and education from applicable to creating effective ethics an initiative that invited teams from around Camp, participants engage in sessions
Stanford faculty and researchers, education programs, covering the full life the world to submit their models, solutions, on mitigating AI risk, understanding
examined how AI can be used to advance cycle of program creation, development, and tools with the goal of improving our and regulated foundation models, and
human learning through new pedagogies, and implementation. Panelists from ability to evaluate AI systems. impacts of AI on healthcare, education,
new modalities of assessment, new different universities addressed how to get climate, and online harm. The goal is to
foundation models, and more. In doing institutional buy-in to create a new ethics leave all participants with the conceptual
so, the summit asked the question of how initiative and how to structure a successful framework needed to address the emerging
AI can transform teaching and learning in program, while instructors presented live technology landscape today and better
an ethical, equitable, and safe manner. teaching demonstrations and ethics curricula. anticipate the challenges of tomorrow.
38 39

Industry Programs Member Testimonials
Led by Panos Madamopoulos-Moraris, Managing Director for Industry
Generative AI offers a whole new world of We chose the Stanford HAI corporate affiliate program as
Programs and Partnerships, HAI continued to help advance collaborations
opportunities to simplify and improve our lives. As the our flagship university collaboration, and the opportunity
with industry and helped to ensure that AI is deployed in human-centered AI landscape continues to evolve at a rapid scale, SAP to work with world-class researchers and faculty
focuses on building AI into core business processes members, as well as the dedicated staff from HAI, has
ways. In AY23, HAI’s community of industry funders included Accenture,
to drive productivity and growth for companies been truly rewarding so far. We cannot be prouder of the
Google, IBM, McKinsey, PepsiCo, SCBx, and Wells Fargo. Google and worldwide. Our close collaboration with the Stanford immense impact of the Accenture Stanford Foundation
Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence Model Scholar Program that has become instrumental to
Microsoft provided cloud credits for the HAI cloud grant program.
reinforces our strong commitment to building and using achieve Accenture’s AI ambition.
relevant, reliable, and responsible AI. It also provides
Lan Guan
us with access to the latest research and allows us
Industry visits, outreach to senior decision-makers, and Research Collaborations and Chief AI Officer, Accenture
to engage with talents and experts in the field as we
engagements with executives took place multiple times
Faculty Engagement
create Business AI for our customers.
each week, engaging over 500 C-suite executives
and industry leaders. Cross-cutting programming in HAI operationalized research collaborations with Juergen Mueller
The HAI Founding Members Program allows for
AY 2022-2023 comprised six Executive Breakfasts industry affiliates, fellow-mentor-advisor relations, and Chief Technology Officer and Executive
customizable, project-based collaborations that engage
featuring faculty, including Nigam Shah, Steve Blank, visiting scholars. The areas of collaboration spanned Board Member, SAP
participating Googlers with new topics, methods, and
Rishee Jain, Gordon Wetzstein, Riitta Katila, and Jiajun AI and society/economy, generative AI, responsible/
people in the domain of Human-Centered AI. We look
Wu. The HAI Startup Series kicked off, showcasing 14 trusted AI, foundation models, embodied AI, health
forward to expanding on these initiatives—Google
startups over 5 sessions and laying the foundation for care, fintech, and sustainability.
Collaborating with the team at HAI and their renowned recognizes that HAI’s interdisciplinary perspective is
an AI-focused entrepreneurial community at Stanford.
Funds allocated to research collaborations almost list of talented academics will allow us to gain insights key to shaping an inclusive AI future.
that will help shape the future of artificial intelligence.
HAI launched the “Foundation Model Scholar Program,” tripled year-over-year, reaching $4.5M and covering
Jeff Dean
This is a unique relationship that will help us grasp the
which brought faculty, postdocs, and graduate more than 35 research collaborations with over 250 Chief Scientist, Google DeepMind and Google Research
implications and significance of this technology and its
students together to demystify foundation models beneficiaries at the schools of Engineering, Medicine,
impact in key industry areas including supply chains,
and their applications during an intensive three-day, Humanities & Sciences, and Sustainability, including
organizational design, omnichannel consumer experience,
on-campus program. Focusing on generative AI, its faculty, postdocs, and graduate students.
and sustainability. As we look to the future, our goal is to The HAI Corporate Program continues to be a great
main objective was to elucidate the technical aspects
drive innovation with AI at the forefront and guide industry enabler for us to engage with the broader ecosystem
of foundation models and delve into their far-reaching
leadership on how AI can benefit our society. across research and industry adjacencies. The insights
impact on AI development across various research
and value we derive from it have helped us tune our new
domains and applications including health care and the Athina Kanioura
to market offerings and reach a better product market fit.
digital economy. With participation from diverse global Chief Strategy and Transformation Officer, PepsiCo
locations, including Mumbai, NYC, SF, Dublin, and Chintan Mehta
Sydney, the program has been acclaimed as an “Oscar CIO, Head of Digital Technology and Innovation, Wells Fargo
Winning moment” by Accenture’s senior leadership.
Many of our clients have a deep appetite for learning
This collaboration highlighted the importance of a
and foresight into how to best cope with the AI
strategic partnership between academia and industry
disruption in their organizations. Joining Stanford HAI’s As the HAI Corporate Program has matured over the
in advancing accessible and impactful learning
corporate affiliate program gives us an opportunity to last couple of years, we find increased opportunities for
experiences, and the program will be recurring
open up Silicon Valley with its leading-edge thinking, our researchers to engage with faculty and students to
and welcomes Accenture’s senior leadership and
concentration of talent, and ecosystem of partners to advance areas critical to the future of AI. In addition to
ecosystem partners.
all of our clients. the benefits of engaging across a broad community on
technology, ethics, and policy, we are also beginning to
Ben Ellencweig
see specific advances in AI techniques and approaches
Senior Partner, McKinsey
that are of mutual interest.
Jeffrey J. Welser
COO IBM Research, VP Exploratory Science
& University Collaboration, IBM
40 41

Content & Communications
Notably, the federal government also has been turning Support for HAI
to HAI for its broad AI expertise. In June, President Joe
Stanford HAI is grateful for the generosity of
Biden convened a group of technology leaders to debate
Led by Carolyn Lehman, Director of Media and Communications, HAI’s those who provide support to make its work
what he called the “risks and enormous promises” of
possible. The impact of this philanthropic
artificial intelligence. Fei-Fei Li and Rob Reich were two
content team published 118 blog posts, 26 announcement stories, and
support extends beyond individual projects; it
of only 10 invited guests to brief the president.
73 videos, which generated 1.1M page views and 362k YouTube views. ripples wider as our researchers seek further
The 2023 AI Index succeeded in building engagement discoveries, share their findings, and make
The team also produced a series of law, policy, and AI updates; a series with media and influencers. Media coverage increased strides toward new therapeutic strategies for
53 percent over the 2022 AI Index coverage. HAI had the enhancement of artificial intelligence and
featuring new faculty leadership; and a foundation models video explainer.
130 original pieces of coverage and 179 syndications its role in shaping a better future for humanity.
As a result of these efforts and others, HAI’s social media following grew from outlets including Bloomberg, Fortune, Fox News,
The institute welcomes gifts made online.
The Guardian, and Insider. This provided a total reach of
84 percent in the academic year. Please contact Stacey Sickels Boyce,
723 million—based on the publications’ unique visitors
Senior Associate Director of Development,
per month.
with questions.
Media Relations
Content and Social Media
HAI continued to make a significant impact in the The Economist
The HAI Blog continues to be a significant engagement
media by sharing individual and group insights
“How Foundation Models Are driver. Some of the most viewed blogs include the
regarding human-centered AI. HAI’s executive team,
Turbo-Charging AI Progress” following:
assistant directors, fellows, and lab executive leaders
are sought out regularly for analysis and comment on In a cover story, the Economist published HAI’s first — AI Will Transform Teaching and Learning. Let’s Get it Right
everything AI, from policy-related implications to the major announcement of the Center for Research on
— 2023 State of AI in 14 Charts
impact of research on medicine, education, and more. Foundation Models—putting the term “foundation
model,” coined by CRFM, on the map. — Scholars Build AI Detection Tool
From to , HAI secured
more than 856 unique stories in local, national, and — Fei-Fei and Demis Hassabis video
Washington Post
global media outlets, including print and broadcast
“Stanford University Just Schooled — What Is a Foundation Model? An Explainer for Non-Experts
news, involving HAI faculty members, staff, and fellows.
Congress on AI”
HAI has continued to build a loyal online community—
boosting visibility and impact among AI influencers,
This is one of about a dozen stories about HAI’s AI
interested members of the public sector, education,
Policy Boot Camp, which brings congressional aides
research, and medicine.
to campus.
New York Times
@StanfordHAI /stanfordhai @stanfordhai7626
“In Reversal Because of A.I., Office
80,519 75,540 300,000
Jobs Are Now More at Risk”
This is one of 16 stories highlighting Erik Brynjolfsson’s
latest productivity and AI research. followers, followers, views during the academic year,
and is growing by at least and is growing rapidly by and trackle
25% 107% 42,000
year over year since 2019 year over year since 2019 hours of watch time
HAI’s key audience on Twitter/X is Our engagement rates are higher than
academics, AI enthusiasts, and journalists. industry standards.

Research Grant Support in 2023 Financials in 2023
Sources of Income1
Cloud Credit Grants Gifts and Other Income
30% 84%
$2,000,000 $64,884,932
Hoffman-Yee Grants Endowment Payouts
40% 12%
Total Issued in Research Grants $2,750,000 $9,038,018 Total Income
$6,767,000 $76,970,385
Seed Grants Sponsored Research
26% 4%
$1,767,000 $3,047,434
Wu-Tsai Grants
4%
$250,000
1 Income does not include increases in endowment principal
Expenditures
Operations
24%
$4,939,006
People
10%
Total Expenditures $2,118,950
$20,839,534
Research
45%
$9,367,748
Community and Programs
21%
$4,413,830
44 45

Thank You
Visit us
Thank you for following Stanford HAI’s efforts
hai.stanford.edu
to realize our vision of human-centered AI.
Reach out
We appreciate the support of our extended hai-institute@stanford.edu
community and encourage you to contact us Follow us on social media
@StanfordHAI
with any questions.
353 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305