Chapter 5:
Hemispheric Relations

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016- Edition

Security and Defence Organizations and Initiatives
- Merida Initiative
- Security and Prosperity Partnership - Regional Security
of North America. System (RSS)
- Central America Regional
Security Initiative.
- Caribbean
Community
(CARICOM):
- Central
American Caribbean Basin
Integration Security Initiative
System. (CBSI).
- Central American
Armed Forces
Conference.
- Amazonic Cooperation
Treaty Organization.
-South American
Defence.
- Bolivarian Alliance for the
- Conference of Defence - Organization of Peoples of our America.
Ministers of the Americas. American States.
Note:On July 3, 2009, Resolution 1962 expelling Cuba from the OAS was abolished (Cuba ratified it would not return to the OAS).
Thematic axes:
“Strengthening a. The changing internactional
Defence and Security defence and security
Cooperation in the environment: The evolving role
Hemisphere in an of the military.
Increasingly Volatile b. Environmental protection and
Global Environment” resilience.
c. Hemispheric security and
(Port of Spain,
Trinidad and Tobago, defence cooperation policy:
) a case for strengthened
humanitarian emergency
assistance.
Thhe MMiiniistry off NNatiionall SSecurit ollowingeventshavealreadytakenplace:
- November 12, 2015: Meeting of Experts.
- : XII CDMA Preparatory Meeting.
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 5: Hemispheric Relations

Conference of Defence Ministers of the Americas (CDMA)
The CDMA is a unique meeting of regional ministers of Williamsburg Principles
defence. It brings together 34 countries of the hemi-
sphere to meet every two years. It is a forum, the objec- - Mutual security rests on the preservation of democracy.
tive of which is to advance towards reciprocal knowledge, - Military and security forces play a critical role in supporting and defending the legitimate inter-
analysis, debate and exchange of views and experiences ests of sovereign democratic States.
on defence and security, as well as any other interaction - Subordination of the Armed Forces to the democratically controlled authority.
mechanism to allow its fulfi lment. It has an ad-hoc struc- - Transparency in defence matters.
ture, as it has no formal permanent secretariat. The coun- - Dispute resolution through negotiated settlements.
tries offer themselves as hosts.
- Greater defence cooperation in support of security needs.
Its decisions are not binding.
Functioning Inclusion of Themes in Final Declarations
Inclusion of
Condemning outlawed armed groups/terrorism. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 civil society in
the Conference
Civil society contribution. process:
PPRREEPPPPAARAAAATTOORRRYY
MMEEETTINNGG Inter-American Convention: transparency in conventional weapons.
Cooperation on natural disasters and/ or SAR I Williamsburg, 1995
Humanitarian demining. II Bariloche, 1996
Draft fifififinnnnaaaallll sssstttaaattteeeement HHRR/IHL education.
itemmmsss ooofff aaagggeeennda
Military education/training. III Cartagena, 1998
Promotion of meetings and exchanges.
IV Manaus, 2000
Civilian training/inclusion.
Multiculturalism. V Santiago, 2002
Multidimensionality/new threats according to domestic laws.
The
countriesoffe
CCCCCCCCCCCCCC
rto
MMMMMMMMMMMMMMM
bbbeeh
DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD
oossstts
AAAAAAAAAA
forfuture
m
eetings
Institut
G
io
e
n
n
a
d
l
e
m
r p
o
e
d
r
e
s
r
p
n
e
N
P
iz
c
e
o
a
t
a
i
n
t
v
c
i
-
o
e
e
p
n
r
/
o
o
p
R
p
li
r
S
e
f
o
e
C
r
c
a
r
e
a

ti
s
t

o
i
s
o
n

e
n
s
s

.
.
. VI
V
I
V
M
I
I
I I
Q
a
B
n
u
a
a
i
n
t
g
o
ff
u
,
,
a

,

Small arms and light weapons proliferation. IX Santa Cruz, 2010
Promotion of confidence-building measures.
X Punta del Este, 2012
Plenary sessions / Presentations Subregional realities/flexible architecture.
Option of bilteral meetings Democracy-security-economy relation. XI Arequipa, 2014
Option for multilateral meetings
Budgetary transparency.
XII Port of Spain, 2016
Environmental best practices
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Themes on the Agenda
VII Managua, 2006 (Nicaragua)
I Williamsburg, 1995 (United States)
Hemispheric security system, scenarios and sub-regional regimes.
Measures to increase transparency, military confi dence and improve security.
Measures for increasing mutual trust, security and cooperation in multinational
Cooperation on defence measures.
operations in the Americas.
The Armed Forces in 21st Century democracy
Modernization and transformation of defence institutions.
II Bariloche, 1996 (Argentina)
VIII Banff, 2008 (Canada)
New dimensions of international security.
Assistance in natural disasters.
New roles.
Assistants in large national and regional events.
Institutional framework and relations between defence systems.
Peacekeeping operations.
III Cartagena, 1998 (Colombia)
IX Santa Cruz, 2010 (Bolivia)
The hemispheric security system and its mechanisms for regional development.
Complementary functions of armed forces in democratic societies. The consolidation of peace, trust, security and cooperation in the Americas.
Hemispheric cooperation in the fi ght against terrorism, illicit drugs, and illicit arms, Democracy, Armed Forces, Security and Society.
munitions and explosives traffi cking. Regional security and natural disasters. Strengthening hemispheric cooperation.
IV Manaus, 2000 (Brazil)
X Punta del Este, 2012 (Uruguay)
Hemispheric security at the beginning of the 21st Century.
Mutual trust on the American continent, current situation and projections for Natural disasters, environmental and biodiversity protection.
the next decade. Peace operations.
Defence and development: possibilities for regional cooperation. Security and defence validity of the Inter-American Defence System.
V Santiago, 2002 (Chile)
XI Arequipa, 2014 (Peru)
Hemispheric security at the beginning of the 21st Century.
Mutual trust on the American continent. Coordination of the specialized conferences of the armed forces institutions with
the CMDA.
Defence and society: possibilities for regional cooperation.
Cooperation in military health.
VI Quito, 2004 (Ecuador) Cooperation in search and rescue capabilities.
Defence and environmental protection.
The new hemispheric security architecture.
Sharing experiences on the participation and effectiveness of the armed forces in
Mutual trust and security in the hemispheric security system. matters of security in the region and the hemisphere.
Defence, development and society: the possibility for cooperation.
Source: Compilation based on the fi nal declarations of the conferences and information provided by the Ministry of National Security of Trinidad and Tobago. A
grouping of principal topics covered in each declaration is presented.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016- Edition

Inter-American Defence System
There is no formal defence “system” in the American hemisphere, but rather different instruments related to this subject. Organizations –such as
the OAS-, treaties –such as the TIAR-, a diverse array of forums, and academic institutions such as the Inter-American Defence College.
MAPS Assistance Programs (1953-1956, Inter-American Defence Board (IADB) - 1942
under the legal umbrella of TIAR)
Created as a coordinating body during World War II, it has remained over time. Objective: identify solu-
tions to common challenges of defence and security which may arise in the American continent. Role of
Inter-American Naval Conferences advisor in peace times.
(1959, forum)
Conference of American Armies Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (Rio Treaty) – 1947
(1960, forum) It establishes that an attack on an American State will be considered an attack to all, and it also estab-
lishes the duty to assist. It was an instrument of the Cold War and it serves as a legal structure providing a
framework for bilateral agreements between the United States and the countries of the region.
System of Cooperation among the
American Air Forces (1961, forum)
Organization of American States (OAS) – 1948
Inter- American Defence College (1962) Objective: achieve peace and justice in all its Member States. It replaced the Panamerican Union.
-Committee of Hemispheric Security (1995).
- Secretariat for Multidimensional Security (2005).
-IADB becomes an OAS entity(2006).
Conference of Defence Ministers of
the Americas (1995, forum)
Hemispheric Institutions Sub-regional Response
1947-1948 IInter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance. Diplomatic solidarity with the United States.
IADB (role of advisor in peace times).
Beginning of
CCharter of the OAS (collective security).
the Cold War
SSchool of the Americas (1946-1999).
IInter-American Air Forces Academy (1947).
Agreements for United States military missions in other countries.
1950-1953 MMAPS with 17 Latin American countries (the United States Cooperation with the United States in the system building (ex-
Korean War pprovides training, equipment, and weapons in return for sup- cept Mexico).
pport to policies; permanent military missions in each country). Participation of Colombia in the War.
Inter-American Naval Conferences (CNI). Wave of military coups in Latin America (1964-1973).
1959-1968 Effects CConference of American Armies (CAA). Tlatelolco Treaty (1967) and Prohibition of nuclear weapons in
of the Cuban SSystem of Cooperation Among the American Air Forces (SICOFAA). Latin America.
Revolution
Inter-American Defence College (IADC).
AAnnual joint exercises.
1975-1986
Democratization OOAS reform. Weapons control projects. Attempts at confl ict resolution.
Disagreements on how to address the drug issue.
1989-1991 CCreation of the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commis-
Regional Security System (RSS) amended in 1996 (Caribbean).
End of Cold War; ssion –CICAD- (1986).
Post Cold War. SSpecial Security Committee of the OAS (1991).
Conference of Defence Ministers of the Americas -CMDA- Consensus on hemispheric integration.
((1995). Confl ict resolution.
1994 CCreation of the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism Confi dence measures.
Summit of the ((1999) . Peru denounces the TIAR (1990). Withdrawal of condemnation
Americas Inter-American Defence College reform (1995-6). in 1991.
WWHINSEC replaces the School of the Americas (2001). Conference of Central American Armed Forces (1997).
Permanent Security Committee of the OAS (2005).
Initial exceptional solidarity with the United States.
BBrazil invokes the TIAR.
2001 Mexico denounces TIAR (2002).
CCreation of the Secretariat for Multidimensional Security
September 11
((2005).
Attack
MMeeting of Ministers of Public Security –MISPA I- (2007).
Foundation of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of our
America –ALBA- (2004).
Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America (2005).
Merida Initiative (2008).
Union of South American Nations–UNASUR- (2008).
2005 South American Defence Council (2008).
End of Miami Caribbean Basin Security Initiative (2010).
Consensus ALBA Defence School (2012).
Bolivia, Ecuador, Nicaragua and Venezuela announced their de-
nouncement of the TIAR (2012).
Venezuela denounces the Inter-American Convention on Human
Rights (CADH) in .
Ecuador disaffi liates itself from the IADB (2015).
Since the mid 20th century, military assistance agreements, also known as mutual assistance pacts, have been
Mutual
signed between the US and countries of the region. In various cases, these agreements have ceased to be im-
Assistance
plemented or were superseded by hierarchically higher standards. They form the basis for personnel, training
Pacts
and equipment assistance as well as for the so-called military groups.
Source: Compilation based on historical data.
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 5: Hemispheric Relations

Conference of American Armies (CAA)
The Conference of American Armies (CAA) was created in 1960, with the aim of becoming a debate forum for the exchange of experiences among the Armies of
the American continent. This Conference has twenty Member Armies (Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago, United States, Uruguay and Venezuela); and 5 Observer Armies
(Barbados, Belize, Guyana, Jamaica y Suriname). The Central America Armed Forces Conference (CFAC) and the IADB are observer organizations.
Since 2004, the Conference cycles have been working on the development of manuals related to peace operations. Thus, products have been developed on lessons
learned, procedures, terminology, education and training.
Thematic Evolution in the CAA (1960-2010)
Nbr. - Year Subjects
I-1960 Operations, information, logistics, control, research and development.
II-1961 Personnel, intelligence, operations, logistics, civil action and military policy.
III-1962 Logistics.
IV-1963 Establishment of communication networks in order to disseminate and exchange information on subversive movements.
V-1964 Administration of training and intensifying preparations of armies in revolutionary wars.
Cooperation between the army and government organizations for better interaction with the social order of the people and organization
VI-1965 and training of the army for internal security.
VII-1966 Military system improvement and its incorporation to the Charter of the OAS.
VIII-1968 Hemispheric security.
IX-1969 Communist subversion in the Americas. Education on democracy and training on fi ghting a revolutionary battle.
X-1973 Strategies against subversion in the Americas for the security of the Hemisphere.
XI-1975 CAA regulations: Security of the Americas, integral educating system in the American Armies (contribute to eradicate subversion).
XII-1977 Integration of the Inter-American system. The fi ght against communist subversion.
XIII-1979 Improvement of professional education of soldiers. Administrative training. Approval of CAA’s Regulations.
XIV-1981 Psychological war. Member Armies guarantee they will not allow other countries’ subversive organizations into their territories.
Cooperative action to identify, isolate and neutralize external support to communist subversion in the Americas. Communist threat to hemi-
XV-1983
spheric security.
XVI-1984-85 The Army in a democratic society. Subversion in Latin America? Perspectives and delimitations. Defence coalition in the Americas.
XVII-1986-87 Combating international terrorism: threats, policies and responses.
XVIII-1988-89 Central American confl ict. Analysis and assessment of the 78 / 89 period from the political-military viewpoint.
Democracy maintenance in the continent faced with the ideological opening of the communist world. Political, social and economic realities
XIX-1990-91
of the American countries.
Participation of the American Armies and their reserves in contributing to their governments to guarantee continental security in view of the
XX-1992-93 new world situation. The formation of economic blocks and/or alliances, supported by international organizations, and pressures on the need
of the armed forces, their missions and access to technology.
XXI-1994-95 Challenges to the Nation-State. Consequences for continental security and their impacts on the American Armies.
Armies’ participation in country development and in international security and peace cooperation activities within the framework of a demo-
XXII-1996-97 cratic society.
XXIII-1998-99 The CAA we wish for the 21st century..
XXIV-2000-01 American Armies within the framework of global relations and international law at the beginning of the 21st century. Impacts on national defence.
XXV-2002-03 The American Armies and their contribution to the formation of defence policies in the context of new challenges to continental security.
The CAA and its contribution to hemispheric security and defence through an increased ability to work together, for Chapter 6 PKO and
XXVI-2004-05
disaster relief operations.
XXVII-2006-07
XXVIII-2008-09
The CAA and its contribution to PKOs (developed under UN mandate) and disaster relief operations, through the creation and application of
XXIX-2010-11 mechanisms and procedures designed to improve the collective capacities and interoperability of their members.
XXX -2012-13
XXXI – 2014-15
XXXII – 2016-17 Interagency operations in response to emerging challenges.
2 YEAR CYCLE
Preparatory Ad-hoc and Specialised Conferences Commander’s Exercises
Conferences
Conferences
• Peacekeeping operations.
• Environment.
• Science and technology.
• Education and training.
• Civil-military relations.
• Assistance operations in the case of disasters.
• Peacekeeping operations procedures, education and
training.
• Legal affairs.
• Emerging threats and risk situations.
• Ad hoc meetings on procedures, legal affairs and
science and technology in peacekeeping operations.
Source:Compilation based on the different websites and historic documents of the Conference of American Armies.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016- Edition

System of Cooperation among the American Air Forces (SICOFAA)
Created in 1961, the SICOFAA is a system which seeks co-
Cooperation Exercise
operation among the region´s Air Forces. It promotes train-
ing, knowledge and experience exchanges to strengthen The IV Cooperation Exercise was held in 2016 in Mendoza, Argentina. It aimed to in-
the capabilities of the Air Forces -and their equivalents- in tegrate capacities for humanitarian action in case of natural disasters. Delegation from
order to provide support to its members’ requirements. the air forces of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Re-
According to its 2012-2027 Strategic Plan, its strategic ar- public, Ecuador, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, United States and Uruguay participated.
eas are humanitarian aid and institutional strengthening.
InterAmerican Air Forces Academy (IAAFA)
Members: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Co-
The Inter-American Air Forces Academy (IAAFA) was founded on March 15, 1943. It is located in
lombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guate-
Lackland Air Force Base, Texas, United States.
mala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama (National Aero Na- Its stated mission is to train and educate the military forces to build and generate abilities for the
val Service), Paraguay, Peru, United States, Uruguay and support of world stability and security, while generating academic and cultural relations. It offers
Venezuela. Observers: Belize, Costa Rica (Air Surveillance training courses for Offi cers (ISOS) and professional training courses for Non-Commissioned Of-
fi cers (INCOA).
Service), Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica and Mexico.
Conference of the Chiefs of American Air 2012-2017 Master Plan – SICOFAA
Forces (CONJEFAMER)
Functional organization
CONJEFAMER
Highest authority.
Decides on actions to be
developed
PREPLAN
Assessment and
Planning Board.
Advisory Body
Enhance the
System’s
operational
capacity to
Comittees and provide
SPS humanitarian aid
other activities OENFA
Personnel Management and Management and Information Execution Execution
Operations
Logistics Science and Technology Red Control Estaciones SITFAA SITFAA
Information and In each country Telecommunication
Source:Compilation based on information provided by the Permanent Secretariat of SICOFAA, the Combined Air Operations Manual for Humanitarian Aid and Dis-
asters, SICOFAA’s Planestra Strategic Plan 2012-2017 and Director Plan 2012-2017, and the Argentinean Air Force.
Inter-American Naval Conferences (CNI)
They started in 1959 and are held every two years. Their purpose is to study common naval con-
cerns and promote permanent professional contacts.
Member countries:Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecua-
dor, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, United States,
Uruguay and Venezuela. The Inter-American Naval Telecommunications Network and the IADB have
observer status.
Specialized Inter-American Naval Conference of Intelligence
The XI Edition of these meetings was held in 2015 in the Dominican Republic, with the partici-
The XXVII Conference
pation of representatives from Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic,
was held in 
Ecuador, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, United States and Venezuela.
in Canada.
Source:Compilation based on information provided by the public information offi ces of the participating Navies.
strengthening institutional SICOFAA’s
Its general purpose is to position SICOFAA as an agile and effective
response mechanism on humanitarian aid during disasters, through
the following specifi c goals:
• Strengthening mechanisms for support and integration among Air
Forces and their equivalents in the region.
• Optimizing the response capability of the Air Forces and their
equivalents in response to disasters emerging in the region, which
may require SICOFAA to intervene.
• Optimizing technical capabilities inherent to the planning and
development of combined air operations.
• Promoting the establishment of a common doctrine of aerospace
safety.
The Master Plan is part of a Strategic Plan (Planestra 2012-2027)
which establishes the strategic areas and purposes, including the
projects to be implemented.
Objectives Proyects
-Operational • Cooperation exercises
readiness •Promoting a culture of
-Aerospace aerospace security.
Security
Strategic Areas -TTTraining •Fostering regional knowledge
and experience exchange.
-Inter-institutional • Increasing the levels of Coordination exchange with regional organizations.
-Optimization of • Updating SICOFFFAA organization- SICOFFFAA al structure.
according to a
• Improving SICOFFFAA telecommu-
New Approach nications and IT system.
Conference of the Leaders of the Marine
Corps of the Americas
The Conference is held every two years.
Participating countries are: Argentina, Bolivia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru,
United States and Uruguay. The Netherlands and
France are observers.
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 5: Hemispheric Relations

Central American Armed Forces Conference (CFAC)
In 2016 El Salvador
assumed the Presidency
The CFAC was created in 1997 as a forum to promote permanent and systematic efforts for cooperation,
of the Higher Council.
coordination and mutual support among the Central American Armed Forces.
Observers: Argentina, Belize, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, France, Germany, Mexico, Russia, Spain,
Taiwan, United Kingdom and United States.
CFAC is an observer member of the Conference of American Armies Members
Higher Council
Decision-making body: integrated by the military offi cer of President of the
highest rank and hierarchy from each member country (two Higher Council
meetings per year).
Executive Commitee Pro Tempore General
It follows the decisions made by the Higher Council. It is Secretariat
composed of the Chiefs of Joint Staff, or their equivalents, (rotates every one year)
from member countries (three meetings per year).
Observer States:
Representatives before CFAC Argentina; Belize; Brazil; Canada;
Chile; Taiwan; Colombia; France, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Germany, Mexico, Russia, Spain,
Armed Forces of member states United Kingdom and United States. Nicaragua and Dominican Republic.
CCFAC coordination authorities have met over the last years, reaching agreement and making advances
oon the following issues:
CFAC’s Plan of Integrated Cooperation to Prevent and Counteract Terrorism, Organized Crime and
1991 Establishment of the SICA.
Related Activities includes: periodical reports on threats and operations to counteract such threats;
ongoing information exchange; exchange of experiences; (virtual and practical) training exercises;
coordinated actions on land, at sea or in the air; particular operation plans in each country; meet- 1992
ings of Border Unit Commanders; Manuals for interoperability of land, air and sea forces. Among
other fi elds, penitentiary security is also discussed. Diverse mechanisms, such as the Meeting of

Commanders of Border Units between Nicaragua and Honduras, and El Salvador and Honduras, form
part of the outcomes of the plan.

Execution of the Framework
Humanitarian Since it was created in 1999, the Humanitarian and Rescue Unit (UHR-CFAC) has rendered as-
1995 Treaty on Democratic Security
aid and natural sistance during extreme natural disasters (hurricanes, tropical storms and depressions, fl oods and
in Central America.
disasters droughts) affecting the region.

Cooperation in this fi eld gave rise to the creation of the Peacekeeping Operations Unit (UOMP – 1997 Creation of CFAC.
Peacekeeping
CFAC) in 2004, which in 2012 analysed the creation of the CFAC Battalion. Staff training is provided
Operations
at CREOMPAZ in Guatemala, where the Induction Course on Peace Operations is also carried out. 1998
1999 Creation of UHR – CFAC.
In , the Supreme Council of the Conference of Central American Armed Forces
Environmental
(CFAC, for is acronym in Spanish) created the action item on environmental preservation. Its goal
Management 2000 Activation of UHR – CFAC.
is to establish a plan to support the efforts made by each country on environmental matters.

Integral cooperation plan
Annual program on military confi dence-building measures. to prevent and combat
Educations exchange program for cadets, of rotational character. 2002 terrorism, organized crime
Industrial and logistics commercial mechanisms. and related activities.
Cooperation on health-care service exchange among the Armed Forces. 2003
Meetings related to personnel, intelligence, logistics, civil affairs, naval forces, air forces, education,
military health, humanitarian operations, and UN peacekeeping operations.
2004 Activation of UOMP – CFAC.
Regional coordination
CFAC takes part in simu- 2005
The Central American Security Commission works at the level of the Central American lation exercises and drills Creation of the Regional
Integration System (SICA) and is composed of a Sub-Committee of Defence, made up of the Humanitarian 2006 Peacekeeping Operations
of representatives of the Ministries of Defence of SICA member countries. Although Allied Forces (FAHUM), Command.
CFAC is not part of SICA, both institutions maintain permanent communication. as well as in activities on

CFAC representatives take part in high-level meetings, such as the Central American information exchange
Security Conference (CENTSEC) sponsored by the United States Southern Com- and multinational
mand. CFAC also colaborates with other regional institutions, such as the Coordina- coordination organized 2008 2008 Regulations of CFAC.
tion Centre for the Prevention of Natural Disasters in Central America (CEPREDENAC) by the US Southern
and the Central American Commission of Maritime Transport (COCATRAM). Command.

Epidemiologic Surveillance System
This system provides data on the different outbreaks in the region to the health services of Member States’

armed forces. This is done through permanent monitoring, follow-up and surveillance in coordination with the
health authorities of the respective countries. 2012 2012 Review of Regulations.
Source: Compilation based on the Agreement Creating CFAC (1997); Regulations of CFAC (2008 and 2012); web pages of CFAC, the Ministry of Defence of El Sal-
vador and Guatemala, Nicaraguan Army, the Ministry of National Defence of Honduras; SICA and COCATRAM.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016- Edition

UNASUR’s South American Defence Council (CDS The period and Presidency pro tempore of the
South American Defence Council coincides with
Creation: . A Forum for Cooppperation,,, Consultation and Coordination. It the UNASUR Presidency
is attended byyy the Ministers of Defence of UNASUR member countries and senior repre- - 2014-2016: Uruguay.
sentatives of Foreign Affairs Ministries.
- 2016-2018: Venezuela
OObbjjecttiives:
-Consolidate South America as a “peace zone”
- Build a South-American identityyy in the area of defence,,, based on subregggional and na- Structure and Organization
tional characteristics while contributing to the strengthening of Latin America and Carib-
bean unity.
- Generate consensus to reinforce regional cooperation in the area of defence.
Annual
regular
When the CDS was Executive Meetings of
created, the political will to Meetings are headed Defence
by the Vice-ministers Ministers
peacefully settle disputes and
ofDefence. Foreign
promote hemispheric and Affairs and Defence
sub-regional peace and security Officials also take part in
prevailed. Under these these meetings. They
principles, a positive are held every six
months
consensus was achieved
excluded three
aspects: Pro-tempore
President´s
A C Secretariat assumed
by the country
The CDS is holding the
not conceived B TThhe CDS Pro-tempore
as a collective ddooes not UNASUR
security TThhee bbooddyy iiddentify Secretariat
does not common
organization.
deal with adversaries.
security
issues.
Main actions within the framework of action plans, 2011 - 2016

18%36.5% 9%36.5%

50% 23% 4% 23%

40% 20% 16% 24% 8

43.5% 13%17.5% 26%

48% 18.5% 18.5% 15%

28% 33% 22% 17% 0
Defence Military cooperation, Defence industry Education
2011 policies humanitarian action and and technology and Training
peacekeeping operations
0 10 20 30 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Activities
South American Defence School (ESUDE)
It is a higher studies centre for training civilians and members of the military in de-
Defence Military cooperation, Defence Education
policies humanitarian action and industry and Training fence. Its creation was approved at the XI Regular Meeting of the Executive Body
peacekeeping operations and of the CDS and V Regular Meeting of the CDS, in . The fi rst meet-
technology ing of the ESUDE was conducted in in Quito. The Executive Secretary
was elected on April 16, 2015, for a two-year term.
Source: Compilation based on the website of the South American Defence Council and South American Defence School (ESUDE). Action Plans of the South American
Defence Council (2011 to 2016), the Act of the IX Meeting of the Executive Body of the CDS.
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 5: Hemispheric Relations

Organization of American States (OAS)
Structure
Permanent Committee on Hemispheric
Council Security (1995) Executive Secretariat of the Inter-
American Drug Abuse Control
General Commission (CICAD)
Assembly Secretariat for
General Multidimensional Security Secretariat of the
m I e t c d h e a fi n n is e m s s, Secretariat Coordinate ( c 2 oo 0 p 0 e 5 ra ) t ion among Inter-Am T e e ri r c r a o n ri s C m o m (C m IC it T t E e ) e against
mandates, Member States to combat citizen and
policies and national security threats. Public Security Department
actions. (PSD) 2006
In 2016 the General Assembly endorsed the mandate prioritization Committee on Hemispheric Security
process developed by the Permanent Council and the Ad Hoc It is in charge of studying and making recommendations on hemisphe-
Working Group on the Strategic Vision of the OAS. In this context, ric security, particularly on those entrusted to it by the Permanent
the General Secretariat prepared a Strategic Plan, due to be conside- Council or the General Assembly. In recent years, the following issues
red by . Regarding the Security Pillar, the following lines have been addressed:
and expected results were proposed:
✓ Antipersonnel mines
Strategic Lines ✓ Illicit arms trafficking
- Designing, implementing and fostering mechanisms aimed at: ✓ Confidence- and security-building measures
- Preventing crime and violence in the Hemisphere. ✓ Transnational organized crime
- Convicting the perpetrators of crime. ✓ Trafficking-in-persons
✓ Transparency in Conventional Weapons
- Protecting victims and witness of crime and
Acquisitions
violence in the Hemisphere
✓ Natural disaster reduction
- Designing, implementing, and fostering
evidence-based public policies. ✓ Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons
✓ Prevention of crime and violence
Expected results by 2020 ✓ Special security concerns of the Small
Island States
•Confronting transnational organized crime
strategically and in a coordinated fashion. ✓ Gangs involved in criminal activities
•Coordination and cooperation for fighting
transnational organized crime and its multiple OOnn December 15, 2015, the Committee on Hemispheric
expressions. SSeeccuurity established the “Working Group on the
HHeemmispheric Plan of Action against Transnational Organized
•More reliable data on security. CCrriimmee..”, given the following reasons that were suggested by the
ddelegations:
•Modern and effective public policies for security.
•The spread of transnational organized crime is now the region’s
•More and better prepared actors in the area of security.
biggest security challenge;
•Modern and efficient prison systems.
•Organized crime undermines and adversely affects democracy,
•Reduction of the population deprived of liberty in the prison system. citizen security, sustainable development, and human rights;
•States have realized that the ability to tackle transnational organized
•Consideration of human rights, gender perspective and citizen
crime transcends the resources and capabilities of each country and
participation in all matters pertaining to security.
that cooperation is essential to achieving effective results.
Inter-American Defence Board (IADB)
Created in 1942, it is an international forum made up of civilian and military
representatives appointed by the Member States, who provide technical and edu- One of the tasks carried out by the IADB for
cational advice on military and defence matters in the hemisphere. Its structure the OAS is an inventory of confi dence-building
consists of a Council of Delegates (President, Vice-president, delegations of Mem- measures (CSBMs).
ber States); a Secretariat and the Inter-American Defence College (IADC).
Member States:
Antigua and Barbuda Chile Haiti Peru
Argentina Colombia Honduras Saint Kitts and Nevis
Barbados Dominican Republic Jamaica Suriname
Belize El Salvador Mexico Trinidad and Tobago
Bolivia Grenada Nicaragua United States
Brazil Guatemala Panama Uruguay
Canada Guyana Paraguay Venezuela
Ecuador began the process of disaffi liating itself with the IADB in . Grenada was incorporated in 2016.
Sources: Compilation based on the Work Plan and calendar of activities of the Committee on Hemispheric Security for the 2015-2016 term, CP/CSH-1684/15 rev.
6/, CP/RES. 1061/16 (2063/16), AG/RES. 2890 (XLVI-O/16), 2016-2020 Strategic Plan of the OAS (Draft), OAS/Ser.G-GT/VE-31/16, and the websites of the OAS, the
Committee on Hemispheric Security and the IADB.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016- Edition

Links with other Continents
Defence cooperation Defence Agreement for
Europe 2010-2012 agreement. cooperation developing a System for
agreement. Disaster Prevention and
Europe 2012-2016
Mitigation. Assistance and
China 2010-2012 military
China 2012-2016 cooperation.
Rusia 2010-2012
Technical military
Rusia 2012-2016
cooperation agreement.
Irán 2012-2016
Signing of agreements on
cooperation in defence
and technology and a
joint declaration related
to security.
Cooperation for
improving defence
museums .
Agreement for the
Technical military purchase of helicopters
cooperation agreement. and an agreement for
logistical cooperation.
Belarus - Ecuador, Peru. Agreement
Agreement for cooperation
on technical-military cooperation.
in the Amazon Protection
System.
Spain-Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay.
Cooperation Protocol.
Argentina - France. Cooperation
agreement for training in peacekeeping “Agreement on
missions. Cooperation in Science,
Technology and
Italy-Uruguay, Ecuador. Industry”, which led to
Cooperation Agreement for systems the launch of the ‘Tupac
acquisition. Katari’ communications
satellite.
Netherlands - Brazil, Peru.
Agreement on cooperation in defence
matters.
Portugal - Uruguay. Agreement on
Agreement to deepen
cooperation in the field
of defence. defence cooperation.
UK - Peru. Memorandum on defence
industry cooperation. Agreement for
cooperation between
space agencies.
Turkey - Chile. Memorandum on
defence industry
cooperation. Defence
cooperation
agreement.
Ukraine - Peru. Agreement for military
and technical cooperation.
Agreement for military
institutional cooperation.
Belarus-Bolivia. Defence cooperation
agreement.
Bosnia-Herzegovina Chile. UK - Colombia, Peru. Agreement for Cooperation agreement for
Agreement on cooperation in cooperation in the field of defence security and defence.
defence. and security.
Spain-Brazil, Chile, Peru. Defence Sweden-Brazil (2). Cooperation in
cooperation, with a focus on cyber defence, procurement of fighters
defence and natural disasters. aircraft and memorandum on
cooperation in military aeronautics.
France-Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador, Agreement for the
Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru.
Agreement on cooperation in Ukraine-Argentina. Agreement for mutual protection of
defence. technical-military cooperation. information on strategic
military cooperation.
Italy - Brazil, Chile. Agreement for Visegrad countries (Poland,
training in maritime operations, peace Hungary, Tcheca Republic and
operations, acquisition of vessels and Slovakia) - Brazil. Technological
joint aircraft development. cooperation and in cyber defence.
Sources:Annual Institutional Report of the Ministry of Defence of Bolivia (2015), Annual Report on the Management of the National Government of Uruguay (2015),
Annual Report of the Nicaraguan Army (2015), websites of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs of Bolivia, and the Ministries of Defence of Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, Ven-
ezuela, of the Ministry of Popular Power for Science and Technology of Venezuela, of the Presidency of the Republic of Brazil (Portal Brasil) and of the Argentine Navy.
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD