Free Jazz on the
Battlefield
How GhostPlay’s AI Approach Enhances Air Defense
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber, Armin Brandstetter, and Gary S. Schaal
DAIO Study 22|03

About the Defense AI Observatory
The Defense AI Observatory (DAIO) at the Helmut Schmidt University in Hamburg
monitors and analyzes the use of artificial intelligence by armed forces. DAIO comprises
three interrelated work streams:
Culture, concept development, and organizational transformation in the context of
military innovation
Current and future conflict pictures, conflict dynamics, and operational experience,
especially related to the use of emerging technologies
Defense industrial dynamics with a particular focus on the impact of emerging
technologies on the nature and character of techno-industrial ecosystems
DAIO is an integral element of GhostPlay, a capability and technology development project
for concept-driven and AI-enhanced defense decision-making in support of fast-paced
defense operations. GhostPlay is funded by the Center for Digital and Technology Research
of the German Bundeswehr (dtec.bw).
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von

Free Jazz on the
Battlefield
How GhostPlay’s AI Approach Enhances Air Defense
Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber,
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Armin Brandstetter, and Gary S. Schaal
DAIO Study 22|03

About the Authors
Dr. Heiko Borchert is DAIO’s co-director, Senior Research Fellow at the German Institute for
Defence and Strategic Studies, and runs a strategic affairs consulting boutique. He studied
international relations, business administration, economics, and law at the University of St.
Gallen, where he also got his Ph.D.
Dr. Christian Brandlhuber is co-founder and CTO of 21strategies. He studied mathematics
and computer science at the TU Munich and the TH Karlsruhe. He has been involved in
developing AI solutions for defense, industry, and financial market applications since the
late 1990s. Dr. Brandlhuber has contributed to various patents in the field of data fusion
and holds a granted patent for advanced financial planning systems.
Dr. Armin Brandstetter is Sales Director Future Combat Air System (FCAS) with Hensoldt.
He has studied aeronautics and astronautics at the TU Munich. Prior to joining Hensoldt he
worked on operational analysis, mission systems for UAV, and technology management with
Airbus Defense and Space.
Prof. Dr. Gary S. Schaal is DAIO’s co-director and chair of political science, in particular
political theory, at the Helmut Schmidt University. He studied political science, German
philology, and philosophy at the FU Berlin.
Design
Almasy Information Design Thinking
Imprint
Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber, Armin Brandstetter, and Gary S. Schaal, Free Jazz
on the Battlefield. How GhostPlay’s AI Approach Enhances Air Defense. DAIO Study 22/03
(Hamburg: Defense AI Observatory, 2022).
This paper will also appear in: Detlef Schulz (ed.), Forschungsaktivitäten im Digitalisierungs-
und Technologiezentrum der Bundeswehr dtec.bw (Hamburg: Helmut-Schmidt-Universität/
Universität der Bundeswehr, forthcoming).
Defense AI Observatory | Chair of Political Theory | Helmut Schmidt University
Holstenhofweg 85 | 22043 Hamburg | T +49 40 6541 2776
 | contact@defenseai.eu | @Defense_AIO
ISSN (online): 2749-5337
ISSN (print): 2749-5345
4 FREE JAZZ ON THE BATTLEFIELD

Content
1 Summary ..................................................................................................................... 6
2 If I nnovation is the Solution, W hat is the Problem? ............................................................................ 7
3 GhostPlay’s Novelty: Free Jazz vs. Central Coordination .................................... 10
3.1 Tactical AI: Basic Building Blocks. ...............................................................................12
3.2 Emergence: Cooperative Behavior Paves the Ground for Technical Autonomy ............16
3.3 GhostPlay’s Approach to Simulation ...........................................................................18
3.4 Preliminary Results. ....................................................................................................18
3.5 Summary ..................................................................................................................23
4 Balancing Ethics with Performance ........................................................................ 24
5 GhostPlay’s Approach to Innovation Management .............................................. 26
6 Outlook ..................................................................................................................... 28
Literature ...................................................................................................................... 31
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 5

1 Summary
Current conflicts underline the importance of Integrated Air Defense Systems
(IADS) to keep aggressor air power at distance and ensure allied freedom of
maneuver. But what happens if aggressors saturate, deceive, and neutralize allied
air defense with hundreds of unmanned aerial assets in conventional attrition
attacks or apply hitherto unknown tactics potentially enhanced by artificial intelli-
gence (AI)?
That’s the question GhostPlay addresses by developing defense decision
algorithms (Play) to support tactical military decision-making against aggressors
that operate at different levels of ambition, excel at leveraging unknown and
emerging tactics, and strive to exploit operational tempo to their benefit. Ghost-
Play uses a synthetic simulation environment (Ghost) to assess if and to what
extent AI-enhanced solutions – operating in stand-alone or federated systems –
can be used to accelerate operational tempo, enhance tactical level performance,
and step-up efforts to anticipate future adversarial behavior.
Against the background of a growing body of literature on defense innovation,
the paper discusses GhostPlay’s goal to develop context and consequence-aware
AI systems that exploit novel tactics to ensure and scale IADS-based protection.
The paper sheds light on GhostPlay’s conceptual and technical setup, summarizes
initial simulation-based findings and outlines future development options.
6 FREE JAZZ ON THE BATTLEFIELD

2 If I nnovation
is the Solution,
What is the
Problem?
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 77

“Military Innovation” has become a hot buzzword among NATO and EU members.
Two forces shape this current defense innovation discourse. First, increasingly
assertive adversarial military capabilities underline the need for allied defense
innovation to keep the upper hand vis-à-vis strategic competitors.1 Second, the
defense innovation discourse emphasizes the important role of emerging technol-
ogies like artificial intelligence (AI), autonomous and robotic systems, space, and
quantum technologies to name but a few examples.2 In most cases, commercial
entities that are not yet part of the defense ecosystem are frontrunners in devel-
oping and applying these technologies. This increases the need to integrate new
players, technologies, and underpinning capacities into the defense industrial and
technology base.
Although in fashion, defense innovation is notoriously difficult to define.3 Few
capstone documents describe precisely what type of innovation armed forces are
expected to deliver and what needs to change to accomplish the respective tasks.
Based on a previous study4 we contend that defense innovation describes concep-
tual/cultural, organizational, and technological novelties that change how armed
forces prepare for and conduct the application of military power. In so doing,
armed forces build on past operational experience and requirements.
Against the background of these three vectors, GhostPlay’s innovation under-
standing is two-fold. First, GhostPlay addresses a pressing gap as Suppression of
Enemy Air Defense (SEAD) capabilities have atrophied in most EU/NATO nations
since the end of the Cold War. We explore to what extent AI-based solutions
can augment swarms of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) to conduct SEAD mis-
sions. Second, GhostPlay does not look at new technologies to augment existing
technologies. Rather we look at ways in which the use of new technology triggers
novel battlefield behavior at the tactical level. With these two aspects in mind,
GhostPlay models novel AI-based solutions for air defense (AD) and aggressor
swarms that learn how to outperform each other. The first project phase, which we
discuss in this paper, focuses on the defender.
To model and learn superior tactical AD behavior that withstands and counters
UAV swarms, we consider two main aspects. First, in most recent conflicts UAVs
gained the upper hand against AD as AD solutions have been brittle.5 Brittleness
results from a lack of proper integration of all relevant sensors and effectors to
create a powerful AD federation. Integration, in turn, requires coordination. This
is where the second element kicks in. GhostPlay focuses on novel approaches
1 Work/Brimley,20YY.
2 ScienceandTechnologyTrends2020-2040.
3 Horowitz/Pindyck,“Whatisamilitaryinnovationandwhyitmatters.”
4 Borchert/Schütz/Verbovskzy,BewaretheHype,p.13-17.
5 Ibid.,pp.43-44.
8 FREE JAZZ ON THE BATTLEFIELD

that increase tactical AD versatility to fend-off aggressors. In so doing, GhostPlay
breaks new ground by exploring options to develop federated AD webs that
coordinate single entities like sensors and effectors through emergent behavior
without the help of central and hierarchical command and control (C2) solutions.
As we explain in section 3.2, GhostPlay bakes the C2 capability into every element
of the AD web rather than delegating C2 to a dedicated system, that adversaries
can target and attack. This approach makes the AD web much more fluid, agile,
and resilient in responding to threats and mission requirements.
Superior tactical versatility augments military freedom of action. To this purpose
GhostPlay seeks to leverage the principles of war that guide and inform how
military power is applied.6 Among other things, GhostPlay strives for
economy of effort by optimizing the use of effectors in time and place as well
as with respect to how force is organized to achieve optimal effects under any
given conditions;
surprise by using emergent behavior in a way that produces tactical behavior
not yet witnessed by aggressors;
initiative by anticipating future adversarial moves with the goal to preemptively
position allied force to engage adversaries.
In sum, GhostPlay contributes to defense innovation by developing technology
that enables novel battlefield behavior to enhance tactical versatility, first, for air
defenders and, at later stages, also for UAV swarms performing SEAD missions.
In this regard, GhostPlay’s innovation is like free jazz as it improvises, responds to
external stimuli, is dynamic, and integrates whatever asset is available to accom-
plish the AD mission by leveraging a new generation of coordination mechanisms
that are context and consequence aware.
6 UKDefenceDoctrine,p.28,30-31,50-51
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 9

3 GhostPlay’s
Novelty:
Free Jazz vs.
Central
­Coordination
1100 FREE JAZZ ON THE BATTLEFIELD

While GhostPlay strives to create innovation in terms of tangible advantages and
capability improvements for future AD concepts, the project’s underlying technolo-
gy contributes to one of the most challenging topics in contemporary AI research,
the ability to learn tactical behavior in cooperation with other machines and/or
humans. This entails three capabilities. First, the capability to properly assess a
situation and anticipate adversarial behavior. Second, the capability to learn how
to orchestrate and organize a system’s action to achieve objectives across time-ex-
tended scenarios and in response to enemy action. This also includes the ability
to assess, how the relevant environment may respond to the defense system’s
actions. Third, the capability to motivate a system to learn on its own when and
how to cooperate to solve complex tasks with partners. These capabilities under-
pin future solutions striving for technical autonomy in machine-to-machine and
machine-to-human interaction.
Right now, the idea that Deep Reinforcement Learning solutions like AlphaGo,
Alpha Star or Open AI have super-human capabilities creates quite a hype. But
these systems play computer games in a well-known and completely stable
environment. Military solutions, by contrast, operate in a non-stationary real-world
environment, where unforeseen incidents occur. Moreover, commensurate with
adversarial intentions and capabilities, the rules of the military game can change
quite quickly.
This is the environment in which GhostPlay is supposed to operate. Integrated Air
Defense Solutions (IADS) adopt a layered approach (Figure 1). Sensor and effec-
tor reach is the discriminator that helps setting up Very Short Range Air Defense
(VSHORAD), Short Range Air Defense (SHORAD), Medium Range Air Defense
(MRAD) and long-range defensive ground-based “domes.”
Figure 1:­Layered­approach
to­air­defense
Arrow3
Ballistic Missile
Arrow2
threat
Source:Uppal,
David’s
“Israelsuccessful-
lytestsmultilay- Mid-long­range Sling
eredairdefense missiles
systemtodefend
Iron
againstbarrageof Short range
short-,medium-, missiles Dome
andlong-range
ballisticmissile. kilometres 0–4 70 300 1,000 2,000
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 11

Today, specific systems integrate different sensors and effectors for each “dome.”
Each system is developed in isolation. The governing principle to achieve inte-
gration is hierarchical and centralistic: Central command and control (C2) runs
each system, which report into a hierarchic structure with nodes that coordinates
multiple launchers. Ultimately, a high-level C2 or C4 system (Command, Control,
Communications and Computers) integrates and coordinates all elements. Al-
though tried and tested, this set up remains static, is quite brittle and often leads
to unsatisfactory sensor-to-effector latency.
Contemporary state-of-the art solutions may use AI to improve individual process-
ing steps in the observe-orient-decide-act cycle (OODA). GhostPlay goes beyond
the automation of individual steps in the OODA workflow. Rather, GhostPlay
policies establish a fine granular and forward-looking stochastic optimal control
regime, while substantially accelerating decision-making and reducing sen-
sor-to-effector latency.
The GhostPlay architecture achieves this by mediating multiple concurrent control
processes (“agent”), each implementing a specialized control strategy (“policy”),
for example, to effectively control a physical system, like sensors and effectors,
or to determine a certain action plan. GhostPlay’s agents are not centrally coordi-
nated. Rather they use common behavioral conventions (“rules of encounter”) to
ensure mediation and information exchange while training to achieve a common
objective in tandem with partners (multi-agent learning). In contrast to existing AD
solutions, GhostPlay has no pipelined data-fusion process on the platform; rather
a combined situational picture emerges over time via policies that have learned
how to cooperate. This specific design choice has been motivated by the ambition
to explore if defense solutions can be developed as emergent systems.
3.1­Tactical­AI:­Basic­Building­Blocks
State­of­the­art­defense­AI
Currently, state of the art defense AI focuses on introducing AI techniques or
AI-based components to support individual OODA stages. For example, current
applications detect and classify objects in aerial reconnaissance pictures or classify
characteristics in the electromagnetic spectrum to infer a potential emitter. In so
doing, the OODA loop implements (linear) pipeline processing. Thus, it is sufficient
that deployed AI systems only implement a single-step decision. For example, an
optical sensor acquires an image or a single video frame, if the sensor streams video
12 FREE JAZZ ON THE BATTLEFIELD

sequences (observe); this image is sent to an AI component that tries to detect and
classify objects (orient); detected objects will be sent further down the pipeline for
identification, and finally arrive at a decision to complete the cycle. The AI compo-
nent can be interpreted as a Bayesian classifier, which determines the probability
that a certain (known) object is present based on the input image and the parame-
ters the AI component has learnt, in most cases weights of a neural network. Cur-
rently, the AI classifier thus implements a one-step input-to-output mapping.
Improve­classification­and­identification­in­non-benign­environments­
and­fog-of-war
In most real-world applications, in which environmental effects cannot be
controlled,7 or – even worse – if the sensor must operate in a non-benign envi-
ronment, better results can be obtained, if classification is integrated in a con-
text-aware sensor control strategy (policy): The optical sensor acquires an image,
which shows multiple objects. As these objects are far away from the observer
they only appear as unspecific pixels on the image. A state-of-the-art AI classifier
approach would have to classify each picture and would most simply ignore these
target pixels.8 By contrast, a policy-based sensor management system has differ-
ent options: Based on the input image, the policy may decide to zoom-in on those
pixels which are presumed to represent potential targets or threats that require
additional sensor input for classification. The system might even decide to illumi-
nate the position of interest to obtain better information, for example, if clouds
obscure the respective objects. This approach would enable the system to provide
stable classifications early on and long before the state-of-the-art approach would
even be able to recognize the object.
It is very important to note the difference between these two approaches: Interlac-
ing sensor management with classification and identification requires the system
not only to learn input-to-output mapping as current AI deployments do. Rather
the system needs to learn courses of actions to understand how to achieve good
classification results as efficiently as possible. To learn good action sequences, the
system must specifically learn to understand the instant effects of an action as well
as possible long-term consequences. From a mathematical viewpoint this is no
longer a Bayesian classification task, but requires solutions based on the mathe-
matical framework of a Markov Decision Process (MDP).9
7 Industrialenvironmentstypicallytrytocreatecontrollableenvironmentalconditionssuchaslighting.Forexample,objects
thatcomedownaconveyerarealwayssensedinthesamelighttolimit/excludenegativeexternaleffectsonconveyorbelt
transportation.
8 Note,thatthisisnottheresultofabadclassifierbutratherresultsfromthefactthatitisnotpossibletoclassify thetargets
withthegivensensorinput.
9 Asthesystemperceivesitsenvironmentthroughsensorsandthusonlyhasimperfectperception,wecannotassumeto
correctlyobservethetruestatesoftheMDP.Ratherweestimateandpartiallyreconstructthetruestatefromthesequenceof
observationsmadesofar,whichfurthercomplicatesthetaskintoaPartiallyObservableMarkovDecisionProcess(POMDP).
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 13

Learn­important­trade-offs­to­maximize­effectiveness­and­minimize­
own-ship­exposure/risk
In addition to understanding the instant impact of a specific action, learning good
policies also implies that the system learns how to make important trade-offs.
Zooming-in on a position, for example, reduces the observation window and
might lead to a situation where the system “gets stuck” on pedantically classifying
one object, while not recognizing that a fast-moving threat is heading towards the
system outside of its observation window. The system also needs to carefully bal-
ance short-term success with long-term consequences: For example, deciding to
illuminate a target with an active radar sensor may satisfy a short term information
need but can put the observer at risk as the radar signal emitter may be detected
by the target, which in turn may fire a high-speed anti-radiation missile (HARM) to
destroy the observer.10 If the benefits of using an active sensor are bigger than the
risks very much depends on the situational context. Moreover, the decision to use
the active sensor directly affects how the situation will evolve. Systems that master
this complexity are context-sensitive and consequence aware and constitute so
called 3rd wave AI systems according to the US Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA).11
Most often Deep Reinforcement Learning is used to train these systems, but this
creates technical challenges. Take AI concepts for classification as an example.
There is a tutorial input (e.g., tagged example) for each decision made by the
system after each round of classification. But there is no immediate feedback to
the system, which allows the system to understand whether the respective deci-
sion influenced the scenario in a positive or negative way.12 Although the system
needs to maximize the long-term reward intake, the missing link suggests that
positive or negative decision outcomes will only be known at the end of the sce-
nario. This, however, can involve several thousand decision steps into the future,
which means that the system may get out of sync with the proper function it is
expected to accomplish.
10 Balancingshort-termrewardintakewithlong-termobjectivesispartofthe“temporalcreditassignmentproblem.”
Theactualimplementationrequiresskillfulengineeringofwhatconstitutesan“action:”Thesystemmustlearnhowtouse
radarfunctionsinasensibleway,forexample,byallowingatrackertoinitializeandmaintainatrackwithreasonableaccuracy.
Wearecurrentlyworkingwithmacro-actions,whichprovidecompleteimplementationsforcertaintasks.Moreover,weareex-
perimentingwithacombinationof“track-before-detect”and“attention-basedtracking”toanalyzeifthesetrained,model-free
variantswouldenablefastereffectorengagementandbetterself-protectioninhightreatscenarios.
11 
12 AIclassifierstypicallyusetutorialtraining.Inthiscase,theimmediatetutorialinputisusedtoformanerrorsignal,whichis
backpropagatedintotheclassifiertoadjustthoseparameters,whichhadthehighestcontributiontotheerror.
14 FREE JAZZ ON THE BATTLEFIELD

Create­good­initial­policies­without­large­databases
There are concepts in reinforcement learning training protocols that collect traces
through scenarios to aggregate so called state-values V(s) or state-action values
Q(s,a). These concepts show, if – on average – selecting action a when in state
s has been good or bad. Based on these results neural network structures are
trained to represent the respective value functions.13 However, using only these
concepts in practice may lead to (very) sub-optimal policies, because the positive
or negative outcome of selecting action a in state s not only depends on the
current state, but also on the policy that guides future actions. For example, a
tracking radar is switched on to illuminate a target and gain accurate position and
movement estimates for engagement. This decision may be positive if the threat is
successfully intercepted. But it can also be negative in case of failure as the system
has exposed its position and created an opportunity for adversarial attack. More-
over, using less precise passive sensors to preassign targets while reducing expo-
sure time would have improved tactics. To gradually converge to good policies,
reinforcement learning systems need to strike a balance between exploiting past
behavior and exploring new behavior that could deliver novel policies.
With scenarios spanning thousands of decision steps, finding good policies
becomes combinatorically prohibitive. This creates specific issues during early
training phases. In almost all cases, in which applications have been said to have
“super-human” decision-making capability, initial policies used to start reinforce-
ment improvements have been developed with supervised learning. Supervised
learning, in turn, was possible because large databases of expert level policies
were available to create tutorial input. But the military application area addressed
by GhostPlay, lacks the respective databases. That’s why GhostPlay needed to find
a way to create initial good policies without databases.
Today, GhostPlay implements a novel “search-in-policy-space technique” to
achieve this objective. We decided to initially model an air defense platform,
which has multiple on-board sensors and one effector. Each sensor and effector
has its own policy, which learns how to optimally use the sensor’s specific charac-
teristics. Data is exchanged via a central on-platform long-term memory structure,
from which all policies can read and to which all policies can write.14 Cooperation
amongst the policies is mediated by a stigmergic signal. As expected, the result-
ing platform behavior is rather complex and adapts to fine nuances of an emerg-
ing scenario.
13 Graves,“Hybridcomputingusinganeuralnetworkwithdynamicexternalmemory;”Kanerva,SparseDistributedMemory
14 Thealgorithmicsolutionisaproprietarydevelopmentof21strategiesandhasbeeninuseinthecommercialdomainforyears.
Forrelatedconcepts,see:Sun/Wiestra/Schaul/Schmidhuber,“Stochasticsearchusingthenaturalgradient;”Wistra/Schaul/
Schmidhuber,“Naturalevolutionstrategies.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 15

3.2 Emergence: Cooperative Behavior Paves the
Ground­for­Technical­Autonomy
Success in joint problem solving very much depends on the way in which perception
and interaction with other agents in the team are modeled. As discussed above,
a classical AD setup collects and propagates information via different sensors to a
central C2 node, where information is aggregated, fused and appropriate courses
of action are calculated. Then orders and instructions are flowing down the chain of
command to individual effector systems, in our case the anti-aircraft artillery (AAA)
platform. This approach is tried and tested but also raises several issues:
Network­centricity: The process heavily relies on transmitting data through the
network to and from C2 nodes, which largely coordinate individual platforms,
unless they operate in self-defense mode. What if communication is disrupted
and bandwidth is limited? Are there other ways to reorganize local entities for
effective cooperation if communication breaks down?
Sensor to effector latency: Propagating information through networks that require
C2 nodes for data fusion generates sensor-to-effector latencies. Latency, in turn,
can put individual AD platforms at risk if incoming threats are detected too late.
Single point of failure: C2 nodes may constitute a single point of failure. If the
opponent manages to detect and take out the C2 node, the whole AD net-
work becomes ineffective or at least massively degraded.
Reconfiguration: Even if the C2 node is not affected, loss of individual sensors
or effectors in the network may require a reorganization of the compound.
Currently this requires replanning, which again results in latencies. Looking
at attrition scenarios, we assume that the ability of some network elements
to automatically regroup could substantially improve overall resilience and
effectiveness.
Ad-hoc­support: Attackers commonly exploit the “relative strength principle.”
This means that attackers will try to concentrate force at a specific and narrow
point of the defender to temporarily overwhelm it. Even if the defender
massively steps up its efforts, it is almost impossible to avoid that forces at the
point of attack quickly run out of ammunition, while the larger part of the de-
fense infrastructure is almost unaffected. We speculate, that a system, which is
able to locally reorganize, can provide ad-hoc support to the very forces under
heavy attack and reinforce them quicker.
16 FREE JAZZ ON THE BATTLEFIELD

Economy of effort: Multiple systems of an IADS cover the same airspace. In
practice each of these systems has its own C2 component. These C2 compo-
nents need to decide or negotiate which effectors to deploy, such that econo-
my of effort is preserved. This decision is highly context sensitive.15 We assume
that a system that properly understands this context will be able to make more
effective effector choices commensurate with the threat.
To explore these hypotheses, our objective was to experiment with a setup, which
does not have a C2 component at all. Rather our system is composed of individual
AD platforms that learn how to cooperate and find an effective and emergent de-
fense response against any incoming threat.16 In essence, we strive to learn policies,
which motivate other agents in the same team to cooperate. To do so, we model
joint behavior amongst our AAA platforms as a Decentralized POMDP (DecPOMDP).
The general idea is to develop a “theory of mind” among agents, i.e., we assume
that actions amongst agents are communicative acts. Agents can interpret a fellow
agent’s action when they observe them and learn which actions to take to convey
a maximum of information to others.17 As a result, agents learn when and what to
communicate to each other to best achieve joint and individual goals.18 From a
technical perspective the major challenge was to extend the training procedure to
explore in policy space and not – as usual – in action space, as one agent’s belief
about another agent’s current state depends not only on the current state and
observed action, but also on the policy explored.
First training results showed substantial instabilities in performance. Although training
performance reached good performance levels, performance deteriorated massively
when making slight changes to the agent team. Our analysis showed that agents
learned “idiosyncratic”19 behavior. After changing the training protocols to imple-
ment cross-play and league play schemes, results could be stabilized. As our prelimi-
nary results, discussed in more detail below, make clear, this also vindicated the resil-
ience hypothesis presented above. Further investigation and training of the system is
required to potentially learn optimal communication patterns and timing under low
communication bandwidth constraints or electronic warfare (EW) conditions.
15 EconomyofeffortsuggeststhatitmightnotbeeconomictoattackanartillerymissilewhichcostsUS$150kwithanADmis-
silethatcostsUS$8m–unlesstheartillerymissilemaydestroyanentity,whichisanextremelyimportantpartofthedefend-
er’sinfrastructure.Disobeyingeconomyofeffortmayquicklyturnintomassivelossesofdefensivecapabilitiesandresilience.
16 Thisisaratherradicalstandpoint.Weexpectthatareal-worlddeploymentwillcontaincertaindataaggregationandcommand
nodes,howeverthatindividualsystemswillbeabletoworkwithoutthem,butiftheyareavailable,makeoptimaluseofthem.
17 Foerster,“LearningtoCommunicatewithDeepMulti-AgentReinforcementLearning.”
18 Thepolicyexplored,whichdefinesthebehaviorofagents,isassumedtobecommonknowledgetoallagentsintheteam.
19 Forexample,aAAAagentwasobservedtoswitchonitssearchradar.Astheplatformshavelearnedtooperatemostlywith
passivesensorsandnetworkedRAPs,otheragentsbelievedthisactiontosuggesttheplatformwantstosignalthatitisbeing
attacked.Thisinterpretationisnottotallyunintuitive.Ingeneral,however,switchingonthesearchradarimpliesonlythatthe
platformwantstoacquiremoreinformationaboutitsclosesurroundinganddoesnotautomaticallyimplythattheplatformis
underattack.Ifotheragentsdomisinterpretsuchabehavior,theymightmovetowardsthesendingplatformtohelp,thereby
givinguptheirpositionfornorealreason.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 17

3.3 GhostPlay’s Approach to Simulation
The in-process combat simulator is a central piece of the GhostPlay environment.
The simulator orchestrates interaction among objects in a staged war gaming
scenario. The simulator’s computing power is key as scenarios with a fairly large
number of entities need to be played quickly over several thousand time steps.
Therefore, the simulator was built to be deployable “in-process” and directly
interact with the objects to be trained without network latency. The simulator also
has precautions to play scenarios in multiple time resolutions.
The simulator is extensible horizontally by adding new objects to the scenario and
vertically by extending individual models with more details. While playing low
resolution scenarios, the simulator works primarily with probabilistic models (repre-
senting summary statistics of interaction effects) and targets temporally extended
scenarios as they would occur in an Anti-Access/Area Denial (A2/AD) situation.
Equipped with higher resolution models, we have specified operational behavior
down to level of modeling mechanical latencies of AAA turret movements or
individual sensor control.
3.4 Preliminary Results
GhostPlay’s preliminary results are encouraging. After less than one year of simula-
tion-based research we observe that AD components behave in novel ways. New
patterns reflect core tenants of the principles of war, as we argue below.
Single Platform Tactics
GhostPlay deliberately started out modelling a single air defense platform thereby
using the FlakPz Gepard, a German AAA system, that is largely self-sustaining.
The Gepard is also most qualified for the GhostPlay scenarios that require an
AD system to operate on-board active sensors (search radar and tracking radar
function) and passive sensors (optical periscope and infrared sensor) plus effectors
while engaging targets on the move. We also wanted to experiment with differ-
ent coordination policies to analyze, if platform behavior adapts commensurate
with additional sensor and effector capabilities, as this would suggest that the
platform was able to learn how to use additional technical capabilities. Therefore,
we equipped the AAA with hypothetical additional sensor (e.g., infrared sensor)
and effector capabilities in the simulation. We also wanted to know if the policies
learned would take advantage of a fused Recognized Air Picture (RAP) using
18 FREE JAZZ ON THE BATTLEFIELD

information from multiple sources and thus provided the system with a link-based,
centrally supplied RAP.20
This single-platform setup has produced a series of interesting findings that can
be summarized as follows:
The­system­learns­sensor-control­strategies­to­improve­target­classification:
Traditionally, for example, an AI classifier receives a video frame produced by
the periscope camera to classify a target. In contrast, a periscope using the
GhostPlay policy first learns how to zoom-in on a certain coordinate of interest
as this leads to faster convergence on a stable classification.21
The­system­learns­multi-sensor­control­strategies: The system is able to learn
policies which implement situation-specific trade-offs between relying largely
on passive sensors and deploying active sensors to minimize the risk of being
detected and attacked by radiation-following missiles.22
The system learns to change behavior when a RAP is available: In the same
scenario the system behaves differently if it acts upon RAP-ensured situational
awareness. Behavioral changes are most notable for the use of passive sensors
(periscope). These sensors are mainly used for 360° searches if the global air
picture is not available. For example, search directions focus on incidents when
the platform needs the most time to turn due to mechanical constraints or to
adjust the turret position early on to anticipate incoming threats.
The system learns to prioritize: The system learns how to prioritize target
engagements. We have used a swarm of 105 UAVs. The swarm flew in a pack
formation and broke up shortly before the AD system to stage individual at-
tacks. In the most demanding scenario 105 individual trajectories were meant
to confuse the AAA sensors. At the moment the swarm broke up, a high-ve-
locity threat approached the AAA system from a different angle. The system
has mastered the challenge of, first, detecting the high velocity threat; second,
recognizing that this threat is far more serious than the UAV swarm; and third,
20 TheRAPwouldbeproducedbyalargerrangedatafusionprocess,usingmorepowerfulandlonger-rangesensors.AstheRAP
productioninvolvesprocessingandhumanvalidationofclassificationandidentification,itprovidesawiderareaviewbutmay
supperfromreportinglatency,tobeconsideredwhenassociatingsuchinformationtolocalsensors.
21 SimilartoDeepMindsAlphaStartheactionspaceisimplementedwithactionmacros,i.e.,thesystemfirstdeterminesthetype
ofaction(e.g.,sensorcontrol,effector-control,sensornumber,allsubsequentfieldsaretheninterpretedincontextofthe
actionmacro).AninterestingnewopportunityistoconnecttheFlakPzwithapassivesensornetwork(likeTwinVis),withthe
passivesystemactingasapreliminaryguidanceandpre-warningsystem.Preliminaryevidencesuggeststhatthiscombination
couldgreatlystrengthenthesurvivabilityoftheFlakPzasitreducesitselectromagneticemission.
22 Evidencefromsomescenariossuggeststhatpolicieshavelearnedtousethetrackingradartoprovokethetargettochange
directionintheattempttoescapethetrackingbeam.However,thisneedstobeanalyzedinmoredetail,especiallytoensure
thatobservedbehaviorisstableandnotjustanunwantedartefact.Thisanalysiswillbedoneinthesecondprojectphase,
whereweplantouseamoreelaborateaerialvehiclebehaviorincontrasttothecurrentrules-basedapproach.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 19

turning turret and weapon to engage this threat while the UAV swarm contin-
ues to perform fancy maneuvers.
The­fire-control­policy­learns­appropriate­timing. The system learns policies,
which discriminate between platforms that deploy weapons (e.g., attack
helicopters or UCAVs) and loitering ammunition. Generally, the learned policy
shows a tendency to engage loitering ammunition later and weapon carrying
vehicles earlier if they are in reach of effectors.23
The­fire-control­policy­compensates­low­sensor­resolution­or­track­drops­with­
UAV swarms: Especially in attacks by smaller scale UAVs (e.g., attrition attacks)
sensor systems and trackers may not be able to resolve each UAV individually
or produce switching tracks and/or lose/drop tracks required to re-initialize.
We observe that the learned fire control policy is comparably robust to these
issues. The policy learns to engage a “pulk” with a series of coordinated
barrage fire patterns to gradually reduce the swarm size, even when tracks
have a comparably wide covariance. Should further tests vindicate this be-
havior, sensor quality would matter less to AAA systems, while opportunities
to operate these systems with remote sensors (e.g., using sensors from other
platforms or forward deployed sensors) would significantly increase.
Overall, we trained the AAA platform against a variety of different threats, rang-
ing from single UAV/UCAV like the Bayraktar TB2, drone swarms, and helicopter
attacks represented by Ka-52 and Mil Mi-28 combined with fast approaching
missiles. Attackers were modeled with “local rule-based intelligence,”, i.e., the
attack pattern and objective were predefined with pre-specified approach tra-
jectories. Attackers, however, operated on modeled rulesets prescribing how to
respond to the detection of and the engagement by an AD system.24 All models
had associated a probabilistic damage model, which allowed realistic effector
impact estimation on a target object, given the target’s physical structure, effector
type and impact area.
Preliminary results suggest that the AAA platform learns very fine-granular en-
gagement tactics for different types of threats and even senses when it is impor-
tant to destroy the target or only disable it. Compared to a traditional OODA
workflow implementation, our system reduces the volume of ammunition required
to protect assigned objects by around 12% vis-à-vis helicopters and up to 42%
23 Asofnowthisisjustanobservation.Wehavenotyetproperlyanalyzedthisbehavior.Butlookingatscenariorunswithplat-
formsthatcarryweaponsanduseearliergenerationsofthetrainedpolicysuggests,thattheearlierengagementmaypreempt
thereleaseofweaponsbytheplatform.“As-early-as-possible”engagementsalsooccurinscenarioswithplatformsthatuse
modelsoflaser-guidedweapons,whichcouldbeinterpretedasfurtherevidenceunderpinningtheobservation.
24 FollowingtheprinciplesdiscussedinIsci/Günel,“Fuzzylogicbasedair-to-aircombatalgorithmforunmannedairvehicles,”the
localbehaviorinresponsetoimminentthreatsandtheorchestrationofattackswhilebeingengagedbytheADsystemswere
modelledbyFuzzyinferencebutadaptedforSEADmissions.
20 FREE JAZZ ON THE BATTLEFIELD

in scenarios against attacking swarms.25 The project will extend and verify these
figures further to publish detailed reports in the project’s mid-term report. We plan
to open the simulation environment and/or to establish a test bed, where vendors
can compare their individual control strategies.
Multi-Platform­Tactics
In addition to single-platform scenarios, we combined multiple AAA units of the
same type to protect an airfield as a a scenario-specific high value asset (HVA). The
intention of these training runs was to get first insights in what could be expected
from having multiple AAA systems learning to team up freely and without a central
C2 coordination. We have achieved the following preliminary results:
A­group­of­AAA­platforms­learned­to­cooperate­in­defending­against­a­drone­swarm­
with 30 UAVs. The AAA platforms’ cooperative tactics was already rather com-
plex (Figure 2): AAA platform 1 used its active sensors, while platforms 2 and
3 were observing the situation under emission control (EmCon). As ten UAVs
separated from the swarm to engage AAA platform 1, twenty UAVs proceeded
further to the airfield as the main target. While AAA 1 engaged the attacking
UAV swarm, AAA 2 attempted to sneak in by the main swarm. Meanwhile AAA
3 pretended being a “lame duck.” Shortly before the UAV swarm staged its
attack AAA 2 and 3 simultaneously engaged the main swarm. It turned out
that the move of AAA 2 created a situation that severely restricted the free-
dom of maneuver of the swarm, which could be effectively neutralized. In 30%
of all scenarios in which the AD systems had not been using this policy, the
swarm prevailed and damaged the airfield significantly. By contrast, the AAA
team using this policy outperformed the swarm in 98% of all scenarios played
and protected the airfield.
Increasing­survivability­by­re-organization. In further tests we started to inves-
tigate the effects of attrition attacks. We used ten AAA systems to protect
a HVA against an aggressor swarm of 105 UAV. The ten AAA systems were
positioned around the HVA. The attacking swarm leveraged the principle of
“relative strength,” which means that 70-90 UAVs would concentrate on a
geographically small area, creating an overwhelming force for the two or three
AAA systems deployed in that region. In parallel smaller UAV swarms would
try to distract AAA systems and keep them busy in their positions. The con-
centrated force led to unavoidable losses of AAA systems in the scenario. In
earlier training stages the AAA solution was lost and the number of UAVs that
survived was large enough to attack the HVA. At later stages of the policy, the
25 InseveralUAVswarmscenarios,excessammunitionrequiredbytheOODAworkflow-controlledsystemswasnotthemain
issue.Inthesecases,theAAAplatformsimplydidnotsurvivethescenario.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 21

Figure 2:­AAA­platforms­(blue)­defend­airfield­against­aggressor­swarm­(red).­
Source:VideomaterialGhostPlay.
AAA platforms learned to continuously re-organize group assignments and
re-prioritize targets. Consequently, whenever one AAA system was becoming
dysfunctional another AAA platform was moving in (even preemptively, when a
AAA platform was running low on ammunition), such that the UAV swarm was
substantially decimated and no longer able to substantially harm to the HVA.
Overall, the policy suggests that in 9,864 out of 10,000 scenarios a constella-
tion of ten AAA was able to put up effective protection against a 105-member
UAV swarm, losing not more that three AAA platforms.
We need to emphasize that these are early preliminary results based on idealized
assumptions. For example, the scenarios assume that AAA platforms share internal
status information among them and can freely choose sensor deployment without
having to adhere to EmCon rules. In addition, the AAA platforms did not have
any restrictions to move out of their positions, nor were they bound by rules of
engagement (RoE). We will use further simulation runs to explore how different
RoE will affect the freedom of maneuver of the AAA platforms under considera-
tion. We will also scrutinize how RoE need to be crafted to ensure effective human
control, without preventing the AAA platforms from delivering the results already
accomplished.

In addition, there are several technical caveats. On the one hand it is by no means
certain, that operating multiple AAA platforms in a federation without central
coordination26 would produce any meaningful results. On the other hand, all AAA
platforms could just jump on the same target as soon as it is in reach of their ef-
fectors, thus using available capacities very inefficiently. Although our preliminary
results are very encouraging, we have taken precautions to learn stable policies
thereby using team rotations, “other-play” and learning protocols like league-up-
dates. Further research is needed to ensure, that policies do not learn to agree
on implicit communicative acts, which would break the POMDP conditions and
may lead to instable behavior. Given imperfect perception models and simulated
“fog-of-war” effects, the latter may be substantially more difficult as compared to
computer games and will require further efforts in upcoming project phases.
3.5 Summary
Initial findings suggest that learned policies can create behavioral patterns that
reflect key principles of war. More fine-granular control of the sensor-effector
network reduces the amount of force required (economy of force) to establish
effective protection (objective). Our AAA systems advance situational awareness
at the platform level by considering more information than only kinematic aspects
of the target object. This enables the platform to anticipate adversarial moves
and enables emergent and adaptive countermeasures. This behavior will make
it impossible for the adversary to “read” and understand the AAA system. Thus,
air defenders can exploit newfound elements of surprise that shift the initiative to
their benefit.
Defense systems leveraging network-centric warfare mainly focus on building fed-
erated solutions by seamlessly integrating all components. Our preliminary results
show that cognition is about to significantly augment these federations as every
component can interpret the current and future behavior of its companions based
on policies known by all elements of the federation. This would offer new ways to
ensure resilience in non-benign environments in which communication is likely to
be missing and data will be corrupted.
26 Inpracticaldeploymentsthereisatleastanassignedsectorofresponsibilityinwhichtheplatformactivelyengagestargets.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 23

4 Balancing
Ethics with
Performance
2244 FREE JAZZ ON THE BATTLEFIELD

In democracies armed forces operate within a framework set by ethical and moral
principles as well as the rule of law.27 Within this framework, armed forces will
sooner, rather than later, grapple with technical autonomy. In this context, defense
AI causes significant concerns as it serves the use of force. Therefore, if defense AI
is used to defend democracies, it must necessarily be embedded in national legal
and value-oriented frameworks, relevant supranational rules and international
law. In practice, however, it proves to be a major challenge to incorporate legal,
ethical, or societal norms into the functions of AI systems.
Since 2017, governmental and non-governmental organizations have produced
lists that outline generic, mandatory quality attributes for AI systems. These lists
can be seen as a first attempt to combine ethical, legal, societal, and technologi-
cal considerations. But these lists are far from sufficient to realize or promote core
values such as human dignity and freedom, peace and justice, or soldierly virtues
such as love of one’s homeland, truthfulness, or courage.
Thus, a key research aspect of GhostPlay is to evaluate the applicability of the new
IEEE 7000™ 2021 standard for Value-Based Engineering (VBE), which became
effective in . Ideally, applying this standard would lead to defense
solutions, with different qualities. That’s why GhostPlay wants to consider the
entire universe of values that German Armed Forces attribute to their leadership
principle of Innere Führung. Being in close contact and contributing to the stand-
ard’s further evolution, GhostPlay will be the first defense AI application worldwide
designed to fully comply with IEEE 7000™-2021.28
Moreover, GhostPlay’s use of the IEEE 7000™ standard will produce learning ma-
terials to train Value Leads, a new job description in systems development. These
Value Leads possess the philosophical and technical understanding required for
VBE with the goal to make Germany a pioneer and leading nation educating
value-sensitive defense AI engineers and developers.
27 Asindustryisactivelyresearchingaspectsoftechnicalautonomy,forexample,tosupportautonomousdrivingandrobot
assistance,thereisnoplausiblereason,whythesetechnologieswouldnotshowupinamilitarycontext.Thus,theeffects
andpossibilitiesofsuchcapabilitiesmustbeunderstoodandanalyzedboth,intermsoffutureforceplanningandintermsof
potentialfuturethreats.
28 
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 25

5 GhostPlay’s
Approach to
Innovation
Management
2266 FREE JAZZ ON THE BATTLEFIELD

GhostPlay is a capability and technology development project that uses cut-
ting-edge insights from academic as well as applied research to provide the Bun-
deswehr with a novel level of tactical versatility. Tactical versatility complements
the Bundeswehr’s strive for information, decision, and effects superiority. Ghost-
Play’s key added value stems from the fact that context and consequence-aware
solutions can be transferred across applications used in different military domains.
This creates valuable opportunities for cross-pollination between domains and
military services.
Ultimately, GhostPlay’s demanding development agenda requires an innovation
management approach that is agile and holistic. To this purpose GhostPlay com-
bines the Real-Option approach29 with an agile development process. With this
approach new research and implementation topics are assessed according to their
expected operational value, adopting a hypothetical pricing scheme, like financial
option pricing. As the scheme takes into account internal and external risk factors,
it balances risks and opportunities to maximize the expected operational value,
which can be created by the assigned budget.
Practically, the innovation portfolio is evaluated every six months, combining
external information about recent conflicts, technology trends and recent initia-
tives of Western forces, collected and organized by the Defense AI Observatory,
with actual market requirements as perceived by industry partners and the proper
findings of our research project.
29 Trigerios,RealOptions.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 27

6­Outlook
2288 FREE JAZZ ON THE BATTLEFIELD

After one year, GhostPlay has delivered encouraging results that underline the
feasibility and potential improvements of tactical AI and emergent coordination in
an AD environment.
Already at this stage, GhostPlay’s project partner Hensoldt has decided to transfer
the project’s sensor resource management capabilities into a new environment to
coordinate the deployment of active and passive sensors with tactical AI. This will
create new capabilities for armed forces and vindicates the project’s methodologi-
cal and technological approach.
Moreover, we will extend the set of principles used for GhostPlay by replacing a
fuzzy logic-based interference mode currently used for attacking systems.30 At the
next stage attackers shall use the same tactical AI and emergence principles to de-
velop new and change existing tactics during a mission in a “counter-play” train-
ing protocol. This means that AD systems and SEAD systems would be trained in
alternating cycles. Whenever a more successful AD policy is found, SEAD polices
will be adapted to overcome the new AD policy and vice-versa. These “oppo-
nent-play” cycles will enable both sides to continuously learn increasingly fine
granular and complex behavior, enabling them to cope with today’s most danger-
ous threats at a certain stage.
AI-based SEAD tactics are of specific interest, as they directly address a current
capability gap. To develop SEAD tactics against sophisticated threats such as S400
and S500 AD compounds, the existing AD capability will be complemented with
surface-to-air-missile models, which may extend the purely reactive RL architec-
tures used today with planning in large scale POMDP methods.
While many aspects of GhostPlay still require further research and analysis in terms
of robustness and effects before they could enter operational service, the project
creates added value for different military tasks:
Non-traditional­red­teaming­for­future­force­planning: The GhostPlay simulator
and AI models can be used to test new sensor/effector constellations. Ghost-
Play provides the first environment, in which AI methods learn how to best
use available physical capabilities. This provides force planners with advanced
insights on how new sensors, effectors, communication, and platform capabil-
ities would affect future tactics. The system can thus be used to find the best
capability combinations and efficiently develop operational requirements for
new systems.
30 Ernest,“GeneticFuzzybasedArtificialIntelligenceforUnmannedCombatAerialVehicleControlinSimulatedAirCombat
Missions.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 29

Non-traditional­red-teaming­for­projects­currently­under­development: GhostPlay
can provide a testbed for system vendors to test their concepts and tactics
against a hard-to-predict adversary. Currently new systems are evaluated
against scenarios and vignettes developed by military analysts, but the se-
lection of scenarios is biased towards allied doctrine and allied thinking on
expected adversarial behavior. By contrast, GhostPlay operates “model-free”
and learns tactical behavior without any preselected vignettes. This approach
provides behavioral patterns not yet seen in practice or in existing models and
thus augments existing testbeds, better prepare allied systems, and potentially
uncovers unknown weaknesses in systems under development.
Non-traditional­red-teaming­for­crew-training. Being setup in a DIS (IEEE)
framework, GhostPlay components can be integrated in pilot and air defense
simulators to train crews on yet unseen tactics.
Transferring­GhostPlay­to­other­domains­and­mission­areas: GhostPlay’s approach
and policies can underpin the development of defense solutions meant to
coordinate complex intercept missions without a central C2 component. This
could provide novel solutions to protect naval platforms against surface and
subsea threats and could enhance solutions to provide Joint Tactical Fire
Support (JTFS), for example.
Finally, GhostPlay partners also mull the idea of potentially operating a “GhostPlay
light” environment, i.e., a digital twin of the simulation environment with lower
fidelity and unspecific sensor models. “GhostPlay light” could be hooked up with
commercial video games. The intention is to leverage the “wisdom of the crowd”
by involving many professional, semi-professional and hobby pilots to detect new
and unconventional tactics. These new tactics could then be used to confront and
refine GhostPlay. The respective results could be transferred into the restricted
simulation environment of armed forces, which operate realistic sensor models.
30 FREE JAZZ ON THE BATTLEFIELD

Literature
Borchert,Heiko,TorbenSchütz,JosephVerbovszky, Trigeorgis,Lenos,RealOptions.ManagerialFlexibil-
BewaretheHype.WhatMilitaryConflictsinUkraine, ityandStrategyinResourceAllocation(Cambridge,MIT
Syria,Libya,andNagorno-Karabakh(Don’t)TellUsAbout Press,Cambridge,1999)
theFutureofWar,Hamburg,DefenseAIObservatory,
2021, UKDefenceDoctrine,JointDoctrinePublication
accessed31August2022). 0-01(Shrivenham:UKMinistryofDefence/Development,
ConceptsandDoctrineCenter,2014.
Ernest,Nicolaset.al,“GeneticFuzzybasedArtificial
IntelligenceforUnmannedCombatAerialVehicleCon- Uppal,Rajesh,“Israelsuccessfullytestsmultilayered
trolinSimulatedAirCombatMissions,”Scholar@UC,8 airdefensesystemtodefendagainstbarrageofshort-,
February2017, medium-,andlong-rangeballisticmissiles,”IDST,15May
bc386t25c?locale=en(lastaccessed31August2022). 2022,
tests-multilayered-air-defense-system-to-defend-against-
Foerster,JakobN.et.al.,“LearningtoCommunicate barrage-of-short-medium-and-long-range-ballistic-mis-
withDeepMulti-AgentReinforcementLearning,”ar- siles/(lastaccessed31August2022).
chiveX,21May2016,
(lastaccessed31August2022). Wiestra,Daan,TomSchaul,TobiasGlasmachers,Yi
Sun,JanPeters,JürgenSchmidhuber,“NaturalEvolution
GravesAlex.et.al.,“Hybridcomputingusinganeural Strategies,”JournalofMachineLearning,15(2014),pp.
networkwithdynamicexternalmemory,”Nature,20 949-980,
October2016,pp.471-476, (lastaccessed31August2022).
articles/nature20101(lastaccessed31August2022).
Work,RobertO.andShawnBrimley,20YY.Preparing
Horowitz,MichaelC.andShiraPindyck,“Whatisa forWarintheRoboticAge(Washington,DC,Centerfor
militaryinnovationandwhyitmatters,”JournalofStrate- aNewAmericanSecurity,2014),
gicStudies,2022, publications/reports/20yy-preparing-for-war-in-the-ro-
22.2038572(lastaccessed31August2022). botic-age(lastaccessed31August2022).
Isci,Hasan,GülayÖkeGünel,“Fuzzylogicbased
air-to-aircombatalgorithmforunmannedairvehicles,”
InternationalJournalofDynamicsandControl,10:1
(February2022),pp.230-242,
article/10.1007/s40435-021-00803-6(lastaccessed31
August2022).
Kanerva,Pentti,SparseDistributedMemory(Boston,
MITPress,1988).
ScienceandTechnologyTrends2020-2040.
ExploringtheS&TEdge(Brussels,NATOScienceand
TechnologyOrganization,2019).
Sun,Yi,DaanWiestra,TomSchaul,andJürgen
Schmidhuber,“Stochasticsearchusingthenatural
gradient,”ICML09:Proceedingsofthe26thAnnual
InternationalConferenceonMachineLearning,2009,pp.
1161-1168,
(lastaccessed31August2022).
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 31

32 FREE JAZZ ON THE BATTLEFIELD

Defense­AI­Observatory­Studies
22|03­Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber, Armin Brandstetter, and Gary S. Schaal, Free
Jazz on the Battlefield. How GhostPlay’s AI Approach Enhances Air Defense
22|02­Peter Layton, Evolution not Revolution. Australia’s Defence AI Pathway
21|01­ Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, Joseph Verbovszky, Beware the Hype. What Military
Conflicts in Ukraine, Syria, Libya, and Nagorno-Karabakh (Don’t) Tell Us About the
Future of War