FINAL REPORT

This report is a product of the Defense Science Board (DSB). The DSB is a Federal Advisory
Committee established to provide independent advice to the Secretary of Defense. Statements,
opinions, conclusions, and recommendations in this report do not necessarily represent the official
position of the Department of Defense.

MEMORANDUM FOR UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR RESEARCH AND
ENGINEERING
SUBJECT: Defense Science Board (DSB) Report on Commercial Space System Access
and Integrity.
I am pleased to forward the DSB report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity,
co-chaired by General (ret) Ellen M. Pawlikowski and Ms. Mandy Vaughn.
The DSB was asked to study how the Department of Defense (DoD) should best use
commercial space systems in support of DoD objectives. The DSB provided
recommendations on acquisition models for commercial space systems and evaluated the risks
accompanying both U.S. and potential adversary use of these systems.
The DSB made five recommendations:
• Implement an end-to-end framework to better integrate existing and planned
commercial capabilities into national security space architectures;
• Integrate evaluation of and provision for commercial space services into institutional
processes;
• Incentivize trust and build resilience in commercial providers;
• Develop a suite of capabilities to monitor, assess, and respond to adversary use of
commercial space capabilities; and
• Account for the maturity of the market when making decisions on investing,
regulating, or buying in the commercial market, avoiding overregulation, investing for
market creation rather than monopolization, and minimizing unique requirements.
I fully endorse all the study’s recommendations and urge their careful consideration and
adoption.
Dr. Eric D. Evans
Chair, DSB

THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK

MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHAIR, DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
SUBJECT: Report of the Defense Science Board (DSB) Task Force on Commercial Space
System Access and Integrity
Attached is the final report of the DSB Task Force on Commercial Space System Access and
Integrity. The Task Force was asked to study the Department’s use of commercial space
systems and explore how best they may be further leveraged in support of DoD objectives.
Specific questions in the Terms of Reference included:
• Identify the commercial space systems most useful for current and future DoD needs.
• Identify potential enhancements to commercial space systems that will improve
resilience or protection against current and future threats.
• Recommend approaches for managing the priorities and governing the use of
commercial space systems used for DoD strategic and tactical needs.
• Provide recommendations on models for acquiring commercial space services and
products.
• Investigate the potential risks and vulnerabilities associated with adversary
exploitation of U.S. use of commercial space systems, or attacks on these systems.
• Investigate the impact and possible mitigations for potential adversary use of
commercial space systems against U.S. defense systems.
The study examined the historical and emerging use of commercial space systems in national
security applications and explored the best means by which they can be integrated into an
inherently resilient, truly hybrid national security architecture. It examined possible models
for management and contracting of commercial space services, and institutional impediments
to further commercial integration on the parts of both government and industry. It also
provided a risk management framework pertaining to potential adversary exploitation of U.S.
use of commercial, and for use of commercial by adversaries. Finally, the study made
recommendations for the role of government as an economic actor in the commercial space
marketplace.
Ms. Mandy Vaughn Gen. Ellen M. Pawlikowski, USAF (ret.)
Co-Chair Co-Chair

THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
Table of Contents
Purpose of the Commercial Space System Access and Integrity Study ................................................... 1
Revolution in Commercial Space ........................................................................................................... 1
Commercial Space Provides a Spectrum of Opportunities and the Role of Government Will Vary ... 2
Commercial Capabilities are Key to a Resilient Hybrid Architecture .................................................... 3
Commercial Use Case: Warfighting Operations Today .......................................................................... 3
Improve U.S. Use of Commercial Space Capabilities ............................................................................... 4
Concerns and Perceptions Limiting Use of Commercial Space ........................................................... 5
Concerns and Perceptions: Government Perspective ........................................................................... 5
Concerns and Perceptions: Industry Perspective .................................................................................. 6
Policy Interpretations Limits Role of Commercial Space System Integration ...................................... 6
Acquisition and Operations Barriers to Commercial Space .................................................................. 6
Findings and Recommendations for Improving U.S. Use of Commercial Space Capabilities ............ 7
Managing Risks of Commercial Space Capabilities ................................................................................. 9
Vulnerabilities of U.S. Use of Commercial Space Capabilities.............................................................. 9
Findings and Recommendations to Address the Risks and Vulnerabilities of Use of Commercial
Space Capabilities ................................................................................................................................. 10
Risks of Adversary Use of Commercial .................................................................................................. 10
Findings and Recommendations to Address the Risks of Adversary Use of Commercial ................ 11
Government Role in the Commercial Space Marketplace ..................................................................... 11
Findings and Recommendations to Further Refine the Government Role in the Commercial
Space Marketplace ............................................................................................................................... 12
Summary ................................................................................................................................................ 12
Appendix A: Terms of Reference ........................................................................................................... A-1
Appendix B: Task Force Membership ................................................................................................... B-1
Appendix C: Briefings Received ............................................................................................................ C-1
Appendix D: Acronyms .......................................................................................................................... D-1
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity Table of Contents [i]

THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
Purpose of the Commercial Space System Access and Integrity
Study
In , the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering (USD(R&E)), tasked
the Defense Science Board (DSB) to study Department of Defense use of commercial space
technology and services to understand how best to leverage these capabilities and manage their
associated risks. Specific questions in the Terms of Reference included:
1. Identify the commercial space systems most useful for current and future DoD needs.
2. Identify potential enhancements to commercial space systems that will improve resilience or
protection against current and future threats.
3. Recommend approaches for managing the priorities and governing the use of commercial
space system use for DoD strategic and tactical needs.
4. Provide recommendations on models for acquiring commercial space services and products.
5. Investigate the potential risks and vulnerabilities of an adversary’s exploitation of or attack on
U.S. use of commercial space systems.
6. Investigate the impact and possible mitigations for potential adversary use of commercial
space systems against U.S. defense systems.
A classified annotated briefing complements this unclassified report and can be accessed through the
DSB office.
Revolution in Commercial Space
Space applications were once the preserve of governments and a limited number of commercial
actors. Since the early 2010s, the commercial space sector has expanded dramatically and received
an enormous outpouring of capital investment. To cite one such analysis, per the consulting firm
McKinsey and Company, the space market was valued at some $447 billion in 2023, with projections
into the next decade exceeding $1 trillion.1
SpaceX has distinguished itself as an epochal trailblazer, having built a commercially competitive
launch capability while simultaneously driving down launch costs and eliminating barriers to space
access—to world-changing effect. Beyond launch, commercial providers now offer such services as
earth sensing and observation, deep analytical capabilities, and ground operations for command and
control of satellites. By the century’s third decade, space had shifted decisively from the province of
large nation-states to a burgeoning global commercial market.
As in other science and technology (S&T) fields, the Department played a historical foundational role
in space systems development. Its role as a market actor remains indispensable. But the DoD has
been slow to capitalize on the opportunities presented by the very marketplace its patronage helped
1 “A Giant Leap for the Space Industry,” McKinsey & Company, 
insights/sustainable-inclusive-growth/chart-of-the-day/a-giant-leap-for-the-space-industry.
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity [1]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
create. This report therefore assesses how the Department can better leverage commercial
capabilities, and the implications of these capabilities for risk management.
In some contrast to other domains of military operations, military and commercial space missions are
not firmly separated by areas of responsibility. Therefore, while a hybrid architecture (integrated
commercial and DoD-specific capabilities) offers considerable potential to provide more robust and
integrated capabilities, it also carries novel risks of which the Department must be cognizant.
The Task Force was comprised of government leaders in space system acquisition and operations
(DoD and the intelligence community (IC)), policymakers, technologists, program managers, investors,
and commercial executives. The complete Task Force membership is in Appendix B. The Task Force
solicited inputs from the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), Military Services, DoD agencies,
academia, the House Armed Services Committee, IC, and industry leaders (see Appendix C for
briefings received).
Commercial Space Provides a Spectrum of Opportunities and the Role of Government
Will Vary
The term “commercial space” covers a broad conceptual spectrum, organized for the study’s purposes
into four elements. Commercial innovation (CI) refers to the incorporation of commercially derived,
market-based ideas into DoD’s space activities―SpaceWERX, AFWERX and the Defense Innovation
Unit are examples of this. Commercial Development (CD) refers to the use of commercial components
in bespoke DoD systems― this is the construct applied by the Space Development Agency (SDA).
Commercial Products (CP) are near-off-the-shelf systems, potentially tailored somewhat to DoD’s
particular needs―e.g., Wideband Global SATCOM. Finally, Commercial Services (CS) refer to those
capabilities purchased from commercial providers, with little-to-no direct control over said capabilities
by the Department. Examples of this include satellite communications (SATCOM) and launch.
This study focused primarily on commercial products and commercial services and some discussion of
commercial development, those elements being more capable of supporting DoD missions in the near-
to-medium term than the innovation activities comprising the left two elements (CI and CD). Other
efforts (such as the DSB’s Advise Implementation and Prioritization of National Security Innovation
Activities study) address the issues associated with infusing the innovation ecosystem into DoD
systems and activities broadly, not just for space missions.
Figure 1. Spectrum of Opportunities
In leveraging commercial products and services, government must be cognizant of its importance as a
customer, regulator, and investor, the particulars of which can and should vary significantly depending
upon where on this spectrum a desired capability resides. This conscious curation will be addressed in
greater detail throughout the study.
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity [2]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
The commercial space sector’s market-driven economics depart considerably from the more
ponderous traditional DoD model. Commercial firms are driven by the exigencies of the market to
deliver new products quickly and cost effectively, incentivizing innovation and high productivity.
Though space capabilities have proliferated globally over time, the United States remains market
dominant, with American firms outnumbering their nearest peer (itself the closely allied United
Kingdom) ten to one.2 The Department has much to gain by leveraging these world-leading
efficiencies.
Commercial Capabilities are Key to a Resilient Hybrid Architecture
The study referenced previous work on space resiliency and different technical and architectural
elements to increase system and mission resiliency.3 From those previous efforts, the Task Force
identified how commercial systems and technologies can be leveraged to create truly hybrid
architectures that include elements of orbital diversity, supply chain diversity, and mission options that
can be complementary to bespoke DoD “resiliency”
measures.
The study featured vignettes from historical,
current, and emerging mission areas of DoD use of
commercial space systems. Examples included
communication satellite’s (COMSATCOM) historical
use by the DoD, the National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency (NGA) use of commercially
collected and analyzed geosynchronous earth orbit
(GEO) intelligence (GEOINT) products, and some
recent use of commercial space products in the
Ukraine conflict. Each case demonstrated the past
and present value of commercial as well as the potential of further integration of commercial space.
The study also examined DoD efforts to integrate commercial SATCOM capabilities, and commercial
GEOINT collections in joint warfighting concepts. Both efforts demonstrated the real benefit of
seamless integration of commercial space into military operations.
Commercial Use Case: Warfighting Operations Today
Commercial space capabilities have supported military operations, sometimes including combat, since
the 1960s. Principally, this has entailed support through COMSATCOM and imagery, as well as other
classified programs. Use cases in contemporary warfighting have only grown stronger: three examples
of such include the use of SATCOM for unmanned aerial systems (UAS), detection as a service, and
the involvement of commercial GEOINT in the Russo-Ukraine conflict.
2 Landry Signé and Hanna Dooley, “How Space Exploration Is Fueling the Fourth Industrial Revolution,”
Brookings, March 28, 2023, 
industrial-revolution/.
3 “Defense Strategies for Ensuring the Resilience of National Space Systems,” Defense Science Board, 2017.
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity [3]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
SATCOM enables beyond visual line of site capability to UASs. The importance of this capability in the
conflicts of the 21st century is well-established. As UAS employment grows to even greater scale, the
case for integration of commercial efficiencies in warfighting will grow commensurately.
Satellite maneuver detection is an important component of space domain awareness. The trajectory of
satellites and their associated propulsion systems can be ascertained algorithmically.
The role of commercial satellite imagery products in Ukraine is renowned. Commercial imagery and
persistent surveillance have been indispensable to Ukraine’s war efforts. Because it is unclassified,
rapid sharing between international partners is possible. Public release of such imagery as Russia’s
abortive “40-mile convoy” have been a pioneering influence in the information domain,
“fundamentally chang[ing] the frame of the conflict…”4
Improve U.S. Use of Commercial Space Capabilities
The Task Force explored several approaches to contracting or managing commercial space services.
One concept, favored by the U.S. Space Force (USSF), is U.S. Transportation Command’s Commercial
Reserve Air Fleet (CRAF) model for DoD use of commercial aircraft during conflict. Through the Charter
Airlift Services contract, participating air carriers commit 30% of their passenger fleet and 15% of their
cargo fleet to an array of national security contingencies. As recompense for backend risk, air carriers
are incentivized by access to Department airlift business in peacetime.
While the CRAF model has some applicability to space, civil airlift differs from space applications in
important ways. Owning to the nature of satellite orbits, commercial space systems will inherently
occupy a more persistent threat environment than civil aircraft activated under CRAF, which are
generally not expected to operate in contested environments. Moreover, as this study will contend,
commercial space services should become more integrated into warfighting operations. They should
therefore be expected to take a more leading role than the participants of CRAF, which serve as more
of an auxiliary called upon during acute crisis. This is to say, CRAF is an augmentation measure, not a
model for full integration as advocated for commercial space systems by this study.
An important attribute of the CRAF construct is the acquisition of services through a working capital
fund (WCF), much as how DoD manages government depots and commercial repair facilities. WCFs
provide greater flexibility, eliminate the erroneous perception of government-owned services as
costless, and dismantle the barriers to integration posed by different funding appropriations for
commercial and government-owned services. The different “colors of money” in the latter paradigm
drive decisions on allocation between commercial and government-owned based solely on the type of
4 “New Documentary on Ukraine Underscores the Importance of Maxar’s...,” Maxar Blog,

maxars-commercial-satellite-imagery-and-capabilities; “The Game-Changing Role of Commercial Satellite Imagery
and Analytics...,” Maxar Blog, 
commercial-satellite-imagery-and-analytics-in-Ukraine; J. Mezey, “Game-Changers: Implications of the Russo-
Ukraine War for the Future of Ground Warfare,” Atlantic Council, February 27, 2024,

ukraine-war-for-the-future-of-ground-warfare/.
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity [4]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
funds available. This would be particularly applicable to the provision of SATCOM to combatant
commands.
The managed service contracts used in the commercial SATCOM market provide another model,
providing a stable demand signal to the vendor while allowing it to retain significant flexibility. In this
construct, commercial customers hold long-term service contracts, providing high levels of availability,
surge capacity, and global coverage through service-level agreements.
Finally, “signals as a service,” a construct the Task Force proposes that results from enduring
relationships with commercial providers. This capability could also provide a reliable and seamless
approach to integration in a variety of mission areas. This model envisions ownership of all user
equipment and software by the vendor, with needs particular to the Department priced into the
service.
Concerns and Perceptions Limiting Use of Commercial Space
Government and industry representatives spanning legacy and emerging mission areas, technology
development, and mission uses provided their perspective on the challenges and opportunities for
commercial space. Areas of discussion included acquisition trades, leveraging innovation from the
commercial sector, models for financial incentives and protections, and barriers to entry for new and
legacy participants. The Task Force explored in detail how to strike a balance between commerciality
and support of heretofore government functions.
Concerns and Perceptions: Government Perspective
The synergies of market forces and achieving an improvement in mission resiliency through a hybrid
approach are the raisons d'etre of commercial integration. The emergence of vendor lock, or
dependence upon a sole vendor, has the potential to negate the strengths of the market by stifling
innovation and inflating prices. This can culminate in a de facto monopoly, cementing a stagnant and
wasteful anticompetitive paradigm. Moreover, vendor lock has the potential to create “cells” that
experiment without integrating with operations. The interest of government in avoiding vendor lock,
however, is in direct conflict with the imperative of firms to maximize market share.
Government is wary of the commercial services’ long-term reliability, particularly during acute crisis.
Firms, in hoc to market forces and shareholder concerns, may not wholly share the government’s
interests and lack its comparative stability. The decision of Starlink to limit its use by the Ukrainian
Armed Forces in their offensive operations is a poignant illustration of government concerns in
extremis. The SDA model leverages commercial for system components for input into government-
owned systems over which it holds final control, mitigating some concerns. In so doing, SDA envisions
creating its own market valued at some $4 billion per annum.
Government is hesitant to cede control over missions it views as inherently governmental. This largely
owes to a conflation of law and policy (the former is more permissive than the latter), as well as
concerns with cyber security and interfaces with foreign firms. In general, government tends to prefer
direct ownership of no-fail assets, even if commercial products may be equal or greater in
effectiveness, in whole or even in part, to the conduct of a mission.
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity [5]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
Concerns and Perceptions: Industry Perspective
From industry’s perspective, government buying practices are suboptimal. For example, government
purchases SATCOM transponders in lieu of services, eschewing stabilizing long-term agreements. The
government separates the user equipment from the service provided. This approach has been
described as transactional and not to the same level of efficiency or global reliability of commercially
procured managed services.
Industry’s potential is sometimes poorly understood by government. In the particular of cases of the
National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) and SDA, industry believes that limits are imposed on them
that fail to account for what a less constrained commercial sector could provide.
The potential for damage or destruction of space systems implicated in warfighting operations is
significant. There remains no industry consensus on how government should compensate industry for
loss of assets (e.g., indemnification, war risk insurance). For example, some providers which are
strongly reliant upon DoD as an anchor seek compensation, while others do not.
Concern about availability of threat and vulnerability information was a consistent theme heard from
commercial operators. Firms are often willing to self-resource added protection measures, which
often make ample business sense. But absent sufficient information, they cannot allocate their
resources effectively.
Finally, mirroring the government’s own concerns, industry actors fear being locked out of the market
by incipient monopolies should the government act as an anchor tenant or misuse acquisition tools to
purchase platforms instead of services.
Policy Interpretations Limits Role of Commercial Space System Integration
Elements of policy, requirements, or tradition in DoD architectural premises limit commercial systems
and services integration. In particular, Department definitions of “inherently governmental” tend to be
broader and therefore more constraining than the law demands; this carries important implications
for the behavior of government customers through the acquisition and purchasing processes. Policy,
informed by restrictive interpretation, limits commercial space applications to smaller portions of the
mission than law permits.
Functions, not missions per se, can be the legal preserve of the government. Conflation of these
categories can inhibit further commercial integration. Moreover, certain functions (e.g., SATCOM,
imagery, or launch) within a mission set deemed inherently governmental by policy may nonetheless
be assigned to commercial capabilities while maintaining policy compliance.
Acquisition and Operations Barriers to Commercial Space
The Task Force assessed a series of acquisition and operations barriers to commercial integration,
listed below. In general, Department practices are poorly aligned with their commercial counterparts.
DoD is poorly appraised of the state of the art in both technology and process. It does not sufficiently
factor industry into its planning and exercises, nor does it adequately coordinate with industry in terms
of threat sharing and security.
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity [6]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
Findings and Recommendations for Improving U.S. Use of Commercial Space
Capabilities
Despite their demonstrated utility, cultural and bureaucratic barriers slow the integration of
commercial space capabilities into national security missions. Policy interpretation, security,
acquisition practices, funding models, operational employment, and military exercises limit the
potential reach and application of commercial space. Bottom line: Integrated Deterrence Requires
Integrated Operations.
Recommendation 1: Implement an end-to-end framework to better integrate existing and planned
commercial capabilities into national security space architectures.
• Architecture analysis, test and evaluation, military operations and planning, capability
development, and sustainment and support. [Space Warfighting Analysis Center (SWAC),
USSPACECOM, USSF, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Space Acquisition and
Integration (SAF/SQ)]
• Develop initial prototype for “integrated commercial Command, Control, C4ISR” to
demonstrate end-to-end integration. [Strategic Capabilities Office (SCO)]
Action Area Means Funding and Responsibility
Requirements: Integrate commercial • Start with the question: “How can I use what is • OPR: JCS/J8 (lead) and the
capabilities early in definition of available?” Explore commercial capabilities Military Services
requirements upfront vs late in the process
Development: Create a strategic • Assign all PEOs responsibility for executing • Fund through 2% tax on
funding increase (STRATFI)-like Commercial Capability Funding Initiative (CCAPFI programs of record assigned
program to enable PEOs to leverage (akin to STRATFI)) efforts. Forming partnerships to a PEO
emerging and developing commercial with commercial providers which leverage • OPR: SAF/SQ
capabilities in Program of Record private investment sharing
efforts. STRATFI efforts funded by SBIR
funds and limited to small business
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity [7]
A
S
c
p
q
a
U N C L A S S
u i s i t i o n a n d p e r a t i o n s B a r r i e r s t o C
c e
A c q u is it io n
D o D a c q u is itio n m o d e ls n o t c o n s is te n t w ith m o d e rn
c o m m e rc ia l s p a c e b u s in e s s p ra c tic e s
E .g ., D o D b u y s S A T C M a s d e d ic a te d G E tra n s p o n d e rs fo r
o n e y e a r le a s e d e s p ite C M S A T C M p ro v id e rs m o v in g to
m a n a g e d s e rv ic e s a n d h y b rid a rc h ite c tu re s le v e ra g in g L E ,
M E , G E
A n a ly s is o f a lte rn a tiv e s n o t k e e p in g u p w ith ra p id
c o m m e rc ia l d e v e lo p m e n t o p tio n s a re u n in fo rm e d o r o u t
o f d a te
R e q u ire m e n ts p ro c e s s a n d fu n d in g m o d e ls n o t a lig n e d to
p u rc h a s in g c o m m e rc ia l s e rv ic e s
L ife c y c le c o s t e s tim a tio n re q u ire m e n ts n o t a m e n a b le to
c o m m e rc ia l s e rv ic e p ric in g m o d e ls
L a c k o f tra in in g a n d e d u c a tio n o n c o m m e rc ia l b u s in e s s
p ra c tic e s
L a c k o f s u p p o rt in g ra n tin g c le a ra n c e s to c o m p a n ie s
p ro v id in g c o m m e rc ia l d a ta p ro d u c ts / s e rv ic e s
R E-D E C IS I N A L
D U N C L A S S
IF IE D
o m
D S B
IF IE D
U
C
LwNCCn
LepLp
S
m e r c i a l
p e r a t io n s
M S A T C M n o t in c lu d e d in m o s t C o m b a ta n t C o m m a n d
la n s
n ly JS C in c lu d e s C M S A T C M in m is s io n p la n n in g
im ite d to n o p la y o f c o m m e rc ia l s e rv ic e s in e x e rc is e s a n d
a r g a m e s
o c o m m e rc ia l s y s te m s a re p a rt o f U S S A C E C M s
ritic a l A s s e t L is t (C A L )/ D e fe n d e d A s s e t L is t (D A L )
o m m e rc ia l In te g ra tio n C e ll c o n c e p t d o e s n t s c a le to th e
e e d
n ly 1 0 c o m p a n ie s v ia C o o p e ra tiv e R e s e a rc h a n d
D e v e lo p m e n t A g re e m e n t, p a y-to -p la y
im ite d in fo rm a tio n e x c h a n g e o n th re a ts a n d o p e ra tio n a l
n v iro n m e n t b e tw e e n m ilita ry o p e ra tio n s a n d c o m m e rc ia l
ro v id e rs
a c k o f s u p p o rt in g ra n tin g c le a ra n c e s to c o m p a n ie s
ro v id in g c o m m e rc ia l d a ta p ro d u c ts / s e rv ic e s
E N L
1 1

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
Action Area Means Funding and Responsibility
Test & Evaluation: In every TTX, • Broaden inclusion of Commercial Space in TTXs, • OPR: SWAC lead for
exercise, and evaluation where Space exercises, across the spectrum of live, virtual, integrating commercial
capabilities are applied, include and constructive capabilities in all analyses
commercial space capabilities as well • Create and maintain digital twins for commercial • OPR: USSPACECOM lead in
space integration incorporating into exercises
• Leverage results of Red Team vulnerability • OPR: USSF allocate budget
assessments to improve resiliency exclusively for integrating
commercial Space into TTXs,
exercises, training
• OPR: SAF/SQ include
commercial space systems in
digital enterprise tools and
environment
Operations: Create dedicated efforts • Create the equivalent of Tactical Exploitation of • Initial responsibility assigned
to integrate existing commercial space National Capabilities (TENCAP) for Commercial to SCO with longer term
capabilities into operations Space (e.g., Technical Exploitation of objective for SAF/SQ and
Commercial Capabilities) with a separate CSO decision on
program element (PE) for funding reassignment within the
USSF
• DoD PE funding line of
$XXXM (TBD)
• OPR: USD(R&E)
Sustainment and Support: Implement • Pilot: Implement a working capital funding • OPR: USD(A&S)
seamless and flexible funding to approach for wideband SATCOM where both
support operations of integrated USSF MILSATCOM operations, support, and
capabilities by using a working capital commercial services contracts are funded.
fund approach to supporting both DoD Leverage the already established working capital
and commercial services fund efforts in commercial SATCOM today.
Target 2025.
• Expand pilot to tactical ISR and space domain
awareness
Interagency Collaboration: Initiate • DoD engage agency counterparts to streamline • OPR: National Space Council
interagency effort on the spectrum certification of user equipment (terminals) for Secretary
and terminal certification efforts to both commercial and military use
streamline policy for joint approval • DoD engage FCC to improve spectrum
process management
• DoD outline framework for "signals as a service" • OPR: DoD CIO
to be implemented with commercial providers
Recommendation 2: Integrate evaluation of and provision for commercial space services into
institutional processes [Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) (USD(C)), Under Secretary of
Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment (USD(A&S)), SAF, USSPACECOM]
• Including planning, programming, budgeting, and acquisition.
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity [8]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
Action Area Means Funding and Responsibility
Planning • USSPACECOM and Joint Staff adapt existing analysis and force • OPR: USSPACECOM (lead),
planning efforts to fully integrate commercial services capabilities JSC/J8, JCS/J5
• In requirements definition, start with the question: “How can I use
what is there today?”
Programming • OSD adapt existing analysis techniques to fully integrate commercial • OPR: OSD/CAPE
services capabilities
• CAPE and SAF modify cost estimating approaches, to include • OPR: OSD/CAPE (lead), SAF/FM,
lifecycle costing, to fully integrate commercial space capabilities SAF/SQ, USSF/S8
Budgeting • See Recommendation 1 with respect to establishing working capital • OPR: OSD/COMP (lead),
funding for space services USD(A&S), SAF/FM
• See recommendation 1 with respect to establishing a CCAPFI • OPR: SAF/SQ (lead), SAF/FM
• Move to mission area vs platform budgeting. Explore reallocation to • OPR: OSD/COMP (lead),
more operations and management (O&M) funding to support the USD(A&S), SAF/SQ, SAF/FM
enduring relationships and management of services/functions (vs
buying platforms)
Acquisition • See Recommendation 1 with respect to establishing a CCAPFI • OPR: SAF/SQ (lead), USD(A&S)
• Pursue capability area budgeting vs individual programs of record to • OPR: SAF/SQ (lead), OSD/COMP,
provide funding flexibility in year of execution SAF/FM
• Pursue OMB and Congressional approval to enter into long term • OPR: SAF/SQ (lead), USD(A&S)
service agreements
• Initiate training courses for USSF personnel about commercial • OPR: Space Training and
business and the tools needed to integrate into operations (e.g., Readiness Command (lead),
Commercial Acq-101) SAF/SQ (lead for acquisition
• Continue to pursue opportunities to streamline and accelerate DoD processes)
acquisition processes
The study includes specific examples and steps through the lifecycle of a program (requirements,
acquisition, test and evaluation, and operations and sustainment) as well as the planning,
programming, budgeting, and execution process to aid in implementation. These recommendations
aim to institutionally integrate commercial operations and systems into DoD missions.
Managing Risks of Commercial Space Capabilities
Commercial space systems and architectures are, by their nature, intended for global access and use.
While this openness is a necessary component of a world marketplace, it presents distinct risks and
challenges, real and perceived.
Vulnerabilities of U.S. Use of Commercial Space Capabilities
The integration of commercial space systems brings a degree of inherent resiliency through
diversification and proliferation. However, these systems remain vulnerable to the same adversary
threats as their bespoke government-owned counterparts, while bringing additional risks through their
greater exposure to market and political-economic forces. Nonetheless, opportunities exist to increase
resilience of commercial systems through protection technologies consistent with commercial
markets and missions.
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity [9]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
Findings and Recommendations to Address the Risks and Vulnerabilities of Use of
Commercial Space Capabilities
The study concluded that commercial satellite systems are vulnerable to the same threats as
dedicated national security satellites, but that opportunities exist to mitigate many of these risks.
Recommendation 3: Incentivize trust and build resilience in commercial providers.
• Include “resilience” as part of quality-of-service requirement in commercial contracts and
apply resources to shape commercial investments in hardening.
• Establish the “market” for premium pricing for more resilient services.
• Enable tech transfer of key U.S. Government (USG) technologies (i.e., cyber protection).
• Improve sharing of threat intelligence and timely indications and warnings.
Action Area Means OPR/Funding
Improve • Initiate efforts to get security clearances for existing and • OPR: SAF/SQ (lead), Defense
Information emerging commercial service providers, to include facility Counterintelligence and Security
Sharing clearances Agency
• Expand capacity of existing information sharing forums • OPR: SPACECOM (lead), IC (NRO,
NGA)
• Broaden the DARPA BRIDGES model for initiating clearances • OPR: Initially DARPA; OUSD(R&E)
process for companies in targeted technical sectors and CSO considering assigning to
USSF
Conduct • Implement vulnerability assessment red teams with select • OPR: USAF Red Team
Vulnerability existing providers as a pilot. Expand to others
Assessments • Incorporate lessons learned as quality-of-service requirements • OPR: SAF/SQ
in service-level agreements with commercial service providers
• SAF/SQ and USSF apply lessons learned to the present and
• OPR: SAF/SQ
future supply chain
Surge Capability • Incorporate surge capacity and geographic coverage • OPR: SAF/SQ (contracts) and
requirements upfront in commercial services contracts as USSPACECOM (requirements)
quality-of-service requirements in service level agreements
Risks of Adversary Use of Commercial
A truly global commercial marketplace is by its nature open to a breadth of world actors, friendly and
otherwise. Historically, the United States has controlled the proliferation of space systems through a
regulatory regime consisting of International Traffic in Arms Regulations restrictions, licensing, and
other means. This structure grew somewhat obsolescent, being incapable of controlling rising foreign
competition which exists beyond its writ even as it undermined the competitiveness of U.S. firms.
Consequently, its restrictions have been relaxed in recent years. The technologies discussed in this
report therefore are substantially available to competitors and adversaries.
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity [10]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
Findings and Recommendations to Address the Risks of Adversary Use of Commercial
The study addressed various mitigation options that could be applied to state and non-state actors in
this regime and concluded that response options beyond regulation alone are required.
Recommendation 4: Develop suite of capabilities to monitor, assess, and respond to adversary use of
commercial space capabilities.
Government Role in the Commercial Space Marketplace
The government plays a pivotal role in shaping the commercial marketplace. This role varies
considerably depending upon where in the spectrum of development a given product resides and the
maturity of the market. Inaction by DoD, however, can have consequences as profound as action.
Excessive aversion to “picking a winner” or vendor lock can undermine support of emerging markets
critical to future U.S. techno-economic dominance.
In established commercial markets (such as GEO SATCOM), the role of government is principally as a
customer. In this capacity, it is often one of many demand sources, and not necessarily the largest or
most important. The government may cause undesired market perturbations as regulator, though
mature industries by their nature are less sensitive to regulatory inputs. Government inaction arguably
poses a greater risk by allowing commercial trends to diverge excessively from its unique mission
requirements.
Nascent markets emerging from traditionally government missions (such as intelligence, surveillance,
and reconnaissance (ISR)) are more sensitive to political economic forces. In these mission sets, for
which there may be limited early pure commercial demand, the government can be indispensable as
an anchor tenant and source of a stable demand signal. The absence of the latter may starve the
embryonic industry of needed resources and incentives to continue technical innovation. Contrarily,
government monopsony can stunt the market’s long-term development should commercial businesses
cases fail to grow beyond it. Emerging markets will also be more acutely sensitive to overregulation,
which can undermine international competitiveness.
Government may play a role as an investor or early customer in emerging disruptive capabilities such
as proliferated low Earth orbit. Patronage of a dominant supplier may lead to an undesirable
monopoly. Contrarily, government inaction may stunt market growth.
Finally, capabilities without an established market, or that are government-only (such as on-orbit
servicing) require government as investor and anchor customer. Inherently, they will carry USG-unique
requirements, potentially to such a degree as to preclude the emergence of truly commercial demand.
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity [11]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
Figure 3. Government Role in Commercial Space Marketplace
Findings and Recommendations to Further Refine the Government Role in the
Commercial Space Marketplace
The role of the government in the commercial marketplace is as a regulator, investor, and customer. In
emerging markets, the government has been and could be the anchor customer and has the potential
to disrupt market forces.
Recommendation 5:
• DoD must account for maturity of the commercial market when making decisions on how it
regulates, invests, and buys commercial space services. [USD(A&S), USD(R&E), Space
Systems Command Commercial Space Office (SSC/COMSO)]
• Avoid overregulation of U.S. companies to enable international competitiveness.
• Invest for market creation, not market monopolization.
• Minimize unique requirements when buying commercial services.
Summary
Commercial space capabilities continue to evolve rapidly and offer considerable potential to the
United States and its allies and partners. To best leverage these capabilities, the USG must implement
new end-to-end processes: to wit, changes in analysis, testing, operations, development, and
sustainment; and planning, programming, budgeting, and acquisition. Management of commercial
space has several potential models, selection of which is contingent upon the respective roles of
government and commercial. The growth of commercial space applications presents distinctive risks
pertaining both to U.S. and adversary use. USG and commercial systems hold many risks in common,
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity [12]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
and improvements to the latter are substantially underway on industry’s initiative. Finally, the
government must remain cognizant of its potential to perturb the market both for good and ill. Bottom
line: Integrated Deterrence Requires Integrated Operations.
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity [13]

THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
Appendix A: Terms of Reference
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity Terms of Reference [A-1]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity Terms of Reference [A-2]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
Appendix B: Task Force Membership
Co-Chairs
Ms. Mandy Vaughn Gen Ellen M. Pawlikowski, USAF (Ret.)
Members
Mr. Mike Appelbaum Dr. Daniel Hastings
Ms. Kari Bingen Dr. Paul Kaminski
Mr. D. Marshall Brenizer Mr. John Paul (JP) Parker
Dr. Alison Brown Dr. Dhanurjay “DJ” atil
Mr. James Carlini Dr. Brad Tousley
Ms. Laetitia de Cayeux
Government Advisors
Mr. Tom Ainsworth, OSD Strategic Capabilities Office
Executive Secretary
Dr. Lindsay Millard
Defense Science Board Secretariat
Ms. Elizabeth Kowalski, DSB Executive Director
Mr. Kevin Doxey, DSB Executive Director (former)
Dr. Troy Techau, Designated Federal Officer (DFO)
Study Support
Mr. Robert Kolterman, SAIC
Mr. Mark Brophy, SAIC
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity Membership [B-1]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
Appendix C: Briefings Received
Meeting 1 (14 Feb 2023)
Commercial Systems Program Office Overview
NRO
Counterspace Cyber Threats to Commercial SATCOM
National Security Innovation Capital (NSIC)
Electronic Warfare Threats to Commercial Space Systems and Services
NSIC
Commercial Remote Sensing Overview
David Gauthier
Commercial Space Efforts
SCO/MIT-LL
Killer Bee Phase II Study Outbrief
SCO/MIT-LL
Meeting 2 (28-29 )
CSA Protection and Indemnification
General Counsel, Department of the Air Force
Space Counterintelligence
Office of the Director of National Intelligence
Commercial Space Protection Policy Discussion
International Conference on Circuit, Systems and Communication (ICCSC)/National Security Space
Organization (NSSA)
Space Architecture Integration
Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Space Acquisition and Integration
Director of Architecture, Science, and Technology (SAF/SQA)
Intelsat and the Hybrid Networks of the Future
Intelsat
Space and Counterspace, China
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA)
Space and Counterspace, Russia
DIA
Commercial Integration
Maxar
Meeting 3 (5 )
Discussion with Bill Adkins
House Appropriations
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity Briefings [C-1]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
Meeting 4 (17 and 19 )
Commercial Integration
Inmarsat
U.S. Space Command Perspective
U.S. Space Command
Leveraging Commercial Space for Rapid Capability Delivery
Space Development Agency
OUSD(P) Perspective
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space Policy
Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) Perspective
ARFL
Zero Trust
Xage Security
Meeting 5 (13-14 )
Thoughts on Resilience
Marshall Brenizer brief to Position, Navigation, and Timing Task Force, 29 Mar 2023
Discussion with Strategic Capabilities Office
SCO
General Counsel Perspective
Associate General Counsel
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity Briefings [C-2]

DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD
Appendix D: Acronyms
AFRL Air Force Research Laboratory
CD commercial development
C4ISR Command, Control, Communications, Computers (C4) Intelligence,
Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR)
CI commercial innovation
COMSATCOM commercial satellite communications
CP commercial product
CRAF Commercial Reserve Air Fleet
CS commercial service
DIA Defense Intelligence Agency
DoD Department of Defense
DSB Defense Science Board
GEO geosynchronous earth orbit
GEOINT geospatial intelligence
ISR intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
NGA National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
NRO National Reconnaissance Office
OSD Office of the Secretary of Defense
SAF Secretary of the Air Force
SAF/SQ Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Space Acquisition and Integration
SATCOM satellite communications
SCO Strategic Capabilities Office
SDA Space Development Agency
SSC/COMSO Space Systems Command Commercial Space Office
STRATFI Strategic Funding Increase
SWAC Space Warfighting Analysis Center
UAS unmanned arial system
USD(A&S) Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment
USD(C) Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)
USD(R&E) Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering
USG United States Government
USSF U.S. Space Force
WCF working capital fund
DSB Report on Commercial Space System Access and Integrity Acronyms [D-1]