:DI
kcotsrettuhS
Global
Catastrophic
Risks 2023
Managing risks
through collective
action

GLOBAL CATASTROPHIC RISKS 2023:
MANAGING RISKS THROUGH COLLECTIVE ACTION
The views expressed in this report are those of the authors. Their statements are not necessarily
endorsed by the affiliated organisations or the Global Challenges Foundation.
ANNUAL REPORT TEAM
Editor-in-chief: Kajsa Waaghals
Researcher: Waldemar Ingdahl
Creative: Weber Shandwick Social Impact
CONTRIBUTORS
Outside safe operating space New Agenda for Peace: a spotlight on catastrophic
Author: Johan Rockström, Director of the Potsdam risks
Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK) and Author: Richard Gowan, UN Director New York,
Professor in Earth System Science at the University International Crisis Group (ICG)
of Potsdam Link: 
Link: richard-gowan
Equity in action: global to local Bridging the global governance gap for nuclear
Author: David Obura PhD, MBS, Chair The weapons
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Author: Beatrice Fihn, Director, Lex International
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES), Founding Link: 
Director of CORDIO East Africa, Member, Earth 1351bb11/
Commission
Link: Nuclear weapons in an era of strategic complexity
Author: Dr Wilfred Wan, WMD Programme Director
Convergence of climate change & nuclear and Senior Researcher, SIPRI
weapons Link: 
Author: Dr. Francesca Giovannini, Harvard Kennedy
School Unmuting civil society & applying people-centred
Link: approaches
giovannini Author: Lysa John, Secretary-General, CIVICUS
Link: 
Towards global constitutionalism staff
Author: Joyeeta Gupta, full professor on Environment Link: 
and Development in the Global South at University of
Amsterdam Author: Mandeep S Tiwana, Chief Officer – Evidence
and Engagement, CIVICUS
Link: 
gupta.html Link: 
staff
A liveable future: our window of opportunity Link: 
Author: Owen Gaffney, Chief Impact Officer at Nobel 8b1b98185/
Prize Outreach, CEO of Planetary Stewardship, co-lead
at Earth4All, and co-founder of Exponential Roadmap Preparing for future shocks: opportunities and
Initiative. responsibilities
Link: Author: Adam Day, Head, United Nations University -
gaffney-6577708/ Centre for Policy Research (UNU-CPR) Geneva Office
Link: 
Incentives & partnerships: multilateral Author: Stefan Löfven, Co-chair of the High Level
governance Advisory Board of Effective Multilateralism (HLAB) and
Author: Maiara Folly, Executive Director of Plataforma Chair of the governing board SIPRI
CIPÓ Link: 
Link: Author: David Passarelli, Director of United Nations
team/#diretoria University - Centre for Policy Research (UNU-CPR)
Climate, conflict & ecological: governance of Link: 
overlapping risks passarelli
Author: Tom Ellison Deputy Director, The Center for
Climate and Security
Link: 
tom-ellison/
(Edited by: Erin Sikorsky Director, The Center for
Climate and Security and Director, The International
Military Council on Climate and Security
Link: )
G2lobal Challenges Annual Report 2018 Global Catastrophic Risks 204213

Contents
Foreword 4
Approach 5
Risks: the scientific context 6
Safe and just earth system boundaries 7
CLIMATE CHANGE
Outside safe operating space 8
ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
Equity in action: global to local 11
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
Convergence of climate change & nuclear weapons 15
Global governance reform 19
CLIMATE CHANGE & ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
Towards global constitutionalism 20
A liveable future: our window of opportunity 23
Incentives & partnerships: multilateral governance 26
Climate, conflict & ecological: governance of overlapping risks 30
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
New Agenda for Peace: a spotlight on catastrophic risks 33
Bridging the global governance gap for nuclear weapons 36
Nuclear weapons in an era of strategic complexity 39
UN-REFORMS, CIVIL SOCIETY
Unmuting civil society & applying people-centred approaches 42
Preparing for future shocks: opportunities and responsibilities 45
G3lobal Challenges Annual Report 2018 Global Catastrophic Risks 204213

FOREWORD: GLOBAL CATASTROPHIC RISKS 2023
Dear reader,
JENS ORBACK
2024: Overshadowed by intersecting global risks The clock
▼
and a global governance architecture that is not fit
for purpose, a new year offers new chances. Now it
is up to us if we take them. This report looks into is ticking -
the risks at stake and explores how we can approach
a comprehensive overhaul of global governance to
address them. yet it is not
Among risks that threaten our societies, this year’s
report focuses on three of the most prominent – too late.
climate change, ecological collapse, and weapons ▼
of mass destruction. It examines how they have
each developed, but also how they interact and
exacerbate one another. For example, resource
scarcity driven by climate change can spark However, it’s not just about policy; it’s also about
conflict. Rising sea levels and more frequent inclusivity. We must bring more people affected by
extreme weather events also threaten the safety of global risks into the conversation. Civil society must
nuclear facilities. When climate and environment be included in policymaking to protect ecosystems,
intertwine with peace and security, we need a and non-nuclear states must be included in non-
paradigm shift in multilateral cooperation. proliferation discussions. Only by amplifying
diverse voices can we engineer solutions that have
The stark reality, underscored by our contributors, legitimacy and resonate universally.
is that time is not on our side. We stand close to
crossing six of the nine planetary boundaries The clock is ticking - yet it is not too late.
that define a safe operating space for humanity. Meaningful steps have been taken and can be
Moreover, when we factor in ‘safe and just’ limits taken again. The Earth, with its built-in resilience,
– considering both Earth’s stability and human presents us with an opportunity – a chance for
welfare – the situation is even more threatening. humanity to reconstruct our collaborative endeavors
and forge a safer world.
The authors in this report show that the pathway to
effective global governance demands a dual strategy:
immediate pragmatic actions and visionary, ‘blue-
sky’ thinking. For instance, when considering how
to address the global governance of nuclear risk, it is
important to both support the immediate work of the
International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons
Executive Director,
(ICAN) and to get more states to sign up to the ban. Global Challenges Foundation
4 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

Approach
There are many factors affecting the way human CLIMATE CHANGE
beings live and cope on this planet. When looking Extreme weather events have led to increased
at humanity as a group – and over a longer deaths in all regions. Millions of lives and homes
perspective – climate, technology and the way have been destroyed in droughts and floods,
we take decisions together are the most critical. while millions more face extreme hunger. We are
This report presents an overview of the global dangerously close to triggering climate tipping
catastrophic risks the world currently faces with points, beyond which we face a high risk of large-
these crucial factors in mind. Expert analysis of scale, irreversible change, pushing the planet
the latest scientific research can guide us to more further away from conditions relied upon by all life
efficient governance models. on Earth.
When preparing this report, we aimed to develop WEAPONS OF
an approach that would reflect the best current MASS DESTRUCTION
understanding of global risks, to aid decision- Nuclear weapons can cause widespread
makers in governance reform. We chose to focus devastation and long-lasting environmental
the report on three of the most significant threats consequences, inflicting harm on every country
of today: climate change, ecological collapse and on Earth. Despite such universal impact,
weapons of mass destruction. While distinct, these discussions and solutions on nuclear weapons
risks closely intersect and exacerbate one another, have traditionally centred around the nine nuclear-
presenting a complex challenge for those working armed states, leaving the majority of the global
to manage and mitigate them. community largely voiceless.
Through a series of essays from academic ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
and policy experts, as well as civil society Six of the nine systems and processes that provide
representatives, the report examines how these the life-supporting functions of our planet are
risks overlap, where current systems of global now outside their safe operating space, having
governance are lacking in the face of such transgressed Planetary Boundaries. This damage
complexity, and how they could be improved. has extensive knock-on impacts, including food
Against a backdrop of increasing pressure on insecurity, water scarcity, accelerated climate
governments to identify new approaches to address breakdown and loss of planetary reliance.
converging risks, we offer the short- and long-term
governance solutions presented in this report as a
tool for decision makers around the world.
During 2024 the Global Challenges Foundation will
continue to support multilateral cooperation in
order to tackle these threats. New technologies can
help us. But that is another argument for improved
global governance, for the impact of technologies
is decided by those who have control over them.
G5lobal Challenges Annual Report 2018 Global Catastrophic Risks 204213

Risks: the
scientific context

:DI
kcotsrettuhS
6 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

Safe and just earth
system boundaries
What are they?
Newly quantified boundaries which account for CLIMATE SURFACE
both the biophysical conditions to maintain a WATER
stable planet to underpin life on Earth (“safe”), Safe & Just: Safe & Just:
as well as assessing how significant harm to 1°C <20% monthly
flow alteration
humans and other species can be avoided
(“just”).
Breached Breached for 34%
of Earth
Safe boundaries ensure stable and
GROUND BIOSPHERE
resilient conditions on Earth, often set in WATER (GLOBAL NATURE)
relation to climate tipping points. Safe & Just: Safe & Just:
Drawdown ≤ Recharge >50-60% natural
Just boundaries minimise human ecosystem area intact
exposure to significant harm, such as
Breached for 47% Breached
loss of lives, livelihoods or incomes,
of Earth
displacement, loss of food, water or
NUTRIENT SURFACE
nutritional security, chronic disease,
CYCLE WATER
injury or malnutrition.
Safe & Just: Safe & Just:
<57 Tg Nitrogen & <4.5-9.0 Tg <20% monthly
How are they different? Phosphorus surplus per year flow alteration
Past scientific attempts to define environmental globally
boundaries, such as the Planetary Boundary Breached Not
breached
Framework, have looked only at the global
conditions needed to maintain a stable planet
and safeguard life on Earth. The new research
explores what is needed to ensure that equity
A just and equitable
and justice are not undermined due to changes
in the Earth system. approach is essential
to planetary stability.
Why do they matter?
The Earth Commission has quantified safe and We cannot have a
just boundaries for climate, biodiversity, fresh
biophysically safe planet
water and different kinds of pollution to air, soil
and water. Staying within these new boundaries
without justice.
is essential to protect both the stability of
the planet and the safety of its inhabitants. Prof. Joyeeta Gupta,
Worryingly, most have already been breached. Co-Chair of the Earth Commission
G7lobal Challenges Annual Report 2018 Global Catastrophic Risks 204213

CLIMATE CHANGE
Outside safe
JOHAN ROCKSTRÖM
operating space
Six of the nine systems and processes that provide In the case of climate change, crossing the Planetary
the life-supporting functions of our planet are Boundary, with little sign of slowing down in the near
now outside their safe operating space, having future, brings the Earth system ever closer to known
transgressed Planetary Boundaries (Richardson et tipping points, beyond which we face high risk of
al., 2023). Although our knowledge of how this will large-scale, irreversible changes, pushing the planet
play out differs depending on how advanced the further on a drift away from conditions that have
science is, we do know that the risk of destabilizing supported humanity since the dawn of civilisation.
our planet as a whole is now rising sharply. This puts For the Greenland ice sheet (GIS), the West Antarctic
us at risk of permanently undermining the livability ice sheet (WAIS), tropical coral reef systems and
of our planet for all humans, in terms of everything abrupt thawing of permafrost in the Arctic, the latest
from water, food, and health to security. science foresees a high risk of tipping beyond 1.5°C
global warming (Armstrong McKay et al., 2022).
...there is no safe future for (Averaged over a decade, the Earth has now warmed
1.14°C compared to pre-industrial conditions due
humans on Earth without
to human activity, and most of this warming has
respecting all nine Planetary taken place in the last 50 years). The hundreds of
scientists involved in the latest assessment of the
Boundaries.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change arrived
at a similar conclusion in their iconic burning embers
graphic: between 1.5°C and 2°C the risk of “large-scale
Tipping point Effect singular events”, essentially tipping events, moves
from moderate to high.
1.5°C
Already, if the early tipping elements are triggered
Uphill Downhill
Effort is required to Runaway state -past (GIS and WAIS), we would commit future generations
move uphill towards the Tipping Point, no to 10 meters sea level rise, permanently ruin the
Tipping Point additional effort is
required livelihoods for hundreds of millions of people
depending on coastal tropical reef ecosystems, and
trigger feedbacks that would accelerate warming even
further. It would not cause an abrupt collapse, but
push planet Earth further away from the stable state
that our civilization, our modern world, relies on.
The Tipping Point
A tipping point in the climate system is a threshold
that, when exceeded, can lead to large changes in
the state of the system
8 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CLIMATE CHANGE
Tipping points in large-scale biological systems due With the transgression of planetary boundaries, the
to a combination of land-use and climate change are ability of Earth to adapt to and buffer the pressure of
also drawing nearer. For example, there are already unrelenting human activity, while still maintaining
signs that the ability of the Amazon rainforest to be a the conditions under which human civilizations as
net sink of carbon is slowing down, and deforestation we know them have developed and flourished, is
and warming temperatures could be close to waning. This resilience stems from the interactions
triggering a transition to a much more sparsely- of the physical and biological systems and processes
vegetated savannah state. This loss of Earth’s richest that make up our Earth system, which dampen
terrestrial ecosystem in terms of biological diversity, shocks and stresses resulting from climate and
would not only affect millions who live in the region, other environmental change. It can be thought of
it would have far-reaching consequences for the as the elastic memory in the Earth system, always
global carbon cycle, alter rainfall patterns in central pulling it back towards its pre-Anthropocene state.
and southern South America and the implications for CO2 fertilization describes one such interactive
climate would be felt even farther afield. mechanism: rising atmospheric CO2 concentration
drives higher plant growth, leading to an increase
in the amount of carbon absorbed, and thus acting
to draw carbon out of the atmosphere. Under the
pressure of human activity, beyond planetary
boundaries, these same interactions can rather
reinforce each other, repelling the Earth system
further away from its safe operating space.
Shutterstock
ID:

9 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CLIMATE CHANGE
Even without the self-reinforcing implications of The most recent assessment of the health of our
crossing tipping points, the sum total of current planet as a whole illuminates a previously dark
political will to reduce greenhouse gas emissions corner of global risk analysis: there is no safe future
has put the world on a path to around 2.7°C global for humans on Earth without respecting all nine
warming above pre-industrial levels by the end of Planetary Boundaries. Decarbonising the global
this century. Over the past three million years we energy system alone is not enough. In fact, pushing
have never exceeded 2°C, and our civilisations have too far on the other Planetary Boundaries relating to
developed at 0.5°C of maximum warming beyond the land, biodiversity, nutrients, water and pollutants,
pre-industrial average temperature of 14°C on Earth. can, on its own, push Earth through the 1.5°C limit.
A disastrous ≈3°C warming would not only exacerbate Only when respecting the deep interconnectedness
the already-palpable increase in devastating extreme of the Earth system, the bedrock of its resilience, can
weather events, it would represent a perturbation of risk with global environmental change be reduced.
the climate so extreme that one third of the global
population – more than 2 billion people – would On a more hopeful note, we also have the evidence
be living in regions where average temperatures that despite the Anthropocene pressures on the
lie outside the human climate niche (Lenton et planet, manifested in the breaching of all biosphere
al., 2023). With threats to health, food and water boundaries, Earth still holds a significant degree
security, such warming levels would threaten social of resilience, continuing to buffer the climate and
stability, with the burden of risk resting heavily on ecological abuse posed by the unsustainable human
the shoulders of those already experiencing the most enterprise. In fact, the emerging best possible future
severe impacts of climate change. for humanity on a safe landing on climate, is to
cope with a period of overshoot (several decades
Irrespective of the current climate-mitigation policies of > 0.1-0.3°C overshoot), before returning back to
and targets being realized, an overshoot of the Paris within a safe 1.5°C world by 2100. But what is it that
global warming target of 1.5°C has become close to will bring us back from overshoot? Well, it is quite
inevitable (Rogelj et al., 2023). At the current rate straightforward:
of GHG emissions from fossil-fuel burning, land
use change and industrial pollution, we are likely to decarbonise the world economy by 2050
breach the 1.5°C limit in the next 10-15 years. 1. following the IPCC and the Carbon Law
(cutting emissions by half each decade
The risks associated with temporarily overshooting starting with 2030),
1.5°C are not well studied, but first results highlight
that, again, the most detrimental effects will return back to the safe space on terrestrial
be disproportionately felt by the world’s most 2. and ocean boundaries, and
underdeveloped countries (Bauer et al., 2023). One
thing is however certain, more than 1.5°C global hope that no tipping points are permanently
3.
warming will be an unparalleled stress test for our crossed.
planet. Earth’s natural defences, spearheaded by
the buffering capacity of the biosphere, will be In the end, it is very likely the oceans that will determine
essential to fending off systemic change that could whether or not we can cool the planet after overshoot,
compromise the conditions that have allowed which in turn hinges on the biological, physical and
humans to thrive. chemical health of our marine systems on Earth.
10 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
Equity in action:
DAVID OBURA
global to local
Two major updates of the planetary boundaries The new work lays out two further injustices.2 While
framework were published in the last few months.1 the study reinforces the identification of 1.5°C as a
They reinforce what is now commonly seen in public ‘safe limit’ for warming3, given the demonstrated
media from local to global levels – that humanity vulnerability of millions of people to climate-related
is crossing an increasing number of limits of our hazards already, and of some countries to inevitable
single earth system. We are accelerating, rather than drowning by sea level rise from historic emissions,
decelerating, into the Anthropocene. A key advance that a ‘just’ limit has already been crossed in the last
is that one of these updates expanded on the justice decade, with unjust exposure of hundreds of millions
dimensions of crossing planetary limits. This is a of people already at 1°C warming.
critically important advance as it addresses the fears
of many developing countries and disadvantaged The second new dimension is that certain of the
groups of what should be done and by whom, in planetary boundaries are actually expressed at local
returning within planetary limits. levels, not global. For example, one aspect of the
biosphere boundary, the provisioning of ecosystem
Three elements of planetary (in)justice have been services – such as pollination by insects, or protection
clear for many years, sharpened by climate change. of soils from erosion by overlying vegetation –
First and most obviously, some parts of the global operates locally, down to scales of 1 km or less. And
(and national) populations are far more vulnerable because of this localization, they must be active at the
to climate impacts. This is amplified by two further scale of individual people, for those people to have just
injustices: the same people have contributed least access and be able to benefit from them.
to the drivers of climate change (damage, in the
figure), and in the process, their fair share of the
global carbon budget has been appropriated by
others, thereby limiting their available pathways to
development
11 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023
Shutterstock
ID:

ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
WHY IS THIS IMPORTANT TO MITIGATE AND A critical challenge is to make these global initiatives
ADDRESS GLOBAL RISK EQUITABLY? relevant to the lives of the most vulnerable people, in
Agenda 2030 of the United Nations and its highly diverse and contextualized local spaces.
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), requires that
no-one be left behind, that the benefits of nature and The Global Challenges Foundation concept note on
global society be shared with all people on the planet. reducing earth system risks7 envisions an approach
that builds from the bottom up8, starting with local
Among the key tools for protecting all people from contexts to identify what solutions might be most
global risks, are platforms that integrate sciences relevant to realities on the ground. This bottom-up
and knowledge relevant to specific risks, to feed process both enables and requires engagement and
these into policy frameworks. The IPCC has been inclusion, assuring the right voices and rights-holders
established to do this for climate change, and IPBES are engaged from the beginning. it incorporates
for loss of biodiversity and its benefits to people. three main elements:
But these platforms address just some of the SDGs.
Other key elements, such as food, water and disease First is to minimize exposure of people to any
risks do not yet have dedicated integrated platforms, hazard, and reduce sensitivity. As local areas
and the existing ones do not necessarily cover become heavily populated, people are forced to
sufficient elements of their risks and interactions. inhabit marginal locations previously avoided
What is needed is a global ‘safety net’ that integrates because of their high exposure, such as low-lying
knowledge and addresses risk across all countries, flood plains exposed to flooding, or hillsides at risk
and down to local levels. of landslides. This often is accompanied by poor
governance that also allows environmental and
Multiple efforts are seeking solutions to this building standards to be ignored, amplifying both
challenge – the Global Challenges Foundation exposure and sensitivity.
sponsored a concept note4 on a component of such
a safety net, focused around ‘earth system risk task Second, the state of locally-expressed planetary
forces’ that add functionality and responsivity to boundaries is determined by local assets. For
existing platforms, to specific challenges (such as example, in places where lakes, rivers and wetlands
polar glacier melt, or coral reef collapse). A Science- have been modified or their natural processes and
Policy Action Network is envisioned by the UN recharge interrupted, restoring them also restores the
Secretary General’s High Level Advisory Board functions and benefits they supply, including those
(HLAB) in its recommendations] for emerging that reduce risk. The state of local natural assets is
priorities in reforming the United Nations.5 Emerging well within the control of local actors dependent
from increasingly integrated food systems sciences on them, so investing in and supporting actors
and networks the ‘Montpellier process’6 envisages and governance may be of equal or even greater
‘pooling collective intelligence’ through linking importance to, investing in direct action on the state
science-policy platforms to better address sustainable of the assets.
development challenges.
12 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
Third, and a critical enabler of the first two, is In thinking about what this means for addressing
addressing the full dimensions of justice laid Anthropocene threats it is important to focus on local
out by the latest understanding of planetary assets and ‘nature based solutions’, to build from the
boundaries. These include the five dimensions ground up:
outlined earlier – unequal vulnerability among
people, unequal contribution to the problem, equity must drive decision-making as it is the
unequal consumption of fair shares, unequal access foundational criterion that can identify fair
to benefits, and that unjust exposure at local levels direction of resource flows, and to turn nature-
can precede the crossing of global limits. negative activities to nature- and people-
positive ones. A simple heuristic is to identify
All of these injustices disadvantage poorer the places and contexts where there is a justice
communities and poorer countries. But in ways only deficit in any of the five dimensions indicated,
now being reinforced by science, the local dimension to redirect resources to redress these;
of critical planetary boundaries provides powerful
leverage through which justice is a primary solution. focus on natural assets as the foundations of
For all the ways in which nature provides solutions resilience and welfare in all local spaces, down
that support people, i.e. across all the classes of to 1 km2 scales. It is only by building up these
contribution from nature identified by IPBES, natural assets will we be able to secure peoples’
‘nature-based solutions’ are key to meeting these resilience to multiple, and often surprising,
needs. And for the locally-determined benefits the future hazards.
rebuilding of nature to provide these solutions across
all local spaces can be a primary mechanism for
addressing multiple dimensions of justice.

:DI
kcotsrettuhS
13 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
These two principles can help countries respond
at local scales to the challenges emerging
from earth system risks, in an integrated
framework and with aligned policies.
A
th
n
e
d
f u
fa
t
r
u r
fr
e
o
d
m
e v
p
e
l
l
a
o
c
p
in
m
g
e
l
n
im
t o
it
f
s on
c
ycles of inequa
lity
disadvantaged countries or sectors
... ...
of society, this perspective r e
u
strengthens mechanisms for s
o
integrating resource flows p
x
in economic and policy e
c
o
processes, to raise people n
above the poverty line
s u
m
access
p
and establish a more level
tion
international ‘playing field’.
v
u
N
im
a
p
tu
le
r
m
e-b
en
as
te
e
d
d
t
s
h
o
r
lu
ou
ti
g
o
h
n s
a da
mag e l n
e r
planetary boundaries lens a
b
provide a critical perspective to l i
i
t
accelerate actions towards true y
sustainable development.
1. Richardson K, Steffen W, Lucht W, et al (2023) Earth beyond six of nine planetary boundaries. Sci Adv 9:eadh2458. Rockström J, Gupta J, Qin D, et al (2023) Safe and
just Earth system boundaries. Nature. 
2. Rockström J, Gupta J, Qin D, et al (2023). Ibid.
3. IPCC (2018) Global warming of 1.5°C An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of
strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty. Accessed 2 Apr 2020
4. 
5. 
6. Initiated by the University of Montpellier and One-CG institutions based at the university, forthcoming event in .
7. 
8. Obura DO, Katerere Y, Mayet M, et al (2021) Integrate biodiversity targets from local to global levels. Science 373:746. 
14 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
Convergence of climate
DR. FRANCESCA
GIOVANNINI
change & nuclear weapons
Climate change and nuclear weapons are the two Firstly, climate change undeniably exacerbates
gravest existential risks confronting our planet and political and social tensions, serving as a potent
our humanity today. Each of them already bears the catalyst for conflicts both within and among nations.
potential for irreversible consequences. Their interface Domestically, resource scarcity driven by climate
might further deepen the scale and depth of risks to change might induce significant displacement of
our livelihoods. Yet this strategic interdependence has populations and economic hardships, all of which
often been understudied and largely underappreciated can spark social unrest, conflicts, and political
in policy and academic debates. instability. This in turn could significantly threaten
the ability of a country to maintain high standards
of safety and the security of its nuclear arsenal. In
addition, extreme weather events, the inexorable rise
in sea levels, and the looming spectre of resource
scarcity all contribute to the potential for disputes,
particularly when nuclear-armed states are involved.
Numerous studies have emphasised that climate-
induced shortages of water and arable land could
spark disagreements between nations like Pakistan
and India, thereby heightening the peril of a nuclear
standoff in the South Asian region.
Shutterstock
ID:

/ 709918504
15 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
Secondly, energy scarcity driven by climate Thirdly, climate change poses direct risks to
change can act as a driver for nuclear energy the existing nuclear infrastructure. Rising
pursuit by nations looking for alternative energy sea levels and increased frequency of extreme
sources. However, the thin line between civilian weather events threaten the safety of nuclear
nuclear energy programmes and military nuclear facilities located in coastal areas or regions prone
programmes can lead to proliferation risks, as to natural disasters, potentially leading to nuclear
countries might divert nuclear materials and accidents with catastrophic environmental and
technology from peaceful purposes to weapon human consequences. The catastrophic accident
development, creating a cascade of proliferation. at the Fukushima Daiichi Plant in Japan clearly
Countries like Iran, Turkey and Egypt have all framed demonstrated the vulnerabilities of the nuclear
their decision to invest in civilian nuclear energy as infrastructure even in high technology countries with
imperative to diversify their domestic energy mix and a long-standing nuclear legacy.
reduce reliance on international sources. Yet their
nuclear programmes have fueled concerns over their Concurrently and often poorly appreciated, nuclear
nuclear proliferation ambitions and their safety and weapons too have wielded and will continue to
security standards. have profound effects on the environment and
climate. Historically, we know that nuclear weapons
testing, often carried out in colonial territories, has
had enduring devastating effects on biodiversity.
Radiation from nuclear blasts led to mutations
and death in flora and fauna, disturbing ecological
balances and causing long-lasting damage to
ecosystems across countries in the South Pacific,
Central Asia, and North Africa. Destruction of
ecosystems in turn contributed to further climate
alterations. Furthermore, renowned scientists like
Carl Sagan, Richard P. Turco, and James Pollack,
among others, argued that the detonation of nuclear
weapons can cause immediate and long-term
climatic changes, also known as “nuclear winter.”
Most specifically, the large-scale fires produced
from a nuclear detonation release millions of tons of
soot into the stratosphere, where it can remain for
years, disrupting weather patterns, depleting ozone,
and potentially leading to crop failures and mass
starvation of unprecedented scale and proportion.

:DI
kcotsrettuhS
16 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
The intricate intertwining of climate change and The campaign has advocated for a paradigm shift,
nuclear weapons paints a formidable and grave placing human and environmental security at the
image, where each danger has the capability to forefront of disarmament dialogues and policies.
magnify the adverse repercussions of the other. To It underscores the importance of international
be successful in this endeavor, the international solidarity, cooperation, and legal frameworks in
community needs to develop greater capacities to mitigating these dual risks. Through its holistic
tackle the two existential risks combined, while approach, it has promoted the mitigation of these
reprioritising resources and increasing public interconnected threats, emphasising the urgency of
awareness. Until now, the policy community has collective, integrated action for the safeguarding of
provided siloed approaches that are unable to tackle our planet and humanity.
the scale and depth of the problem.
But more still can be done. For instance, research
The complexity of devising a holistic strategy and development in green technologies and
capable of addressing the interface between the two renewable energy sources are imperative to combat
existential risks derives from the fundamentally climate change and mitigate the repercussions on
different nature of the threats. Climate change is geopolitical dynamics. The advancement in these
primarily a gradual, cumulative process driven by technologies can potentially alleviate the strains
human activities, such as the burning of fossil fuels and tensions arising from resource scarcity and
and deforestation. In contrast, nuclear weapons dependencies, reducing the potential triggers for
pose a threat of sudden, cataclysmic destruction, nuclear confrontations. Moreover, the enhancement
originating from human conflicts, political of international legal frameworks is essential. It
tensions, and the pursuit of power and security. In can lead to the formulation of more stringent and
addition, climate change manifests over extended effective agreements, fostering nuclear disarmament
periods, with its impacts becoming progressively and addressing the risks posed by climate change.
more severe, allowing for ongoing study and long- Developing universally accepted norms can facilitate
term intervention strategies. Nuclear risks are international cooperation, reinforcing collective
characterised by their immediate, irreversible security and ensuring mutual benefit. These norms
consequences and unpredictability, given the volatile can address the contentious lines between civilian
nature of international relations and the ever-present and military nuclear programmes, thereby reducing
risk of accidents or miscalculations. the risks of proliferation and maintaining a balanced
pursuit of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
Yet, raising public awareness of their
interdependence would be a priority if we are to
promote better allocation of resources to mitigate
both threats. In this regard, The International
Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons (ICAN) is a
quintessential illustration of how the amalgamation
of advocacy, diplomacy and education can address
the intertwining existential risks of nuclear weaponry
and climate change.
17 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
Enhanced education and public awareness are
pivotal, fostering a culture of responsibility and
proactive engagement in environmental conservation
and peacebuilding. Mobilising communities around
the globe to understand the interlinked nature of
these threats will empower societies to demand and
contribute to transformative actions. Grassroots
movements and community-based initiatives can
serve as catalysts for change, influencing policies and
promoting sustainable practices and peace.
Furthermore, enhancing global resilience to both
climate change and nuclear risks requires steadfast
international collaboration, bridging the divide
between developed and developing nations, and
fostering mutual trust and shared values. It requires
building capacities and fortifying institutions in
vulnerable regions, ensuring equitable access to
resources and opportunities, and mitigating the
risks of conflicts and tensions escalating to nuclear
proportions.
The interdependence between climate change
and nuclear weapons necessitates an overarching,
integrative approach, combining insights, expertise,
and resources from across the spectrum, to untangle
the complex web and ensure the sustainable
coexistence of all living beings on our planet.
Balancing immediate concerns with long-term
strategies is crucial for constructing a future where
both the environment and humanity can thrive in
harmony.

:DI
kcotsrettuhS
Shutterstock
ID:

18 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

Global
governance
reform

:DI
kcotsrettuhS
19 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CLIMATE CHANGE & ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
Towards global
JOYEETA GUPTA
constitutionalism
With globalization, we are increasingly facing global Moreover, we showed that already in 2019 we
catastrophic risks. How do we avoid these huge risks crossed 7 out of 8 boundaries and 86% of the
or make them manageable? How do we ensure that global population lives in areas where at least two
they do not exacerbate inequalities and injustices? boundaries have been crossed. These results go
Within the Earth Commission we have identified beyond the existing scholarly discussion on planetary
eight safe and just Earth System Boundaries. Earth boundaries because they also focus on issues of
System Boundaries differ from Planetary Boundaries justice. Beyond these social and ecological risks,
to the extent that they also cover local and regional there are risks associated with technologies (e.g.
boundaries. Three safe Earth System boundaries artificial intelligence) and natural events (e.g. an
had to be made more stringent as they were not asteroid hitting earth).
just enough – namely climate change, aerosols, and
nitrogen. For example, although 1.5C is the safe We use the safe and just boundary as the ceiling
boundary, we argue that already at 1°C at least tens of the corridor. We derive a floor by providing all
of millions of people are exposed to a range of life humans minimum access. The corridor that is
threatening consequences, and hence 1°C is the just created is continuously shrinking. Competition for
boundary. Since we have already crossed 1°C, we call accessing the shrinking resources and carbon sinks
on the global community to not miss the 1.5°C mark. is intensifying and worldwide social movements
This means that we must drastically reduce our that demand justice are growing.1 As the corridor
greenhouse gas emissions. Just boundaries minimise shrinks, the demands for justice will only
significant risks to humans. increase.
At the same time, the social Sustainable Development Many of these risks exacerbate inequalities and
Goals call on us to meet the minimum needs of multiply injustices. People (and countries) in
humans. We conducted a thought experiment to geographically vulnerable regions run the risk of
calculate what meeting these minimum needs (to death or displacement. Poor people have lower
water, food, energy and infrastructure) in 2019 would adaptive capacity to cope with or avoid major
mean. Our calculations show that this would lead to catastrophic risks. People, marginalized for whatever
crossing boundaries, unless we transform our global reason, are at the frontline of facing disasters.
society. Catastrophic risks multiply injustices.
20 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CLIMATE CHANGE & ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
At the same time, if we cannot adopt just and The concept of ESJ does not only take into account
inclusive policies, we may not be able to address the justice perspectives that are dominant in the global
root causes of global catastrophic risks. Displaced North but also those justice perspectives that other
people will seek to migrate elsewhere. Conflict over communities and marginalized groups subscribe
limited resources may lead to civil war. Marginalized to. Balancing between these justice elements is
and poor people will cut down the last tree or use the not easy and more scholarly work on this needs to
remaining fossil fuel in order to survive. Injustices be undertaken. ESJ promotes procedural justice –
may unleash catastrophic risks. access to information, decision-making, civic space
and courts, recognizing that poorer and marginalized
To break the spiral of injustices aggravating communities may need greater help to enable them
catastrophic risks, we need to address injustices. One to make use of procedural justice. However, we
way to do so is to call for Global Constitutionalism. note that access to information is clouded by social
Such Constitutionalism could build on the UN media and alternative facts; worldwide civic space is
Charter of 1945, the Rio Principles on Environment shrinking, and politicians are increasingly interfering
and Development of 1992, and the Sustainable with the independence of the judiciary.
Development Goals of 2015. In addition it could build
on the concept of Earth System Justice (ESJ). Nevertheless, national courts are increasingly calling
for changed behaviour of states and people, among
others, illustrated by the 2.431 climate litigation
cases that are reported since 2011 and exponentially
growing.2 In terms of substance, justice is about
access to minimum resources and the allocation of
the remaining resources, risks and responsibilities.
The discussion on minimum
resources is ongoing within
human rights resolutions and
the adoption of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs).
However, currently, none of
the social SDGs have been
met at a regional or global
level3 and ESJ requires
that we prioritise access.
Allocation that is undertaken
primarily through markets and
trade can be inequitable. The
current allocation of resources
and wealth is quite inequitable.

:DI
kcotsrettuhS
21 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CLIMATE CHANGE & ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
Operationalizing Earth System Justice calls for The proposed global Constitution would include
adopting (a) Earth system boundaries at local shared goals for all countries and peoples, common
to global level; (b) adopting rules to guarantee principles that guide actions including the
minimum access to basic resources. It also calls precautionary principles, clearly articulate in one
for (c) addressing the root causes of such risks (e.g. place the rights of all people and possible nature,
debates on ‘going beyond GDP’4 and introducing and responsibilities of states and people. This
excess profit and wealth taxes5); (d) promoting should provide a framework against which every
liability of companies and countries for risks caused new development can be tested. One that warns
to others (e.g. through the UNFCCC’s concept technology developers that they should internalize
of ‘loss and damage’); and (e) revisiting existing the possible damage that their technology could
allocation mechanisms (e.g. existing climate finance cause. One that warns business people to integrate
mechanisms already caused the most vulnerable the price of causing damage to others even if
countries to face a ‘low funding trap’6). in another country. A precedent is being set by
California suing the major oil and gas multinationals
Such ideas could form the basis of a new global for misleading the state on the negative side effects
constitution. This is especially necessary as global of greenhouse gases. Such a Constitution needs to
governance is fragmented. For example, different be drafted based on ideas in existing constitutions
environmental issues are dealt with by different in different parts of the world, and on newer ideas
treaties. Although coherence and comprehensiveness of how to live within Earth System Boundaries. The
is desirable, this is not possible at such a large scale. constitution needs to be supported by people in
Moreover, as knowledge multiplies and AI massively different continents in order to become legitimate.
increases the scope of development, the governance If a country could be persuaded to suggest that such
system will always be reactive and not proactive. And a constitution is needed within the UN General
that is why a global constitution is needed. Assembly, the highest UN body, and if other
countries agree, then possibly negotiations could
begin on such a constitution. Such a constitution
could lead to amendments to existing trade and
investment agreements. It could inspire nations to
update their national constitutions and it could be
implemented within existing or new international
courts, but also within national courts. In 1945, the
UN Charter was adopted. It is high time for us to
propose a second UN Constitution.
1. Since 2006 civil protests and demonstrations across the world have more than tripled (Ortiz, I. et al. (2022). World Protests. A Study of Key Protest. Issues in the 21st Century. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
185 P. Eyal, Nadav. Revolt. 2021. The Worldwide Uprising Against Globalization. London: Picador. 515 P.)
2. Reported in the climate change litigation database of the Sabin Center for Climate Change Law
3. Sachs, J.D., Lafortune, G., Fuller, G., Drumm, E. (2023). Implementing the SDG Stimulus. Sustainable Development Report 2023. Paris: SDSN, Dublin: Dublin University Press, 2023. 10.25546/102924
4. For example as advocated by Joseph E. Stiglitz, Jean-Paul Fitoussi and Martine Durand in their 2018 OECD report ‘Beyond GDP: Measuring what counts for economic and social performance’
5. In 2021 the tax justice network estimated that countries are losing a total of $483 billion in tax a year to global tax abuse committed by multinational corporations and wealthy individuals
6. Mofakkarul Islam, M.D. (2022). Distributive justice in global climate finance – Recipients’ climate vulnerability and the allocation of climate funds. Global Environmental Change, Vol. 73
22 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CLIMATE CHANGE & ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
A liveable future:
OWEN GAFFNEY
our window of opportunity
The window of opportunity for a livable future on Alarmingly, 2023 is likely to approach 1.5°C above
Earth is closing rapidly, according to the consensus pre-industrial levels. With El Nino growing stronger
view of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate in the Pacific, it is likely 2024 will be even hotter.
Change (IPCC) in 2022.1 The unrelenting heat of the As discussed elsewhere in this report (Rockström),
summer of 2023 gave a glimpse of what is to come. irreversible climate tipping points are now
As the United Nations Secretary General António dangerously close.2 We can say categorically that
Guterres rightly said, “humanity has opened the we are destabilizing the only ecological system in
gates of hell.” the solar system that we know for a fact can support
life and an advanced civilization. The stakes could
not be higher. We are gambling with the future of a
stable planet.
A world with less inequality with a Greatly reduced emissions with a Reduced social tension by 2030 if we take a
Giant Leap Giant Leap Giant Leap
Earth4All inequality index CO2 emissions from energy and industry Earth4All social tension index
(GtCO2/y)
Giant Leap Too little Too Late Giant Leap Too little Too Late Giant Leap Too little Too Late
0.8 1.60
2100 0.3 10
2080 0.4 12 1.50
0.6
2060 0.4 16
1.40
2040 10 29
0.4 2020 38 38 1.30 2020 2040
2000 31 31 1.20
0.5
1.10
1.00
2020 2040 2060 2080 2100 1980 2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100
Footnote: The Earth4All inequality index measures the relative size of workers’ Footnote: The Earth4All social tension index measures the inverse of people’s percieved rate
incomes of capital owners in the Earth4All model. of progress, defined as the rate of change in the Earth4All Wellbeing Index.
Source: Earth for All: A Survival Guide for Humanity (2022)

23 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CLIMATE CHANGE & ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
As the planetary crisis unfolds another crisis is Our second scenario, though, the Giant Leap,
unfolding in parallel. The world is reversing the shows that it is feasible to change direction. We
trend towards greater democracy. We are seeing a arrive at a remarkable conclusion: it is possible to
rise in populism and authoritarian leaders. Why? strengthen democracies while respecting planetary
Despite the fact that the world has never been so boundaries by guaranteeing economic security for
wealthy, too many people feel economically insecure. all, delivering clean energy security and providing
Deep economic insecurity coupled with weapons- food security. The key is to reduce social tensions
grade disinformation is fueling polarization and to build democratic support for strong governments
fragmentation in societies, just at the moment we need empowered to take long-term decisions for the
unity and strong democratic governments empowered benefit of the majority, not merely serving the
to take long-term decisions for the benefit of the interests of the high-emitting elites. This will require
majority of people. If we want to solve the climate institutional reform on a grand scale.
challenge, we need to solve the democratic crisis.
If we value democracy and a stable planet, we need
In 2022 my colleagues and I published Earth For All: five extraordinary transformations to build strong
a survival guide for humanity. Building on the work societies to face the risks this century: energy and
of The Limits To Growth, we explored two scenarios food are the two obvious ones. But also poverty,
this century.3 In our first scenario we assume today’s inequality and gender empowerment.
economic policies continue into the future. Current
policies to stabilize climate will be too little, too late. A starting point to build greater social cohesion is
The climate will likely cross irreversible tipping points greater wealth redistribution so that all in society
condemning future generations to unimaginable gain from the transformation, not fall further
hardship and setting the stage for conflict. On top of behind. This can be done through taxation reform
that, the economic system, geared to increase wealth and curtailing luxury carbon consumption of the
at the expense of workers’ incomes, will destroy social wealthiest 10% in society.
cohesion potentially making it more difficult for
democratic governments to take long term decisions We also propose a universal basic dividend – a fee
like reducing greenhouse gas emissions. and dividend approach to managing the global
commons based on the Alaska Permanent Fund. This
In this Too Little, Too Late scenario not only will we fund was constitutionally established in 1976 by a
face greater climate risks we will have less institutional Republican governor. It is funded by oil and mining
capacity to solve them. Already in Greece and the revenues and distributes a dividend of about $1600
United States, for example, people are losing faith every year to every citizen. It is a sizable annual sum
in the ability of the government to deal with climate for a family of four. All extraction and pollution of
chaos. With this vicious cycle established, the longer the global commons – from mining to greenhouse gas
we delay climate action, the more dysfunction we emissions and deforestation – should operate under
can expect in societies, and the more difficult it will a similar scheme. Such a universal basic dividend,
be to make even deeper emissions cuts. If we value and expanding to other common goods, will help
democracy, the foundation of human progress, delay is provide essential economic security during a period
a recipe for disaster. of disruptive transformation in the coming decades.
24 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CLIMATE CHANGE & ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
How can we create the political space for ideas A second priority at the international level is reform
like the universal basic dividend and tax reform? of the financial architecture. As Mia Mottley, the PM
The immediate priority is to build stronger cross- of Barbados has said, the IMF and World Bank were
party coalitions around long-term priorities. We devised by a small group of countries 70 years ago.
need more active governments prepared to invest They do not represent today’s reality. Mottley has led
in long-term industrial planning related to energy, a reform process that holds the promise of moving
transport, food systems, buildings and industry. One from billions to trillions of dollars of investment
promising mechanism for institutional reform is to in developing economies. Immediate priorities are
establish, at a national level, citizens’ assemblies to find solutions to reduce the risk of investment
on economic systems change. Citizens’ assemblies in developing countries. This can be done through
have been shown to help overcome entrenched restructuring and canceling debt and reforming
political polarization by providing a legitimate financial instruments like the Special Drawing Rights
way to deliberate at a national level outside of the to allow greater access by low-income countries.
constraints of political parties.
Finally, we need to establish an international
At the same time, to rapidly scale wind and solar in tax system to avoid the “race to the bottom”.
low-income and emerging economies we also need Multinational corporations and rich families must
to reform the international architecture. Three ideas pay a fair tax for a stable planet and stable global
could significantly move the dial. In 2021, a global economy. Today they are free riders.
citizens’ assembly on climate change was established
for the first time. Building on this work, the world The time for incremental action is over. We need
should convene a general global citizens’ assembly exponential change. We need social tipping points
that operates independently from the United to drive action. There are promising signs that we
Nations but in a way that is mutually reinforcing. are reaching a social tipping point, for example
The assembly could deliberate on issues relating movements like the Fridays For Future movement,
to the global commons, for example planetary Extinction Rebellion and Sunrise are gaining
boundaries, economic systems change and improved traction. This must gather momentum and, crucially,
international governance. translate into a powerful political narrative. What
we show with Earth For All is that the old political
narratives are outdated. It is feasible to build
resilience in societies, to reduce economic insecurity
and stabilize the planet. This is not a cost to bear.
This is an investment in our common future on
Earth.
1. Intergovernmental Panel On Climate Change Sixth Assessment Report (2022)
2. Armstrong-McKay et al (2022) Exceeding 1.5°C global warming could trigger multiple climate tipping points Science 
3. Sandrine Dixson-Declève, Owen Gaffney, Jayati Ghosh, Jørgen Randers, Johan Rockström and Per Espen Stoknes Earth For All: A Survival Guide for Humanity (2022), New Society Publishers
25 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CLIMATE CHANGE & ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
Incentives &
MAIARA FOLLY
partnerships:
multilateral governance
In recent years, the world has witnessed significant Despite the significant role that the demand
environmental setbacks. The globe’s large for agricultural goods and minerals from
emitters continue to fall short of meeting their environmentally sensitive areas plays in fueling
national greenhouse gas emissions reduction biodiversity loss and environmental crimes
targets as agreed upon in the Paris Agreement, worldwide, existing global governance institutions
while high deforestation rates continue to have failed to establish a comprehensive global
threaten biodiversity in several regions. Part framework to regulate supply chains. In the absence
of this environmental destruction is driven of multilaterally negotiated socio-environmental
by international trade, and specifically by an rules and requirements, an increasing number
increasing demand for commodities sourced from of countries have passed legislation with
endangered forests and biomes. extraterritorial applications to prevent the import of
products associated with deforestation and human
rights violations.
Shutterstock
ID:

26 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CLIMATE CHANGE & ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
Countries as mentioned above include the United Furthermore, these new legislations were met
Kingdom and the European Union. For instance, with significant political resistance from some
the UK Environment Act 2021 prohibits the of the world’s leading exporters of commodities.
importation of raw materials, the list of which is For instance, Brazil’s ambassador to the EU has
yet to be specified, if they are illegally sourced, in classified the EUDR as unilateral, punitive, and
accordance with the laws of the producing country. discriminatory.5 In addition, in , a
It is worth noting that an estimated one-third of all group of 17 developing nations from Latin America,
global deforestation is considered legal according to Africa and Asia6 sent a letter to the presidents of the
the laws of the countries where this kind of activity European Commission, the European Council and
occurs. On the other hand, the EU Deforestation the European Parliament expressing concerns related
Regulation (EUDR),1 which was approved in April to EUDR:
2023 and became effective on , require
companies to conduct strict due diligence to ensure
that EU imports of commodities – more specifically,
palm oil, cattle, soy, coffee, cacao, timber, and This regulation disregards local
products derived from them, such as beef, hides, circumstances and capabilities, national
leather, chocolate and charcoal – are free from any legislations, certification mechanisms, their
form of deforestation, regardless of whether this is efforts to fight deforestation, and multilateral
considered legal according to the laws of producing commitments of producer countries, including
countries.2 the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities. It also establishes an
It is important to acknowledge that the UK and the inherently discriminatory and punitive
EU, along with other countries that have recently unilateral benchmarking system that is
adopted their own due diligence regulations, such as potentially inconsistent with WTO [World Trade
France3 and Germany,4 establish different criteria for Organisation] obligations.7
cleaning up supply chains. For instance, they adopt
distinct timeframes, cover different commodities, at-
risk biomes and types of environmental and human
rights violations, in addition to establishing varying The letter also emphasised that small producers are
levels of due diligence and traceability requirements, especially vulnerable to the EUDR due to challenges
as well as distinct punishments in case of non- related to limited access to credit schemes, new
compliance. This means that even for those who are technologies, training and technical assistance. It
interested in complying, adapting to a broad set of states: “small producers may end up excluded from
requirements and standards – without, however, international value chains, not because they have
receiving adequate incentives or financial assistance deforested their land, but because of their inability to
– may prove to be costly and challenging, especially comply with the strict requirements imposed by the
for smallholder farmers and small-scale producers. EUDR.”
27 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CLIMATE CHANGE & ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
To summarise; the resistance from producing
nations demonstrates that in order for importing
countries’ legislation to fulfil their goal of achieving
deforestation-free and low-emission trade flows,
enhanced dialogue and international cooperation
between the two sides of the supply chains will be
essential.
To that end, to overcome political opposition arising
from sovereign concerns, while also promoting
compliance with their due diligence regulations,
major importers of commodities should firstly
prioritise efforts to assist producing countries in
implementing their own national traceability systems
and domestic policies aimed at preventing and
combating deforestation and other environmental
crimes.8 In addition, to tackle challenges related to
resource scarcity, especially for small-scale actors,
entities like the EU and the UK should offer positive
incentives and financial support aimed at assisting
smaller producers, such as cooperatives, rural
workers’ associations, local extractive communities,
and family farmers in complying with these external
legislations. Establishing new targeted partnerships Shutterstock ID: 2164280421
that recognise the varying levels of capabilities
between large corporations on the one hand and
small producers on the other, by providing specific In this regard, both commodity-producing and
support to the latter, could help prevent these less- importing countries must make use of existing
resourced actors from unintentionally facing further multilateral frameworks to incorporate socio-
exclusion from international markets. environmental criteria in any attempt to regulate
supply chains. This includes the ongoing process,
Secondly, achieving supply chains that are free led by the UN Human Rights Council,9 to negotiate
from deforestation and other environmental crimes an international instrument to regulate the human
is crucial to global efforts to tackle climate change rights impacts of transnational corporations
and halt and reverse biodiversity loss. Therefore, and other business enterprises. Ensuring that
progress in this area would represent an important environmental provisions are addressed during the
step in helping fulfil the goals of the United Nations negotiations of such a treaty would be consistent
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) with the UN General Assembly Resolution A/76/L.75,
and the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), approved by a landslide of 161 votes in 2022, which
as well as their Paris Agreement and the Kunming- recognised “the right to a clean, healthy and
Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework, respectively. sustainable environment as a human right.”10
28 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

Shutterstock ID: 2169675341
Finally, in addition to mainstreaming environmental To conclude, to be effective in terms of encouraging
concerns in ongoing discussions in other relevant broad acceptance and compliance, a multilateral
forums, the WTO, as the cornerstone of the process to agree on rules to foster fair and sustainable
multilateral rules-based global trading system, trade must be inclusive and multistakeholder-
should take the lead on efforts aimed at both oriented, involving leadership s from both
establishing rigorous socio-environmental criteria developing and developed countries. In other words,
and requirements to govern trade flows, as well it should not be restricted to governments, but
as setting provisions to avoid the misuse of such also allow for the meaningful participation of civil
measures for protectionist ends. This would help society, private sector actors, and those who are both
build more sustainable global supply chains, at the forefront of environmental protection and
while also taking into account different national most affected by biodiversity loss linked to trade,
circumstances and capabilities, and ensuring notably indigenous peoples, traditional and local
consistency with the WTO’s own rules of open, fair communities.
and undistorted trade between nations.
1. Read more on: Parliament adopts new law to fight global deforestation. European Parliament News, 19 Apr 2023. Available on: 
parliament-adopts-new-law-to-fight-global-deforestation#:~:text=The%20deal%20with%20EU%20countries,5. Accessed on: 13 Apr 2023.
2. This law is based on the 2013 EU Timber Regulation (EUTR). Available on: Accessed on: 11
Apr 2023.
3. French law on the duty of vigilance of both parent companies and subcontracted companies. Available on: Accessed on: 27
Apr 2023.
4. Das Lieferkettengesetz. Available on: Accessed on: 11 .
5. How partnerships complement the EU Deforestation Regulation. Available at: 
source=Fern+Global+List&utm_campaign=47b463e1d0-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_4_10_2019_9_12_COPY_01&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_a3733965c2-47b463e1d0-380382257. Accessed on: 10 Jul 2023
6. The letter was sent by Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Indonesia, Ivory Coast, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Paraguay, Peru, and Thailand.
7. Letter from developing countries to European authorities regarding the entry into force of the European Union’s so-called “anti-deforestation law”. Available at: 
atendimento/imprensa/notas-a-imprensa/carta-de-paises-em-desenvolvimento-a-autoridades-europeias-sobre-a-entrada-em-vigor-da-chamada-201clei-antidesmatamento201d-da-uniao-europeia
8. Folly, Maiara and Closs Marília (2023). “Lula’s New Government: Prospects for Brazilian Foreign Policy and Relations with the European Union”. Plataforma CIPÓ. Available at: 
publications/policy-briefbrazilian-foreign-policy-and-the-relations-with-the-eu/
9. In 2014, the Human Rights Council adopted resolution 26/9 by which it decided “to establish an open-ended intergovernmental working group on transnational corporations and other business
enterprises with respect to human rights, whose mandate shall be to elaborate an international legally binding instrument to regulate, in international human rights law, the activities of transnational
corporations and other business enterprises.” The open-ended intergovernmental working group (OEIGWG) has had eight sessions so far and its ninth session took place 23-27 . Further
information about this process can be found at: 
10. United Nations (2022). With 161 Votes in Favour, 8 Abstentions, General Assembly Adopts Landmark Resolution Recognizing Clean, Healthy, Sustainable Environment as Human Right. Available at: https://
press.un.org/en/2022/ga12437.doc.htm#:~:text=With%20161%20votes%20in%20favour%20and%208%20abstentions%2C%20the%20General,ensure%20that%20principle%20is%20upheld.
29 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CLIMATE CHANGE & ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
Climate, conflict &
Author Edited by
TOM ELLISON ERIN SIKORSKY
ecological:
governance of overlapping risks
Averting catastrophic climate change is critical for WHAT IS KNOWN
planetary security, entailing increased clean energy Climate risks are part of a broader triad of ecological
technology deployment, critical minerals mining, collapse and conflict risks. If poorly executed, some
and conservation. If poorly executed, however, these energy transition efforts could exacerbate parts of
actions can exacerbate other global risks -namely the ecological crisis, of which climate change is one
ecological collapse and conflict -requiring stronger part. Mining is energy and water intensive and drives
and more integrated institutions and governance. deforestation and pollution, but the International
Energy Agency projects demand for key minerals
WHAT IS AT STAKE will quadruple by
With the world on pace to far exceed 1.5°C of 2040 in a scenario
warming, failure to quickly address catastrophic achieving the
climate change entails unacceptable risk to Paris Agreement.
human and global security, as previewed Meanwhile,
by the summer’s extremes. Avoiding deployment of
such risks means rapidly deploying some renewables
technologies like solar and at scale could
wind energy, long-distance impact biodiverse
t
v
m
c
r
o
e
a
i
h
b
n
n
a
i
e
s
c
l
m
r
t
le
a
,
i
s
l
n
s
s
.
i
s
I
c
a
i
t
k
n
o
m
e
n
d
l
e
,
l
m
i
a
a
n
n
n
e
e
t
s
d
s
a
,
m
l
c
s
a
o
i
n
l
p
n
i
d
k
p
in
e
e
e
g
r
l
l
e
i
m
t
t
c
o
h
t
o
i
r
u
r
ic
e
m , Shutterstock
ID:
-2280507751
just
e
v
n
i
d
a
t
a
g
h
n
r
a
e
g
e
t
e
e
c
h
n
r
o
u
e
h
s
d
m
y
o
s
E
u
a
t
s
a
n
e
e
r
m
p
t
g
h
r
s
a
e
’
.
s
s
s
S
e
s
s
c
s
y
u
i
,
s
e
r
b
t
e
n
e
u
s
t
m
t
i
h
s
a
s
a
t
l
s
,
v
s
n
e
w
o
o
a
t
r n
produce them. And it means through land and water use, chemical
addressing roughly 20 per cent pollution, and biodiversity loss. The UN’s
of greenhouse gas emissions from land use by Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on
transforming agricultural systems and restoring Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) reports
carbon sinks like rainforests in the Amazon and that ecosystems critical for human wellbeing are
Congo River Basins. deteriorating rapidly worldwide.
30 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CLIMATE CHANGE & ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
Meanwhile, uncoordinated climate change or KEY FACTORS AFFECTING RISK LEVELS
ecological preservation policies could also prompt Several factors could intensify or alleviate these
communal, national, and international tensions. interlocking risks, including the degree of policy
Scientists estimate that stabilising ecosystems coordination across sectors, the pace of technological
and climate change will require protecting 50 innovation, and uncertainties in complex human and
per cent of the Earth’s surface by 2030. This natural systems. More holistic policy coordination
portends intensified land-use conflicts over energy across siloed national and global institutions can
infrastructure, conservation, and the rights of drive action toward win-win policies, like restoration
Indigenous communities (who steward many of environments that preserve ecosystems, store
biodiverse ecosystems and are understandably carbon, and improve social cohesion. The advent
sceptical of potential land grabs). Expanding mining or absence of new technologies like more efficient
risks deepening protests and state repression of and climate resilient crops, or less mineral-intensive
environmental activism, bringing conflict risks batteries, will shape possible tradeoffs between
even among “winners” of the energy transition. In ecosystem conservation and climate policy. And
Peru last year, disputes over copper mining revenue finally, unpredictability in compounding and
contributed to a violent constitutional crisis, while cascading impacts between Earth systems and the
India and Iran are pursuing lithium deposits that risk human underpinnings of global security introduces
tensions with local communities and downstream additional uncertainty.
nations. Finally, as the U.S. intelligence community
has warned, the distribution of obligations for GLOBAL GOVERNANCE AND KEY GAPS
climate action and finance is fueling geopolitical Governance of the nexus of these risks is fragmented
tension, encompassing U.S.-China sniping over across and within the patchwork of institutions
emissions, vulnerable countries’ dissatisfaction over focused on climate change, ecosystem preservation,
inadequate climate aid, objections to E.U. carbon and conflict.
tariffs, or tensions over nature-friendly World Bank
and IMF reforms.
Shutterstock ID: 2245903043
31 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CLIMATE CHANGE & ECOLOGICAL COLLAPSE
On climate, the UN Framework Convention on Climate change risks planetary security, and these
Climate Change (UNFCCC) has made progress concerns should not preempt urgent climate action.
bending emissions and future warming down Rather, global governance must strengthen and
from the worst case. But the Paris Agreement’s unify to successfully manage this nexus of climate,
system of voluntary pledges, transparency, and ecological, and conflict risks.
international peer pressure is increasingly strained
amid inadequate financing and Global North-South
disputes. Ecological preservation is even more
nascent. Last year, parties to the UN Convention 1. First, scientific assessments of climate
on Biological Diversity (CBD) agreed to ambitious change and biodiversity should be
goals, including conserving 30 per cent of the integrated across the IPCC and the IPBES,
Earth’s surface by 2030. However, the preceding to address key tensions and co-benefits
targets were unmet, and countries have largely across risk areas. Likewise, the UNFCCC
not implemented policies toward these goals or and CBD processes should better unify
apportioned the conservation of critical ecosystems their global temperature and conservation
which are unevenly distributed globally. On the key targets.
issue of responsible mining, industry consortiums
and third-party verification services are voluntary, 2. Second, security and geopolitical
while governmental coalitions like the U.S. State institutions like the UN Security Council,
Department’s Energy Resource Governance Initiative NATO, and the G20 should more
and Minerals Security Partnership are ad hoc and proactively address the domestic and
disconnected from global targets. Meanwhile on international conflict risks around
international security, China’s rise and Russia’s war critical minerals. This would include
in Ukraine are amplifying a fragmentation of global comprehensive risk assessments and
geopolitics and a proliferation of competing regional proactive diplomatic engagement in
alliances. potential hotspots.
Governance across siloes is even more challenging. 3. Finally, global energy and climate
Even climate and biodiversity experts are only policymakers need a more robust global
beginning to systematically coordinate, with UN governance regime for mining that includes
science panels on each topic issuing their first joint more uniform and enforceable standards
report in 2021, and no unified process for policy to minimise local harm and potential
making. Meanwhile, while the U.S and NATO have security repercussions by upholding
increased focus on the security implications of community consent, benefits sharing, and
climate change, progress is hostage to U.S. political human rights protection. Even still, parallel
swings; resourcing is falling short; ecological policies to minimise critical minerals
considerations are poorly integrated; and consensus demand growth, such as increased battery
in the UN Security Council is lacking. recycling, more public transport, and
investment in less minerals-intensive
battery technology, should be prioritised to
minimise the unavoidable costs of mining
for ecological and conflict risk.
32 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
New Agenda for Peace:
RICHARD GOWAN
a spotlight on
catastrophic risks
In , United Nations Secretary-General Guterres has made strong statements about all these
António Guterres released A New Agenda for Peace, risks in the past. He has acknowledged that the UN as
with a focus on managing catastrophic risks through an institution cannot resolve these challenges alone.
multilateral diplomacy. The New Agenda is one of Instead, the New Agenda calls for the organisation’s
almost a dozen policy briefs, covering issues members to invest in diplomatic processes to
from education to outer space, that deal with each category of risk, although it
Guterres has released in advance of a does so case-by-case, with differing levels
“Summit of the Future” scheduled for of detail and conviction.
. The UN chief wants
leaders to use this event to agree on The paper puts the need to “eliminate
reforms to the international system nuclear weapons” front and centre as its
to address both geopolitical shifts first policy recommendation. But it has
and technologies such as Artificial little new to say on how states can achieve
Intelligence (AI). this goal, which - as it recognises - is rooted
in the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
While the New Agenda is just one of the preparatory While declaring that “risk reduction does not suffice
documents for the summit, it covers a wide range when the survival of humanity is at stake,” the paper
of security issues. Some of these are traditional UN acknowledges the short-term need for more limited
fare, such as blue helmet peacekeeping. But the steps, like major power dialogues on
paper pays particular attention to catastrophic risks, strategic stability.
including those of nuclear weapons, climate change,
and the dangers associated with technological
innovation.
Shutterstock
ID:

Image:
Flickr
33 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
By contrast, the New Agenda goes into some detail on The most intricate part of the paper, however,
the “interlinkages between climate, peace and security.” concerns new technologies. This covers cyberspace,
This is a bold move, given Russia’s decision to veto a conflict in outer space, and Lethal Autonomous
Security Council resolution on climate and security in Weapons Systems (LAWS). While expressing
. Guterres nonetheless urges the Council concerns over all these, it also nods to the potential
to approach the problem “systematically”, and also of AI and evolving biotechnologies to lead to
proposes the creation of an expert group linked to the global catastrophes. The New Agenda does not
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) echo those tech leaders who have warned that
to study climate action, resilience and peacebuilding. AI may be an existential threat to humanity, but
He suggests the creation of regional UN hubs to help diplomatically suggests that its “potential for harm
analyse climate-related security risks and assist is . . . unpredictable.” It is more explicit that future
governments in responding to them. (Throughout the biotechnologies could, in the wrong hands, “cause
New Agenda, Guterres is at pains to emphasise that the death and disruption on a global scale.”
UN exists to serve member states, not direct them).
Despite Russia’s opposition, many UN members have In pointing to these risks, Guterres is not entering
recently been pushing in a similar direction - both in entirely new terrain for the UN. Kofi Annan, Secretary-
the Security Council and at UN climate summits - so General from 1997-2006, raised similar concerns
this is an area where the Secretary-General has a fair about biotechnology almost 20 years ago. Although
chance of gaining traction. AI is a more novel challenge, UN members including
Singapore and the United Kingdom have recently raised
it in the General Assembly and Security Council.
Yet, as the New Agenda repeatedly emphasises, the
international structures for governing most fast-emerging
technologies are either weak (as in the case of the
Biological Weapons Convention) or simply non-existent.
In contrast to the nuclear field - where Guterres can appeal
to existing frameworks such as the Non Proliferation
Treaty - the New Agenda sets out a menu of new
mechanisms for regulating these innovations, including:
! An “independent multilateral accountability
mechanism” that could investigate malicious
use of cyberspace by states;
! A “legally binding instrument” barring LAWS
operating without human control;
! A new institution, potentially modeled on
the International Atomic Energy Agency,
designed to “mitigate the peace and security
risks of artificial intelligence”.

:DI
kcotsrettuhS
34 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
Through these proposals, as in its suggestions New York-based diplomats are increasingly open
relating to climate security, the New Agenda does a to the idea of making AI a major focus for next
useful job mapping out what a multilateral security year’s summit. However, as the International Crisis
system with a greater focus on both catastrophic Group has cautioned, it is improbable that UN
risks and emerging technologies could look like. members will move quickly to agree new legally
This is at least an important thought experiment. binding arrangements or institutions to manage
Yet implementing many of the paper’s proposals AI, LAWS or biotechnology. Guterres may be
will be a hard task. able to persuade a critical mass of UN members -
including developing countries who worry about
being cut out of scientific advances - to support
new UN-based processes to discuss how to manage
some of these issues. Rather than being a one-off
opportunity to define the rules of the road about
the risks associated with new technologies, the
Summit of the Future may be an opportunity
to start a new round of conversations about the
multilateral governance of evolving global risks.
Discussions on the Summit of the Future were
difficult throughout 2023. The UN’s members
have disagreed on the scope of the summit, and
especially which peace and security issues it
should prioritise. China has questioned whether
the time is ripe to discuss the international
security architecture at all, given the ongoing
war between Russia and Ukraine. Russia itself
has repeatedly criticised Guterres for, in its view,
wading into nuclear security issues that lie beyond
his purview. The U.S. has been more supportive
of the New Agenda initiative, but Washington will
be increasingly distracted by domestic electoral
politics prior to the summit.
These factors make it unlikely that the summit will
deliver breakthroughs on nuclear issues. It is more
probable that UN members will pick up on at least
some of the ideas about climate security in the New
Agenda, even if Russia will remain an obstacle in
the Security Council for the foreseeable future. The
biggest question mark hanging over the summit is
whether the Secretary-General can persuade states
Shutterstock ID: 724398763
to at least consider his ideas on new technologies.
35 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
Bridging the global
BEATRICE FIHN
governance gap for
nuclear weapons
THE GOVERNANCE GAP THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY AS THE FORUM
Nuclear weapons cause widespread devastation The UNGA has the potential to become a powerful
and long-lasting environmental consequences, platform for decisions that protect the world’s
inflicting harm on every country on Earth. Despite interests, as it forces even the richest and largest
such universal impact, discussions and solutions on states to engage all other states in the discussions,
nuclear weapons have traditionally centred around no matter what size. This forum has largely been
the nine nuclear-armed states, leaving the majority of underutilised due to its non-binding decisions, but is
the global community largely voiceless. seeing a rise in importance.
Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine and its threats to When Russia used its veto to stop the UN Security
use nuclear weapons have reminded people about Council adopting a resolution demanding the
these dangers. Russia’s nuclear weapons are not just withdrawal of Russian forces from Ukraine, the text
threatening Ukraine, it threatens all states and people was immediately brought to the UNGA for adoption.
around the world. A threat to use nuclear weapons The resolution called “Aggression against Ukraine”
against one country is, in essence, a threat against all. (ES-11/1) was adopted with overwhelming majority
and while not legally binding, it formed the basis of
The consequences of a nuclear war makes it clear that a global action against Russia’s invasion by a diverse
decisions about the use of nuclear weapons cannot coalition of states, and reinforced that the invasion
rest solely with a few individual leaders. Every was a breach of international norms and principles.
country has a stake in preventing such a catastrophe,
therefore collective decision-making is essential. So This moral and political pressure influences public
instead of just waiting for nuclear armed states to opinion, diplomatic efforts, and non-coercive
one day give up their weapons, we must use existing measures against a violator of international law.
platforms and mechanisms, notably forums like the While it is not the first time we have seen limitations
United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) and tools of the Security Council when dealing with crises
like the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons involving one of its veto-wielding members, this
(TPNW), as a modern and realistic approach to time the UNGA was utilised as a check on the most
increase global governance over nuclear weapons. powerful states.
36 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
As the five permanent members of the Security 2. This diversity has led to a creative
Council possess nuclear weapons, it cannot be implementation process and builds a global
an effective body to stop nuclear war and achieve responsibility for the treaty’s success, leading
nuclear disarmament. Instead, global governance to impact on non-state parties too. Local
on nuclear weapons needs to be built on forums governments such as cities and regional
involving all states such as the General Assembly. authorities have declared support for it,
financial institutions are implementing it by
THE TREATY ON THE PROHIBITION OF NUCLEAR divesting from nuclear weapons producing
WEAPONS (TNPW) AS THE TOOL companies, the treaty has appointed a
The TPNW is an example of how one can address the scientific and technical advisory board of
global governance gap on nuclear weapons. Created academics, scientists and civil society actors
through a UNGA process, this treaty represents a to help support the implementation, and
groundbreaking shift in how the world discusses humanitarian organisations are starting to
and acts on nuclear disarmament. By mobilizing implement the obligations to provide victim
countries impacted by both nuclear weapons use and assistance and environmental remediation.
threat of use, as well as leveraging the democratic
structures of the United Nations, the TPNW 3. The TPNW creates a normative effect by
embraces modern principles of governance. It’s a delegitimising and stigmatising nuclear
comprehensive ban on nuclear weapons, including weapons. Its influence has been evident in
their use, threats of use, possession, testing, countering nuclear threats, such as Russia’s
stationing, and other activities. Although nuclear- recent threats to use nuclear weapons. The
armed states have not yet signed the treaty, it is a TPNW states parties adopted the Vienna
creative and proactive approach to shift global views Declaration in – the strongest
on nuclear weapons and enable global governance multilateral condemnation of threats to use
over these weapons in three ways. nuclear weapons to date. This marked the
start of a series of condemnation of such
1. The TPNW process encourages a global threats to use nuclear weapons, where global
oversight over nuclear weapons by engaging leaders from non-signatories, including
more stakeholders and a diverse set of actors Germany, China, India and NATO’s Secretary
beyond the nuclear armed and nuclear allied General, issued statements condemning,
governments. During the negotiations of culminating in a statement by the G20 in Bali
the treaty, countries from the global south, in , stating that threats to use
communities impacted by nuclear weapons nuclear weapons was “inadmissible”. While
testing or use, youth, humanitarian relief of course such a statement does not fully
organisations and a broad coalition of eliminate the risk of use, US state department
academics, scientists, and other civil society officials and German Chancellor Scholtz
actors took leadership roles and engaged publicly said that such statements had an
deeply in the negotiations. impact on Russia and led to its leadership
toning down such threats.
37 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

Despite this progress, the risk of
nuclear weapons use still persists.
But by strengthening the use of
the UN General Assembly and the
TPNW as tools, we can develop
creative measures to enforce
global norms and governance
over nuclear weapons, even in the
nuclear armed states.
CONCLUSION
The threat of nuclear weapons
is a pressing issue that affects
all nations and people on Earth.
Working through global forums
like the UNGA and with tools
like the TPNW, we can create a
modern approach to address this
challenge. Through collective
decision-making and norm
entrepreneurship, everyone can
contribute to the growing norm
against nuclear weapons, reduce
the risk of their use, and pave
the way for a safer world. Urgent
steps include supporting the
TPNW, developing and adhering
to norms against nuclear weapons,
and engaging a broad range
of stakeholders in the effort to
stop nuclear weapons. In this
interconnected world, a modern
21st-century global governance
system for nuclear weapons
is not only necessary but also
achievable.
Shutterstock
ID:

38 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
Nuclear weapons in an era
DR. WILFRED WAN
of strategic complexity
In , Vladimir Putin announced his Concerns about the impact of strategic
decision to suspend the New Strategic Arms complexity on the nuclear sphere are not
Reduction Treaty (New START), the last vestige unprecedented. Indeed, the possibility of
of nuclear arms control between Russia and the conventional confrontation escalating to nuclear
United States, and the last agreement that set use fueled the development of the crisis-prevention
verifiable limits on the size and composition of and management toolkit between the Soviet Union
the largest nuclear arsenals in the world. Already and United States five decades ago. Even in the
in recent years, both parties had suggested the New START context, some experts link recent
need to update New START. In discussing developments to the 2002 US withdrawal from the
a potential follow-on framework, Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which removed
they seemed to consider all limits in place on the deployment
looking beyond a Cold War- of missile defense systems, and
legacy approach centered - it could be argued—restored
on numerical parity incentives to engage in offensive
of stockpiles. Russia arms racing. Yet the scale of
pushed for the inclusion technological advancement
of US conventional in the contemporary
capabilities and security environment
missile defense1; the outstrips that of periods
US called to address past, upending longstanding
new Russian nuclear structures and underlying
weapons systems as well assumptions, and heralding
as non-strategic nuclear a “deeply challenging period
weapons, and expressed in the management of strategic
its desire to include China stability and global order involving
in talks.2 It was apparent that both nuclear and non-nuclear
the parameters of nuclear arms dangers.”3 Concepts of ‘multi-domain’
control had to expand. Reflecting and ‘integrated’ deterrence appear regularly
this, in their now-paused bilateral strategic in national security strategies and nuclear doctrines;
stability dialogue, Russia and the United States for numerous states, cyber and outer space constitute
established working groups to explore ‘Principles de facto if not de jure new domains of military
and Objectives for Future Arms Control’ and operation, with nuclear response considered in
‘Capabilities and Actions with Strategic Effects.’ relation to those threats.4
Shutterstock ID: 1364464949
39 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
HOW CAN MULTILATERAL GOVERNANCE ! Beyond scope, stakeholders should look
EFFECTIVELY REFLECT THIS COMPLEX AND to expand governance modalities. It is
MORE UNSETTLED REALITY? futile to discuss the future of arms control
Nuclear weapons governance, including arms without acknowledging that relevant
control, exists in an increasingly interconnected capabilities might not have traditional
strategic space in which armament dynamics are ‘arms’ to control (as in the cyber domain)
contingent upon developments across capabilities or are frequently dual-use, with civilian as
and domains, and in which risk of nuclear use well as military applications (as with outer
scenarios are driven by a more intricate range of space systems). Exploring complexity is
routes for escalation. Ensuring nuclear weapons a requisite towards the longer-term goal
are never used again, while reinvigorating arms of negotiating agreements that account
control and disarmament efforts, requires rethinking for different types of capabilities and
the existing framework and its constituent parts. impose new forms of restraint to stand
Doing so, fundamentally, means situating nuclear alongside traditional legally-binding and
capabilities in the evolving strategic context. verifiable instruments. These may centre
on codes of conduct, behavioural norms,
! Stakeholders need to reconsider their or political agreements, for instance that
assumptions about means of achieving further bound situations in which nuclear
strategic stability. There is a need for national weapons are considered for use. A near-term
security apparatuses to holistically assess the move is for stakeholders to de-silo existing
strategic and military utility of nuclear and conversations. States and civil society
non-nuclear capabilities in development, actors could tease out what human nuclear
while at the same time considering how decision-making means in the dialogue
their adversaries may perceive these. This around artificial intelligence, building on the
internal evaluation should inform joint 2023 US Political Declaration on Responsible
explorations of concerns, as proposed in Military Use of Artificial Intelligence and
the aforementioned Russia-US strategic Autonomy. They can also extend the work of
stability dialogue working group, and the the UN processes on cyberspace, diving into
systematic untangling of destabilising effects which nuclear-adjacent systems constitute
incurred by the developments of individual critical infrastructure to shield from cyber
capabilities. Full resumption of the high-level interference.
dialogue among the permanent five members
of the UN Security Council presents a key
step in this process.
40 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
! More effective nuclear governance also The nature of the challenge, and the reality of
requires states to facilitate more inclusive strategic complexity, demands a more dynamic and
dialogue, including by breaking down innovative approach. Smaller groups of like-minded
traditional divisions. This includes engaging states can implement confidence-building measures
nuclear-armed states outside the purview centred on transparency and information exchange
of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty – around relevant strategic technologies, and can
India, Pakistan …etc . Stockpile safety and devise benchmarks for reducing associated risks.
security have presented past opportunities Such pragmatic action can provide much-needed
for cooperation; such issues take on added victories to build on. Ultimately however, nuclear
urgency given convergence effects linked weapons governance must take on a more expansive
to climate change. Nuclear-armed states and inclusive form—centred not only on those who
should also meaningfully engage non- possess these specific capabilities but engaging
nuclear weapon states, especially those at those involved in developments that can impact on
the forefront of developments in strategic them, and those who will be impacted by their use.
capabilities and/or involved in nuclear- Doing so can help to ensure these structures can still
sharing arrangements. The ongoing war address nuclear risks today while facilitating progress
in Ukraine is a stark reminder of potential towards a world free of nuclear weapons.
escalation dynamics linked to these. The
dangers posed to the European continent
by non-strategic nuclear weapons, which
remain outside formal arms control
agreements, will grow, with the purported
stationing of Russian warheads in Belarus,
and Poland pushing to host US nuclear
weapons on its territory. For now, states can
look to more actively involve civil society
and industry as means to track relevant
developments in science and technology,
as the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons has done by establishing a
Shutterstock ID: 2329478503
Scientific Advisory Board.
1. Russia Sees ‘No Prospects’ For Extending Nuclear Pact With U.S., RadioFreeEurope/Radio Liberty, 14 , 
u-s-/30892261.html.
2. Remarks by Ambassador Bonnie Jenkins, ‘Priorities Regarding the New and Emerging Challenges to International Security’, US Department of State, 26 , 
regarding-the-new-and-emerging-challenges-to-international-security/; Barnes, J.E., and D.E. Sanger, ‘U.S. Will Try to Bring China Into Arms Control Talks’, New York Times, 2 , 
com/2023/06/02/us/politics/china-arms-control-nuclear-weapons.html.
3. Futter, A., & Zala, B. (2021). ‘Strategic Non-Nuclear Weapons and the Onset of a Third Nuclear Age.’ European Journal of International Security, 6(3), 257-277.
4. Lindsay, J.R. and E. Gartzke, eds. 2019. Cross-Domain Deterrence: Strategy in an Era of Complexity. Oxford University Press.
41 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

UN-REFORMS, CIVIL SOCIETY
Unmuting civil
Author Author
LYSA JOHN MANDEEP S
TIWANA
society & applying
people-centred approaches
The United Nations (UN) was conceived as a ground- Yet, in the face of multiple intersecting crises,
breaking achievement in global cooperation and including the waging of war by powerful states,
people-centred multilateralism. Born out of the ashes egregious human rights violations, eye-watering
of the Second World War, its Charter outlines four inequality and runaway climate change, the UN
lofty aspirations in the name of ‘We the Peoples’. appears to be hamstrung by great power rivalries and
These are to save succeeding generations from the bureaucratic ways of working with a predisposition
scourge of war; reaffirm faith in fundamental human to ‘manage’ crises rather than avert them through
rights, dignity and equality; establish conditions for preemptive diplomacy and addressing root causes of
justice under international law; and promote social festering global challenges.
progress and better standards of living.
In 2023, CIVICUS’ State of
Civil Society Report lamented
that the international system
appeared increasingly unfit
for purpose when it came
to tackling challenges that
transcend national borders. In
fact, the post-Second World War
consensus to seek solutions to
global challenges through the UN
appears to be at breaking point.
At the time of writing hostilities
are raging in Israel-Palestine,
Ukraine, Sudan and the Sahel
region even as millions of people
continue to reel from the negative
consequences of protracted
conflicts and oppression in
Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Syria, Yemen and
elsewhere.

:DI
kcotsrettuhS
42 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

UN-REFORMS, CIVIL SOCIETY
With their emphasis on social cohesion and leaving Civil society brings an incredible amount of energy to
‘no one behind’ civil society organisations can help the UN to advance ambitious commitments. Without
strengthen peacebuilding and democratisation full civil society participation, global governance
efforts as experiences from ending apartheid institutions are sure to keep falling short of their
in South Africa and the civil war in Liberia potential. It’s no surprise that the Sustainable
attest. Notably, civil society groups bring gender Development Goals which form part of Agenda 2030
perspectives and the needs of excluded populations – arguably the greatest human endeavour to create
into decision making. However, to enable this they peaceful, just, equal and sustainable societies – are
need a seat at the table and decision makers who seriously off track.
believe in the value of civil society.
According to the UN Secretary General’s 2023
But global civic space conditions which enable progress report just 15% of the goals are on track while
the participation of civil society are hugely 30% have regressed or not seen any progress since
challenging. According to the CIVICUS Monitor – 2015 when the goals were put in place. Indeed, it’s no
a participatory research platform that measures secret that civil society organisations contribute to
global civic space conditions – 85% of the world’s innovations in public policy, deliver essential services
population live in countries with serious space to the most excluded, and importantly help ensure
restrictions where active citizens and civil society transparency, accountability and participation. But
organisations find it incredibly hard to organise, they are increasingly under attack for uncovering
speak out or seek transformation of social, corruption and serious human rights abuses.
economic and political structures.
Tellingly, the much anticipated SDG Summit during
These trends are also playing out at the UN where the this year’s UN General Assembly session yielded very
latest report on intimidation and reprisals against little in terms of substantive commitments towards
individuals and groups for cooperating with UN the UN Secretary General’s SDG Stimulus Plan urging
bodies and mechanisms lists as many as 40 countries an annual injection of USD 500 billion to accelerate
as being responsible for these acts. Moreover, many progress. It is our firm belief that many of the
of the UN’s state-centred procedures and exclusive challenges the UN is grappling with can be addressed
decision-making spaces dominated by government through better and more robust participation of civil
representatives sit at odds with the people-centred society. But for this to happen, the UN has to embrace
aspirations of the UN Charter. In times when civil society engagement as a priority.
powerful states are promoting slippery notions
such as ‘cultural relativism’ and ‘development We outline below five areas for action identified
with national characteristics’ to undermine by the Unmute Civil Society initiative supported
the universality of human rights, civil society’s by 52 states and over three hundred civil society
contributions assume even greater significance organisations to make the UN more people-centred in
both to expose the double standards that bedevil the spirit of ‘We the Peoples.’
international relations and to overcome north-south
dichotomies.
43 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

First, the UN should maximise opportunities to take Fourth, the value of civil society participation
advantage of information communications tools (ICT) should be celebrated through the adoption of a Civil
to broaden participation of a wide range of people Society Action Day as occasion to affirm the UN’s
and civil society organisations from across the world. commitment to enabling civil society participation
Hybrid meeting formats that harness digital tools can and drive meaningful debate on improvements.
enable a broad range of stakeholders to access key
policy and decision-making spaces at the UN. Fifth, the UN should urgently appoint a People’s
or Civil Society Envoy to drive best practices on
Second, efforts must be made to narrow digital civil society participation across the UN, address
divides that exist across the global North and South. asymmetries on how UN forums, agencies and offices
Moreover, investments in digital infrastructures engage civil society, ensure participation of a diverse
and digital democracy initiatives should be mindful range of civil society stakeholders in the UN’s work
of disparities that exist across gender, rural-urban, and to proactively drive the UN’s outreach to citizens
economic and minority status, class and other and civil society groups across the world.
intersections of discrimination.
UN Secretary General Guterres has urged ambition
Third, meaningful participation should be prioritised to transform the world to bring more justice and
by amending procedures and practices at the UN to equality to international institutions. As we gear up
allow for ample time and opportunity for civil society for the much anticipated ‘Summit for the Future’ in
representatives to provide inputs on outcomes 2024, meaningful civil society engagement will be
documents, attend key meetings and participate as crucial to turn these words to action.
equal stakeholders in crucial negotiations.
Shutterstock
ID:

44 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

UN-REFORMS, CIVIL SOCIETY
ADAM DAY STEFAN LÖFVEN DAVID PASSARELLI
Preparing
for future shocks:
opportunities and
responsibilities
The growing interest in global catastrophic risks Those most exposed to these global threats live in the
reflects an unease with the trajectory of human developing world. The fact that the parts of the world
activity on this planet. Improvements in scientific least prepared to tackle future threats are also home
survey, evaluation, and foresight methodologies to the majority of the world’s population should
reveal that we are crossing multiple planetary make clear the urgency of this problem: to protect the
tipping points simultaneously and will likely cross majority of the world’s peoples, we need to rebalance
many more soon.1 As we write this, the world is what is today a lopsided investment in prevention
registering peaks in global warming that scientific capacities.
models predicted were still years away. These rapid
environmental shifts are a potent threat to human The COVID-19 pandemic stands as a stark reminder
civilization. of this underinvestment and the uneven impacts
of global shocks. The international community was
Layered on this risk landscape are new threats arising not prepared to weather a global health crisis in
from technological innovation, and a return to 2019, but the developing world was least prepared;
nuclear belligerence. In , the United Nations spending on public health was seven times higher
Security Council met to discuss the implications of in high-income countries. The pandemic led to
artificial intelligence for the future of global peace. sharp increases in public spending and borrowing,
The meeting highlighted that in both the near and pushing many vulnerable countries to the brink
long term, AI will carry a risk of human extinction.2 of debt distress with no working global platform
One month later, the US Department of Defense to support debt restructuring. To this day, most of
warned of an “unprecedented number of complex Africa is missing a reliable and robust mechanism
biological threats” and urged greater investment in for liquidity and balance of payments support—it
response capacities.3 represents a continent-sized hole in the Global
Financial Safety Net.
45 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

UN-REFORMS, CIVIL SOCIETY
Our aging systems of global governance have
been slow to adapt to this new threat landscape,
contributing to a growing sense of dissatisfaction,
disaffection, and mistrust in governments and
international bodies mandated to protect people
and the planet. We must take seriously the prospect
of cascading shocks, and build up capacities to
deal with multiple threats simultaneously. Layered
threats demand more robust defenses. Building these
defenses is both an opportunity and a responsibility.
The lead-up to the 2024 Summit of the Future is
a once in a generation chance to advance the
collective investments needed to safeguard
the future of people and our planet. The UN
Secretary-General’s High-Level Advisory
Board’s (HLAB) report, “A Breakthrough
for People and Planet,” calls for a radical
shift in international cooperation to tackle
the immediate goal of implementing the
Sustainable Development Goals and also
preparing for the shocks we know will come.
The report underscores the importance of fast,
effective, representative coalitions that can
make and implement critical decisions in the
face of minority opposition, where necessary,
to deliver on issues of global concern.
It calls for networked, multistakeholder
partnerships driven by a shared mission, and
held accountable through common, enforceable
rules that cannot be broken with impunity by any
one actor.4
These transformations open the door to new
forms of partnership with civil society, the private
sector, and traditionally marginalized actors
in decision-making processes. The build-up of
these networks will result in a better alignment
of actors and resources ahead of crises, and
subsequently cut down response times and
coordination costs in the aftermath of a crisis.
Shutterstock
ID:

46 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

UN-REFORMS, CIVIL SOCIETY
A network approach can also help offset worrying In the months since the report was transmitted
deficits in public sector capacity to deal with novel to the Member States of the United Nations, we
threats. Over several years, the public sector has have seen some signs of progress. At the Paris
been hollowed out, leaving large gaps in scientific Finance Summit, the World Bank announced it
and technical expertise. The ‘impact hub’ model would implement disaster clauses for debt deals,
advanced in “A Breakthrough for People for Planet” suspending country debt payments in the case of
would facilitate sharing of data and critical skills extreme weather events, a key recommendation
across the private and public sectors. This must in the HLAB report. This change ensures more
be complemented with new resource investments money is left to governments to respond to
to build-up the capacity of judiciaries and public urgent domestic priorities. We have also seen the
administrations to regulate in frontier areas of law. United Nations move quickly on the governance
of artificial intelligence. It recently launched a
This is a vision of networked multilateral governance. multi-stakeholder global advisory body to assist in
It explicitly creates more space for women. formulating an adequate and adequately resourced
Women and girls are not only disproportionately response to this new powerful technology. These
affected by crises, but they also play an important changes are hardly enough, but they do demonstrate
role in prevention. We know that women have that even when trust in multilateral cooperation
played unique, substantive, and decisive roles in is at a low ebb, breakthroughs can be achieved.
peacebuilding, conflict resolution, and the fight for It is a collective responsibility to ensure that this
environmental sustainability. momentum does not diminish in the years ahead.
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. There are several examples of coordinated action grounded in shared, enforceable rules. For over two decades, the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme has guided the behavior of countries to
prevent conflict diamonds from entering mainstream markets. A multi-stakeholder mechanism with a unique tripartite state, private sector, civil society structure, the KPCS has attracted the participation
of over 80 states. Coordinated action through the KPCS process accounts for approximately 99 percent of rough stone diamonds on the market. Participating states must adhere to minimum guidelines,
which are strictly enforced. Indeed, upon joining, they must “amend or enact appropriate laws or regulations to implement and enforce the Certification Scheme and to maintain dissuasive and
proportional penalties for transgressions.” The Kimberley process has well-documented shortcomings. However, it exemplifies the type of multi-stakeholder partnership grounded in enforceable rules
discussed here.
47 Global Catastrophic Risks 2023

CONTINUING
ADDITIONAL
THE CONVERSATION
CONTACT INFO
We hope the conversation will continue. You can help us The Global Challenges Foundation
by simply sharing this report with a friend or colleague. Grev Turegatan 30
114 38 Stockholm
Sweden
For more information, visit our website:
 info@globalchallenges.org
Global Challenges Annual Report 2018 41

Global Challenges Annual Report 2018 41