Policy Brief
HAI Policy & Society

How Persuasive Key Takeaways
Major breakthroughs in large language
Is AI-Generated models have catalyzed concerns about
nation-states using these tools to create
convincing propaganda—but little
research has tested the persuasiveness
Propaganda? of AI-generated propaganda compared
to real-world propaganda.
We conducted a preregistered survey
Josh A. Goldstein, Jason Chao, Shelby Grossman,
experiment of U.S. respondents to
Alex Stamos, and Michael Tomz measure how persuasive participants
find six English-language foreign
propaganda articles sourced from
covert campaigns compared to articles
MAJOR BREAKTHROUGHS IN AI TECHNOLOGIES, ESPECIALLY on the same six topics generated by
LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS (LLMS), have prompted concerns that OpenAI’s GPT-3 model.
these tools could enable the mass production of propaganda at low
cost. Machine learning models that generate original text based on
GPT-3-generated articles were highly
user prompts are increasingly powerful and accessible, causing many
persuasive and nearly as compelling as
to worry that they could supercharge already frequent and ongoing
real-world propaganda. With human-
online covert propaganda and other information campaigns. Indeed, machine teaming, including editing the
companies and external researchers have already begun uncovering prompts fed to the model and curating
GPT-3 output, AI-generated articles
covert propaganda campaigns that are using AI.
were, on average, just as persuasive
or even more persuasive than the
Research into the risk of AI-generated propaganda is emerging: Scholars real-world propaganda articles.
have examined if people find AI-generated news articles credible, if
people recognize when AI-generated content is false, and whether
Policymakers, researchers, civil
elected officials reply to AI-written constituent letters. To date, however,
society organizations, and social
no studies have examined the persuasiveness of AI-generated propaganda media platforms must recognize the
risks of LLMs that enable the creation
against a real-world benchmark.
of highly persuasive propaganda
at significantly lower cost and with
Our paper, “How Persuasive Is AI-Generated Propaganda?,” addresses limited effort. More research is needed
to investigate the persuasiveness of
this gap. We conducted an experiment with U.S. respondents to compare
newer LLMs and to explore potential
the persuasiveness of foreign propaganda articles written by humans risk mitigation measures.

Policy Brief
How Persuasive Is
AI-Generated Propaganda?
and sourced from real-world influence campaigns
against articles generated by OpenAI’s LLM GPT-3.
Could foreign actors use
We sought to answer a single question: Could foreign
AI to generate persuasive
actors use AI to generate persuasive propaganda? In
short, we found that the answer is yes.
propaganda? In short, we found
that the answer is yes.
As the machine learning community continues to make
breakthroughs, and policy debates about AI-generated
disinformation intensify, it is essential to ground policy
discussions in empirical research about risks posed by
AI systems.
Introduction
of covert, likely state-aligned propaganda campaigns
originating from Russia or Iran.
Security experts, civil society groups, government
officials, and AI and social media companies have all We then created AI-generated versions of the human-
warned that generative AI capabilities, including LLMs, written propaganda articles by using the “few-shot
could enhance propaganda and disinformation risks prompting” capability of GPT-3, which allows you
to democracies. The White House’s 2023 executive to provide the model with examples of the output
order on AI warns that irresponsible use of AI could you want. We fed GPT-3 davinci three unrelated
exacerbate societal harms from disinformation. propaganda articles to inform the style and structure
Yet, the examples cited are often anecdotal, and of the desired output. We also provided one or two
little research exists to empirically measure the sentences from the original article that contained the
persuasiveness of AI-written propaganda. article’s main point to inform the substance of the
GPT-3-generated propaganda. Based on the prompt,
Our experiment aims to fill this research gap. the model returned a title and article. To avoid
Using the survey company Lucid, we interviewed a over-indexing on any one output, we used GPT-3 to
sample of 8,221 geographically and demographically generate three title-article pairs for each topic since
representative U.S. respondents to find out how each AI-generated article is different. We discarded
persuasive they find real-world foreign covert AI-generated articles that were not within 10 percent
propaganda articles compared to AI-generated of the shortest and longest human-written articles to
propaganda articles. make sure the lengths of the human-written and AI-
generated sets were comparable.
We first needed to assemble a set of real-world
propaganda articles. To do so, we selected six English- With the propaganda articles in hand, we sought to
language articles that were previously found to be part measure persuasiveness of the human-written and AI-

Policy Brief
How Persuasive Is
AI-Generated Propaganda?
generated propaganda. First, we summarized the main
point in each of the six original propaganda articles,
AI-generated propaganda is
several of which are false or debatable:
likely to be compelling to a wide
1. Most U.S. drone strikes in the Middle East
range of groups in society.
have targeted civilians rather than terrorists.
2. U.S. sanctions against Iran or Russia have
helped the United States control businesses
and governments in Europe.
3. To justify its attack on an air base in Syria,
the United States created fake reports saying
that the Syrian government had used issues and across GPT-3-written articles, we weighed
chemical weapons. each issue and article equally.
4. Western sanctions have led to a shortage
of medical supplies in Syria.
Research Outcomes
5. The United States conducted attacks in Syria
to gain control of an oil-rich region.
6. Saudi Arabia committed to help fund the Our survey outcomes show that AI-generated
U.S.-Mexico border wall. propaganda is similarly persuasive as real-world
propaganda: Respondents’ agreement with thesis
Next, we collected the control data by asking each statements increased substantially after they read
respondent how much they agreed or disagreed with both types of propaganda articles.
four of these thesis statements, selected at random,
without having read articles. Finally, we collected The original propaganda articles were highly
the treatment data by showing respondents an AI- or persuasive. Only 24.4 percent of respondents agreed
human-written propaganda article on the remaining or strongly agreed with the thesis statement when
two topics and measuring their agreement with the they hadn’t read an article (the control); but when
relevant thesis statements. they read a real-world propaganda article, that
number jumped to 47.4 percent (a 23 percentage
For both the control and treatment cases, we point increase). The real-world propaganda nearly
measured agreement in two ways: “percent doubled the share of people who agreed with the
agreement” and “scaled agreement,” where percent thesis statement, though specific numbers varied
agreement is the percentage of respondents who slightly across each topic, from drones to sanctions to
agreed or strongly agreed with each thesis statement chemical weapons in Syria.
and scaled agreement is the average score on a
5-point scale from 0 (“strongly disagree”) to 100 GPT-3-written propaganda articles were also
(“strongly agree”). When averaging scores across highly persuasive. After reading a GPT-3-generated

Policy Brief
How Persuasive Is
AI-Generated Propaganda?
propaganda article, 43.5 percent of respondents
agreed or strongly agreed with the thesis statement
GPT-4 and other models in
(a 19.1 percentage point increase from the control).
This means the GPT-3-written articles were slightly the pipeline could be used to
less persuasive than the original propaganda.
produce propaganda at least
However, the gap was due to a small number of
generated articles (2 of 18) that missed their mark as persuasive as the text
by not advancing the intended argument. When we
we generated using GPT-3.
removed those two off-topic articles, the difference in
persuasiveness between the human-written and AI-
written content became statistically insignificant.
Our findings therefore suggest that propagandists
could utilize GPT-3 to generate persuasive articles
with minimal human effort. We also studied what
Policy Discussion
would happen if humans played a slightly greater role
by selecting the most persuasive of the three articles
Policymakers, researchers, civil society organizations,
on each topic and/or editing the prompts given to
social media platforms, and other stakeholders must
GPT-3 to create more compelling content. When we
recognize the potential risks of misusing LLMs and the
simulated these human-machine teaming strategies,
urgent need for more research on the persuasiveness
the GPT-3-generated propaganda became just as
of AI systems.
persuasive or even more persuasive than the original
propaganda.
Our research indicates that AI-generated content is
highly persuasive for U.S. audiences and that when
The effectiveness of both the original propaganda
propagandists oversee and adjust parts of the AI
and the GPT-3-written propaganda was relatively
content generation process, they can produce articles
consistent across groups of people. We observed
that are as or even more persuasive than real-world,
no significant differences when dividing the sample
human-written propaganda. Nation-states and other
according to demographic variables, partisanship/
actors could leverage LLMs to create highly persuasive
ideology, news consumption, time spent on social
propaganda that maintains persuasiveness across
media, and other factors, leading us to conclude that
demographic lines, geographical areas, and political
AI-generated propaganda is likely to be compelling to
ideologies. While LLMs could allow actors to automate
a wide range of groups in society.
many writing tasks, human-machine strategies that
keep a human in the loop could enable the production
of particularly effective propaganda.

Policy Brief
How Persuasive Is
AI-Generated Propaganda?
It is crucial to note that our experiment likely
underestimates the persuasive potential of LLMs.
By lowering the cost and
These models are rapidly improving—since our study,
several companies have released larger and more improving the ease with which
powerful models, including OpenAI’s GPT-4 and GPT-
propaganda can be produced,
4o, that outperform GPT-3 davinci in related tasks.
GPT-4 and other models in the pipeline could be used LLMs open the door to actors
to produce propaganda that is at least as persuasive as
generating a vast number of
the text we generated using GPT-3.
articles that convey a single
The other reason our experiment likely underestimates
narrative with variances in
persuasiveness is that we studied the effect of reading
only a single article, when propagandists could style and wording.
theoretically use AI to create many articles at once. By
lowering the cost and improving the ease with which
propaganda can be produced, LLMs open the door
to actors generating a vast number of articles that
convey a single narrative with variances in style and
For all the attention paid to Russia’s covert
wording. Such stylistic variations could make it even
propaganda campaigns in connection with the 2016
more difficult to trace multiple propaganda articles
presidential election, the rapid advancement of
back to the same source, because they read more like
LLMs deserves renewed attention for its potential
the views of real people or genuine news sources.
to heighten known risks while raising new questions
Propagandists could redirect the time and resources
about the proliferation and persuasive power of
they save by using AI to building an infrastructure that
online propaganda. Evidence-based research will
looks credible and evades detection, such as fake
be critical to building a deeper understanding of
accounts or “news” websites that mask state links.
the effects of AI-generated propaganda, so that
policymakers can work with other stakeholders to
Future research should investigate the persuasive
assess effective intervention strategies.
capabilities of newer LLMs, interactive dialogue
systems, and audio models; compare them with
a wider range of benchmarks, including the
persuasiveness of expert human writers; and assess
how the effectiveness of AI propaganda varies across
topics. Research should also explore strategies to
minimize the impact of AI-generated propaganda.

Reference: The original article is accessible at Josh Josh A. Goldstein is a research
A. Goldstein et al., “How Persuasive Is AI-Generated fellow at Georgetown’s Center
Propaganda?” PNAS Nexus, vol. 3, issue 2, February for Security and Emerging
2024, Technology (CSET).
pgae034/7610937.
Jason Chao is a master’s
student in computer science
at Stanford University and was
a researcher at the Stanford
Stanford University’s Institute for Human-Centered Artificial
Internet Observatory.
Intelligence (HAI) applies rigorous analysis and research to
pressing policy questions on artificial intelligence. A pillar
of HAI is to inform policymakers, industry leaders, and civil Shelby Grossman is a research
society by disseminating scholarship to a wide audience. scholar at the Stanford Internet
HAI is a nonpartisan research institute, representing a range Observatory.
of voices. The views expressed in this policy brief reflect the
views of the authors. For further information, please contact
HAI-Policy@stanford.edu.
Alex Stamos is a lecturer at
Stanford University and the
former director of the Stanford
Internet Observatory.
Michael Tomz is the William
Bennett Munro Professor in
Political Science and chair of the
Department of Political Science
at Stanford University and a
senior fellow at the Stanford
Institute for Economic Policy
Research.
Stanford HAI: 353 Jane Stanford Way, Stanford CA 94305-5008
T 650.725.4537 F 650.123.4567 E HAI-Policy@stanford.edu hai.stanford.edu