Chapter 5:
Hemispheric Relations

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Security and Defence Organizations and Initiatives
- Merida Initiative
- Security and Prosperity Partnership - Regional Security
of North America. System (RSS)
- Central America Regional
Security Initiative.
- Caribbean
Community
(CARICOM):
- Central
American Caribbean Basin
Integration Security Initiative
System. (CBSI).
- Central American
Armed Forces
Conference.
- Amazonic Cooperation
Treaty Organization.
-South American
Defence.
- Bolivarian Alliance for the
- Conference of Defence - Organization of Peoples of our America.
Ministers of the Americas. American States.
* On July 3, 2009, Resolution 1962 expelling Cuba from the OAS was abolished (Cuba ratified it would not return to the OAS).
Organization of American States (OAS)
Structure
Permanent Committee on Hemispheric
Council Security (1995) Executive Secretariat of the Inter-
American Drug Abuse Control
General Commission (CICAD)
Assembly Secretariat for
General Multidimensional Security Secretariat of the
m I e t c d h e a fi n n is e m s s, Secretariat Coordinate ( c 2 oo 0 p 0 e 5 ra ) t ion among Inter-Am T e e ri r c r a o n ri s C m o m (C m IC it T t E e ) e against
mandates, Member States to combat citizen and
policies and national security threats. Public Security Department
actions. (PSD) 2006
The 43rd session of the General Assembly of the OAS had as its main theme “For a Comprehensive Policy against the World Drug Problem in the Americas “. It took place between
June 4-6, 2013 in Antigua, Guatemala.
It was declared as fundamental that the Hemisphere continues advancing in a coordinated manner in the search for effective solutions to the global drug problem under a mul-
tidisciplinary approach that includes preventive actions to address transnational organized crime, strengthening democratic institutions, and the promotion of local and national
development.
Source:Compilation based on the OAS website and Declarations and Resolutions adopted at the 43rd Regular Session of the General Assembly of the OAS.

Chapter 5: Hemispheric Relations

Committee on Hemispheric Security
particularly on those entrusted to it by the Permanent Council or the General
Assembly. In recent years, the following actions have been carried out according Confidence and Security Promotion
to the issues addressed:
Declaration of Santiago (1995)
Hemispheric Security
- Celebration of the V Meeting of the Forum on Confidence- and Security-
Declaration on Security in the Americas (2003) Building Measures (CSBMs). Achievements in the implementation of CSBMs
were evaluated, highlighting the importance of presenting annual
- Meeting of Ministers of Public Security of the Americas, MISPA reports by member countries. (Washington D.C., 2013/02/28).
IV (Medellin, Colombia – 21-22 November, 2013).
Recommended actions focused on cooperation,
coordination and mutual technical assistance
Anti-Personnel Mines
between the institutions responsible for public
security; development of regional and bilateral - Launch of the report on the program of Compre-
exchanges of operational information and hensive Action against Antipersonnel Mines
promoting the creation and strengthening of whose objective it is to provide financial,
crime and violence observatories. technical, logistical and administrative support to
Member States that request it in order to assist
- Follow-up to the Special Conference on their efforts of mitigating and eliminating the
Security: the 2013 and 2014 OAS General impact of landmines in their villages and their
Assemblies have reaffirmed commitment to economies. It evaluated the advances of the
national programs (2013).
the Declaration on Security in the Americas.
Transnational Organized Crime
Criminal Gangs -- IV Meeting of the Technical Group on Transnational
OOrganized Crime (2013/03/07). Evaluated the creation of
- Presentation of the report "Follow-up on the Regional aan Inter-American Committee against Transnational
Strategy to Promote Hemispheric Cooperation in Dealing OOrganized Crime (CIDOT).
with Criminal Gangs" in which the initiatives being implemen-
ted by the Secretariat for Multidimensional Security are presenntteedd:: -- MMeeeettiing of National Authorities on Transnational Organized Crime,
Gang Truce in El Salvador, Gang Treatment throughout Central America, (2014/04/24-25) where the implementation of the Hemispheric Plan of
Partnership in Opportunities for Employment through Technology in the Action against Transnational Organized Crime and Strengthening of
Americas (POETA) and CICAD’s Training and Certification Program (2013). Hemispheric Cooperation (adopted in 2010) were evaluated.
Special Security Concerns of the Small Island States of the Caribbean
- Resolutions submitted and approved by the General Assembly (every year).
- Celebration of the "Special Security Concerns of Small Island States of the Caribbean" meeting (2013/04/22).
Source: : Compilation based on the Report of the President on the Activities of the Committee on Hemispheric Security, 2010-2011, 2011-2012, 2012-2013; Declara-
tions and Resolutions adopted at 41st, 42nd, 43rd and 44th Regular Sessions of the General Assembly of the OAS and the website of the Committee on Hemispheric
Security, Report of the Rapporteur on the V Forum on Confi dence- and Security- Building Measures ().
Inter-American Defence Board (IADB)
Created in 1942, it is an international forum made up of civilian and military repre- One of the tasks carried out by the IADB for the OAS is
sentatives appointed by the Member States, who provide technical and educational an inventory of confi dence-building measures (CSBMs).
advice on military and defence matters in the hemisphere. Its structure consists of In , a special working group on the issue,
a Council of Delegates (President, Vice-president, delegations of Member States); a composed of representatives from Barbados, Brazil,
Secretariat and the Inter-American Defence College (IADC). Canada, Chile, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Gua-
temala, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Trinidad
In theFirst Inter-American Meeting of Military and Tobago and the United States was organized. That
Organizationswas held, with the purpose of reviewing the structures year six forums were carried out in order to produce a
of these organizations and strengthening mechanisms for dialogue and report on effectiveness and recommendations regard-
cooperation with the IADB. Offi cials from CAA, IANC, CONJEFAMER and ing CSBMs in the region.
SICOFAA participated.
Member States: * Countries with delegates in the Council
(information May 2, 2014). Most delegates
Antigua and Barbuda* Chile* Haiti* Peru*
also exercise functions in their countries’ per-
Argentina* Colombia* Honduras* Suriname manent Mission to the OAS or as an attaché
Barbados* Dominican Republic* Jamaica* Saint Kitts and Nevis* of their country to the United States. The Se-
Belize Ecuador (1) Mexico* Trinidad and Tobago* cretariat has 45 advisors from Brazil (16), Ca-
Bolivia El Salvador* Nicaragua* United States* nada (1), Chile (3), Colombia (12), Dominican
Republic (5), Mexico (2), Paraguay (1), Peru (3)
Brazil* Guatemala* Panama* Uruguay*
and and United States (2).
Canada* Guyana* Paraguay* Venezuela
(1) Ecuador began the process of disaffi liating itself with the IADB in . The IADB’s statute states that requests
take effect one year after being informed, making it effective in 2015.
First Inter-American Logistics Conference
After the creation of the Inter-American Logistics Cooperation System (SICoLog), in , it was determined that the Inter-American Lo-
gistics Conference would be held in October of that year. The aim of the conference was to discuss the coordination of the logistical function
necessary to support member states in humanitarian aid, natural disaster, search and rescue, peacekeeping, and humanitarian demining op-
erations, among others. How to improve the interoperability of forces and assess the capabilities of joint action was one of the main themes.
Source:Annual Report 2013, website and information provided by the Inter-American Defense Board, Report of the First Inter-American Meeting of
Military Organizations (2013), and website the Brazilian Navy.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Conference of Defence Ministers of the Americas (CDMA)
The CDMA is a unique meeting of regional ministers of defence. It brings together 34 countries of the hemisphere to meet every two years. It is
a forum, the objective of which is to advance towards reciprocal knowledge, analysis, debate and exchange of views and experiences on defence
and security, as well as any other interaction mechanism to allow its fulfi lment. It has an ad-hoc structure, as it has no formal permanent secre-
tariat. The countries offer themselves as hosts. Its decisions are not binding.
I Williamsburg, 1995 (United States) VII Managua, 2006 (Nicaragua)*
Measures to increase transparency, military confi dence and improve security. Hemispheric security system, scenarios and sub-regional regimes.
Cooperation on defence measures. Measures for increasing mutual trust, security and cooperation in multinational
The Armed Forces in 21st Century democracy operations in the Americas.
Modernization and transformation of defence institutions.
II Bariloche, 1996 (Argentina)
VIII Banff, 2008 (Canada)*
New dimensions of international security.
New roles. Assistance in natural disasters.
Institutional framework and relations between defence systems. Assistants in large national and regional events.
Peacekeeping operations.
III Cartagena, 1998 (Colombia)
The hemispheric security system and its mechanisms for regional development. IX Santa Cruz, 2010 (Bolivia)*
Complementary functions of armed forces in democratic societies. The consolidation of peace, trust, security and cooperation in the Americas.
Hemispheric cooperation in the fi ght against terrorism, illicit drugs, and illicit arms, Democracy, Armed Forces, Security and Society.
munitions and explosives traffi cking.
Regional security and natural disasters. Strengthening hemispheric cooperation.
IV Manaus, 2000 (Brazil)
Hemispheric security at the beginning of the 21st Century. X Punta del Este, 2012 (Uruguay)*
Mutual trust on the American continent, current situation and projections for Natural disasters, environmental and biodiversity protection.
the next decade. Peace operations.
Defence and development: possibilities for regional cooperation. Security and defence validity of the Inter-American Defence System.
V Santiago, 2002 (Chile)
Hemispheric security at the beginning of the 21st Century. XI Arequipa, 2014 (Peru)*
Mutual trust on the American continent. Coordination of the specialized conferences of the armed forces institutions with
Defence and society: possibilities for regional cooperation. the CMDA.
Cooperation in military health.
VI Quito, 2004 (Ecuador)* Cooperation in search and rescue capabilities.
The new hemispheric security architecture. Defence and environmental protection.
Mutual trust and security in the hemispheric security system. Sharing experiences on the participation and effectiveness of the armed forces in
matters of security in the region and the hemisphere.
Defence, development and society: the possibility for cooperation.
* Conferences that included civil society in the process.
Inclusion of Themes in Final Declarations
Bariloche Cartagena Manaus Santiago Quito Managua Banff Santa Cruz Punta del Este
Condemning outlawed armed groups/terrorism.
Civil society contribution.
Inter-American Convention: transparency in conventional weapons.
Cooperation on natural disasters.
Humanitarian demining.
HHRR/IHL education.
Military education/training.
Promotion of meetings and exchanges.
Civilian training/inclusion.
Multiculturalism.
Multidimensionality/new threats according to domestic laws.
Non-proliferation.
Peace operations.
Gender perspective.
Institutional modernization processes.
Small arms and light weapons proliferation.
Promotion of confi dence-building measures.
Subregional realities/fl exible architecture.
Democracy-security-economy relation.
Budgetary transparency.
Source:Compilation based on the fi nal declarations of the Conferences and information provided by the Ministry of Defence of Peru. A grouping of principal topics
covered in each declaration is presented.
adnegA
eht
no
semehT

Chapter 5: Hemispheric Relations

President
Conference of American Armies (CAA)
Secretary
Created in 1960, it is made up of 20 member armies (Antigua and Bar-
General
buda, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Re-
public, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, SEPCEA
Paraguay, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago, United States, Uruguay, and Ven-
ezuela). Barbados, Belize, Guyana, Jamaica and Suriname took part as Observer
observers, as well as the CFAC and IADB. Member Observer Military
Armies (20) Armies (5) Organizations
Its purpose is to act as a debate forum for the exchange of experiences (2)
among the continent´s armies
Liaison Liaison Liaison
offi cers offi cers offi cers
Cycles, themes and activities
XXVII – 2006-07 XXVIII – 2008-09 XXIX – 2010-11 XXX – 2012-13 XXXI – 2013-14
Brazil Argentina Peru Mexico Colombia
The CAA and its contribution to Peacekeeping Operations (developed under the United Nations mandate) and as-
sistance operations in cases of disasters through the creation and implementation of mechanisms and procedures to
improve the collective capacity of their members and their interoperability.
2 YEAR CYCLE
Preparatory Ad-hoc and Specialised Conferences Commander’s Exercises
Conferences
Conferences
• Peacekeeping operations.
• Environment.
• Science and technology. Within the
• Education and training. framework of the
• Civil-military relations. CAA, countries
• Assistance operations in the case of disasters. make joint exercises
for peacekeeping
• Peacekeeping operations procedures, educa- It provides reports operations, radio-
tion and training. and proposals to communications,
• Legal affairs. the Commanders’ military-civic
• Emerging threats and risk situations. conference relations, cabinet
• Ad hoc meetings on procedures, legal affairs of activities,
and science and technology in peacekeeping communications and
operations. disasters, among
others.
Objectives of Colombia Cycle 2014-2015:
• To continue the work that was performed in the XXX cycle regarding Peacekeeping Operations and Support Operations in cases
of Disaster.
• Exchange experiences on new challenges to hemispheric defence, the role played by member armies to confront them, identifying
possible procedures and mechanisms for cooperation.
• Conduct studies related to the bases, experiences and conclusions reached by expanding the traditional role of armies in the face
of the new challenges to defence presented in the 21st Century.
• Study the employment of member armies, promoting the exchange of knowledge and experience regarding interagency opera-
tions, identifying the most appropriate competences and capabilities for contemporary armies.
During the 28th Conference Since 2012 Communications Exercises CEAA have been carried out. The aim of the 1st CEA Commu-
(2009), the CAA procedural nications Exercise (2012) was to develop the operational and functional capacities necessary to maintain
guidelines for disaster the operational and functional capabilities of the CEA’s radio network. 14 armies participated: Antigua and
assistance were approved.
Barbuda, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru,
United States, and Uruguay. Participants exchanged information on their respective situation having been
The Special Conference on the affected by the hypothetical hurricane Guadalupe.
Environment evaluates the
role of military institutions In 2013, the II Communications Exercise evaluated the communications procedures developed to be able to
in the face of climate change establish a communication network in cases of emergency, linking the communication centers of participat-
in the sub-regions of the ing armies with the facilities of the Permanent Executive Secretariat of the CEA (then, Mexico). 19 armies
Americas and analyzes
participated: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
capabilities to respond to
natural disasters. Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, United States, Uruguay and Venezuela.
The CAA has approved the
The Regional Training Center for Peacekeeping Operations carried out the Cabinet Exercise for the Ap-
Peacekeeping Operations Manual
plication of the CEA Peacekeeping Operations Manual in Guatemala in . The exercise including, among other issues,
aimed to apply knowledge of planning and implementation in the pre-deployment, deployment and the various levels and phases
redeployment of PKOs during basic tactical procedures. of training, responsibilities and
gender issues.
Source: : Compilation based on the websites of the Conference of American Armies, Colombian Army, the Chilean Army and Ministry of Defence and the Secretariat of National
Defence of Mexico; Bulletin No. 2 of XXX cycle of the SEPCEA, Press Release No. 35-cl-2012 of the Ministry of National Defence of Guatemala.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

System of Cooperation among the American Air Forces (SICOFAA)
Created in 1961, the SICOFAA is a system which seeks co-
In the III Cooperation Exercise was held in Peru. Delegations from
operation among the region´s Air Forces. It promotes train-
Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Guatemala,
ing, knowledge and experience exchanges to strengthen
Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, United States, and Uruguay participated. The exercise
the capabilities of the Air Forces -and their equivalents- in
aimed to coordinate and train the capacities of countries in joint humanitarian
order to provide support to its members’ requirements.
assistance and disaster response actions.
According to its 2012-2027 Strategic Plan, its strategic ar-
eas are humanitarian aid and institutional strengthening.
InterAmerican Air Forces Academy (IAAFA)
Members: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Co-
The Inter-American Air Forces Academy (IAAFA) was founded on March 15, 1943. It is located in
lombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guate-
Lackland Air Force Base, Texas, United States.
mala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama (National Aero Na- Its stated mission is to train and educate the military forces to build and generate abilities for the
val Service), Paraguay, Peru, United States, Uruguay and support of world stability and security, while generating academic and cultural relations. It offers
Venezuela. Observers: Belize, Costa Rica (Air Surveillance training courses for Offi cers (ISOS) and professional training courses for Non-Commissioned Of-
fi cers (INCOA).
Service), Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica and Mexico.
Conference of the Chiefs of American Air 2012-2017 Master Plan – SICOFAA
Forces (CONJEFAMER)
Its general purpose is to position SICOFAA as an agile and effective
response mechanism on humanitarian aid during disasters, through
the following specifi c goals:
• Strengthening mechanisms for support and integration among Air
Forces and their equivalents in the region.
• Optimizing the response capability of the Air Forces and their
equivalents in response to disasters emerging in the region, which
Functional organization
may require SICOFAA to intervene.
CONJEFAMER • Optimizing technical capabilities inherent to the planning and
development of combined air operations.
Highest authority.
Decides on actions to be • Promoting the establishment of a common doctrine of aerospace
developed safety.
The Master Plan is part of a Strategic Plan (Planestra 2012-2027)
PREPLAN which establishes the strategic areas and purposes, including the proj-
Assessment and ects to be implemented.
Planning Board.
Advisory Body
Enhance the
System’s
operational
capacity to
Comittees and provide
SPS humanitarian aid
other activities OENFA
Personnel Management and Management and Information Execution Execution
Operations
Logistics Science and Technology Red Control Estaciones SITFAA SITFAA
Information and In each country Telecommunication
Source:Compilation based on information attained on the website of the Permanent Secretariat of SICOFAA, the Combined Air Operations Manual for Humanitarian
Aid and Disasters (2011), and SICOFAA’s Planestra Strategic Plan 2012-2027 and Director Plan 2012-2017.
Inter-American Naval Conferences (CNI)
They started in 1959 and are held every two years. Their purpose is to study common naval concerns and
promote permanent professional contacts. The XXVI Conference was
held in in
Member countries:Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Argentina.
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, United States, Uruguay and
Venezuela. The Inter-American Naval Telecommunications Network and the IADB have observer status.
Specialized Inter-American Naval Conference of Intelligence
The X edition of these meetings was held in in Mexico, with the participation of representatives from Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia,
Canada, Colombia, Chile, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay , Peru, and United
States. Issues related to maritime security such as drug traffi cking, human traffi cking and organized crime in the region were discussed. The
next meeting will be held in 2015 in the Dominican Republic.
Source:Compilation based on the websites of the Inter-American Naval Conference, the Brazilian Navy, the Navy of Peru, and the Navy of the Dominican Republic.
strengthening institutional SICOFAA’s
Objectives Proyects
-Operational • Exercises of Cooperation II
readiness (cirtual) and III (real).
-Aerospace •Promoting a culture of
Security aerospace security.
Strategic •Fostering regional knowledge Areas -TTTraining and experience exchange.
• Increasing the levels of
-Inter-institutional exchange with regional Coordination organizations.
-Optimization of • Updating SICOFFFAA organization- SICOFFFAA al structure.
according to a • Improving SICOFFFAA telecommu-
nications and IT system.
New Approach

Chapter 5: Hemispheric Relations

Central American Armed Forces Conference (CFAC)
In the Dominican
Republic assumed the
The CFAC was created in 1997 as a forum to promote permanent and systematic efforts for cooperation, Presidency of the Higher
coordination and mutual support among the Central American Armed Forces. Council.
Members: Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua.
Observers: Argentina, Belize, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, France, Germany, Russia, Spain, Taiwan, United Kingdom and United States.
CFAC is an observer member of the Conference of American Armies.
Higher Council
President of the
Decision-making body: integrated by the military offi cer of highest rank and hier-
Higher Council
archy from each member country (two meetings per year).
Executive Commitee
Pro Tempore Secretariat
It follows the decisions made by the Higher Council. It is composed of the Chiefs of
Joint Staff, or their equivalents, from member countries (three meetings per year). (rotates every two years)
Representatives before CFAC Observer States:
Argentina; Belize; Brazil; Canada; Chile; Taiwan; Colombia; France,
Armed Forces of member states Germany, Russia, Spain, United Kingdom and United States.
CFAC coordination authorities have met over the last years, reaching agreement and making advances on the following issues:
Fight against CFAC’s Plan of Integrated Cooperation to Prevent and Counteract Terrorism, Organized Crime and Related Activities includes: periodi-
common threats cal reports on threats and operations to counteract such threats; ongoing information exchange; exchange of experiences; (virtual and
(organized crime, practical) training exercises; coordinated actions on land, at sea or in the air; particular operation plans in each country; meetings of
drug-traffi cking and Border Unit Commanders; Manuals for interoperability of land, air and sea forces. Among other fi elds, penitentiary security is also dis-
criminal gangs) cussed. Diverse mechanisms, such as the Meeting of Commanders of Border Units between Nicaragua and Honduras, and El Salvador
and Honduras, form part of the outcomes of the plan.
Humanitarian
aid and natural Since it was created in 1999, the Humanitarian and Rescue Unit (UHR-CFAC) has rendered assistance during extreme natural disasters
disasters (hurricanes, tropical storms and depressions, fl oods and droughts) affecting the region.
Peacekeeping Cooperation in this fi eld gave rise to the creation of the Peacekeeping Operations Unit (UOMP – CFAC) in 2004, which in 2012
Operations analysed the creation of the CFAC Battalion. Staff training is provided at CREOMPAZ in Guatemala, where the Induction Course on
Peace Operations
Institutional Annual program on military confi dence-building measures.
Development Educations exchange program for cadets, of rotational character.
and Educational Industrial and logistics commercial mechanisms.
Exchange Cooperation on health-care service exchange among the Armed Forces.
Regional coordination One of the areas in CFAC takes part in
The Central American Security Commission works at the level of the Central Ameri- which CFAC regu- simulation exercises
can Integration System (SICA) and is composed of a Sub-Committee of Defence, larly works is military and drills of the Hu-
made up of representatives of the Ministries of Defence of SICA member countries. health. In April manitarian Allied Forces
Although CFAC is not part of SICA, both institutions maintain permanent commu-
2014 CFAC’s XIII (FAHUM), as well as in
nication.
Specialized Activity in activities on information
CFAC representatives take part in high-level meetings, such as the Central American
Military Health was exchange and multi-
Security Conference (CENTSEC) sponsored by the United States Southern Com-
mand. CFAC also colaborates with other regional institutions, such carried out in Santo national coordination
as the Coordination Centre for the Prevention of Natural Disas- Domingo, Dominican organized by the US
ters in Central America (CEPREDENAC) and the Central American Republic. Southern Command.
Commission of Maritime Transport (COCATRAM).
Sources: Compilation based on the Agreement Creating CFAC (1997); Regulation of CFAC (2008); Annual Report of the Army of Nicaragua (2012), webpages of
CFAC, the Ministry of Defence of El Salvador and Guatemala, Nicaraguan Army, the Ministry of National Defence of Honduras; SICA and COCATRAM.
Central American Security Strategy
Central American Integration System (SICA)
Created in 2007, and with a revision published in 2011, it is an
instrument created by SICA member states to coordinate their
Within the framework of the 11th Meeting of Central American Presidents (Teguci-
joint actions in the area of security. It operates along four pillars:
galpa, Honduras on 13 ), the Tegucigalpa Protocol was signed, giving
combatting crime; violence prevention; rehabilitation, reinsertion
rise to the Central American Integration System (SICA) and replacing the old Central
and penitentiary security; and institutional strengthening.
American States Organization (ODECA). SICA is the political institution that deals with
economic, political and social integration matters.
Four years later (15 December, 1995), the Framework Treaty on Democratic Security in Central America was signed as a supplementary instru-
ment of the Tegucigalpa Protocol, and became a regional legal instrument on security. The Treaty resulted in the Democratic Safety model and
introduced the Central American Security Commission as a subsidiary authority subordinated to the Meeting of Presidents and the Council of
Foreign Affairs Ministers in order to coordinate, assess, follow up and formulate proposals on regional security.
Member States: Belize, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama.
Sources: Website of SICA, Public Security Index: Central America (RESDAL, 2013).

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

UNASUR’s South American Defence Council (CDS) The period and presidency pro tempore of the
Sout American Defence Council coincides with
the UNASUR Presidency (during 2013-2014
Creation: . A Forum for Cooppperation,,, Consultation and Coordination. It is the Secretariat of the Council was headed by
attended byyy the Ministers of Defence of UNASUR member countries and seniorr representa-
Suriname).
tives of Foreign Affairs Ministries.
Objjjectives:
-Consolidate South America as a “pppeace zone”
- Build a South-American identityyy in the area of defence,,, based on subregggional and nattional
characteristics while contributing to the strengthening of Latin America andd Caribbbean
unity.
- Generate consensus to reinforce regional cooperation in the area of defence.
Education
and Training
When the CDS was created, the political will to peacefully settle disputes Of the 225 acctivities
and promote hemispheric and sub-regional peace and security prevailed. proposeed for 2014,
Under these principles, a positive consensus was achieved excluded three oo 4 ff 0 dd % eefe r n e c f ee ee r p t o o l i t c h ie e s , p 2 ill 0 a % r Defence
aspects: miilitary ccoopperation, policies
hhuummaaaanniittaarriiaann aactions and
a) The CDS is not conceived as a collective security organization.
peaceekeeping operations,
b) The bodyy does not deal with securityy issues. 16% defence industry and
Defence technologyy, and 24% to
c)) The CDS does not identifyy common adversaries. industry educationn aanndd ttrraaiinniinnggg..
and
technology
Activities carried out per country Military cooperation,
humanitarian
Key action and peacekeeping
operations
Military cooperation, Defence industry Education
Defence policies ac h ti u o m n a a n n i d ta p r e ia a n c e and and
operations technology training
Venezuela South American Defence Expenditure Registry
2013 6 2 3 2
The fi rst version of the South American Defence Expenditure
2014 4 0 1 0
Registry was presented at the Executive body’s meeting in February
Colombia 2014. The report presents information between 2006-2011, and its
2013 4 0 2 1 content remains unavailable to the public.
2014 3 1 1 2
Ecuador Guyana
2013 3 2 1 3 2013 3 1 1 2
2014 5 1 2 1 2014 0 0 0 0
Peru Suriname
2013 7 3 0 2 2013 3 0 0 2
2014 4 4 1 1 2014 5 0 0 1
Bolivia Brazil
2013 0 0 0 2 2013 3 2 4 3
2014 0 0 0 1 2014 3 3 3 1
Chile
Paraguay
2013 4 3 1 1
2013 0 0 0 0
2014 1 3 0 1
2014 0 1 0 0
South American Defence School Uruguay
(ESUDE) 2013 1 1 1 2
2014 1 0 1 0
It is a higher studies center for training civil-
ians and members of the military in defence. Argentina
Its creation was approved at the XI Regular 2013 1 2 3 4
Meeting of the Executive Body of the CDS 2014 6 4 3 2
and V Regular Meeting of the CDS, in Febru-
ary 2014. The fi rst meeting of the ESUDE was
conducted in in Quito.
South American Registry of Military
Inventories (RESIM)
In the IX Regular Meeting of the Execu-
tive Bodyyof the CDS and the V Regular
Meeting of the CDS in , the
Chilean delegation presented the fi nal report
on a methodology for making military inven-
tories transparent. Use of theSouth Ameri-
can Military Inventory Form (FOSIM) was
approved. The reports should be submitted
by countries to the Centre for Strategic Stud-
ies (CEED) - technical manager for the organi-
zation of the registry -prior to .
Source:Compilation based on the website of the South American Defence Council, Action Plans of the South American Defence Council (2013 and 2014), the Act
of the IX Meeting of the Executive Body of the CDS and the Act of the Second Meeting on Methodologies for Making Military Inventories Transparent in the South
American Region.
)4102-3102(
stnevE
dna
stnemeergA
• Second Meeting of the Working Group responsible for proposing a methodology for making the region’s military inventory transparent, with
the exposition and debate focusing on observations and proposals in rela-
tion to the Manual and Use of FOSIM.
• International Event “New Dimensions of Regional Integration and Secu-
rity” in Buenos Aires, organized by CEED and CDS.
• II Exercise for Application of the Methodology for Making South Ameri-
can Military Inventories Transparent, a line of work established by the 2012
CDS Action Plan.
• Joint Declaration on Cyber Defence, signed by Argentina and Brazil.
• I Forum on “Regional Defence Policies and Strategies”, and the IV Event
“Conceptual Approaches to Defence, Risk and Threats to the Region “,
developed in Venezuela.

Chapter 5: Hemispheric Relations

Bilateral Agreements (2010 -2014)
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Haiti
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012
2012-2014 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0
Honduras
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0
0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0
Mexico
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 0 1 0 3 0 0 0 0
2012-2014 0 1 0 2 0 1 0 0
Nicaraggua
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2
2012-2014 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0
Panama
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
2012-2014 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0
Paragguayy
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 1 0 2 0 0 1 0 0
2012-2014 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
Peru
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 4 0 2 1 0 4 0 1
2012-2014 2 1 5 1 0 3 0 2
Urugguayy
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 2 0 4 0 0 3 0 0
2012-2014 3 1 3 1 0 0 0 1
Venezuela
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 2 0 3 0 1 0 0 1
2012-2014 2 0 1 0 0 0 0 1
Information on the agreements signed, participant countries, and the issues agreed on is refl ected in the “The Countries” section.
Sources:Compilation based on the Institutional report of the Ministry of Defence of Bolivia (2013), Annual report of the Ministry of Defence of Colombia (2011 and
2012), Activities report of the Armed Forces of El Salvador (2013), Activities reports of SEMAR and SEDENA of Mexico (2013), Annual report of the Nicaraguan Army (2011
and 2012), Annual report of the management of the Uruguayan National Government (2013). Webpages of Ministries of Defence of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela; Ministries of Foreign Affairs of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, Spain, and Venezuela; of the Argentine Navy, Argentine Army, Armed Forces of El Salvador, Nicaraguan Army, Colombian
Air Force, Chamber of Deputies of Chile, Bolivarian System of Communication and Information, of the Presidency of Brazil, Mexico and Uruguay.
enoC
nrehtuoS
aciremA
lartneC
ocixeM
dna
noigeR
naednA
dna
adanaC
setatS
detinU
naebbiraC
eporuE
acirfA
aisA Arggentina Guatemala
YYYear siggned: YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 4 0 1 0 0 1 1 2 2010-2012 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0
2012-2014 4 0 4 0 0 1 0 1 2012-2014 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 0
Bolivia
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 3 0 3 0 0 0 0 3 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0
2012-2014 1 0 1 0 0 3 0 2
Brazil
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 0 1 6 1 0 2 3 1
2012-2014 1 0 2 0 3 6 6 5
Chile
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 4 0 3 1 0 1 0 2
2012-2014 1 5 2 0 0 3 0 0
Colombia
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 1 1 4 2 0 0 0 2
2012-2014 1 2 3 0 0 1 0 0
Costa Rica
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
2012-2014 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Cuba
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0
2012-2014 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Ecuador
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 3 2 3 0 0 3 0 0
2012-2014 3 0 6 0 1 1 0 2
El Salvador
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 1 0 0 2 0 0 0 0
2012-2014 1 0 5 0 0 0 0 0
enoC
nrehtuoS
aciremA
lartneC
ocixeM
dna
noigeR
naednA
dna
adanaC
setatS
detinU
naebbiraC
eporuE
acirfA
aisA
Dom. Reppublic
YYYear siggned:
2010-2012 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0
2012-2014 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Links with other Continents
Defence cooperation Defence Agreement for
Europe 2010-2012 agreement. cooperation developing a System for
agreement. Disaster Prevention and
Europe 2012-2014
Mitigation. Assistance and
China 2010-2012 military
China 2012-2014 cooperation.
Rusia 2010-2012
Technical military
Rusia 2012-2014
cooperation agreement.
Irán 2012-2014
Signing of agreements on
cooperation in defence
and technology and a
joint declaration related
to security.
Cooperation for
improving defence
museums .
Agreement for the
Technical military purchase of helicopters
cooperation agreement. and an agreement for
logistical cooperation.
Belarus - Ecuador, Peru. Agreement
Agreement for cooperation
on technical-military cooperation.
in the Amazon Protection
System.
Spain-Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay.
Cooperation Protocol.
Argentina - France. Cooperation
agreement for training in peacekeeping “Agreement on
missions. Cooperation in Science,
Technology and
Italy-Uruguay, Ecuador. Industry”, which led to
Cooperation Agreement for systems the launch of the ‘Tupac
acquisition. Katari’ communications
satellite.
Netherlands - Brazil, Peru.
Agreement on cooperation in defence
matters.
Portugal - Uruguay. Agreement on
Agreement to deepen
cooperation in the field
of defence. defence cooperation.
UK - Peru. Memorandum on defence
industry cooperation. Agreement for
cooperation between
space agencies.
Turkey - Chile. Memorandum on
defence industry
cooperation. Defence
cooperation
agreement.
Ukraine - Peru. Agreement for military
and technical cooperation.
Agreement for military
institutional cooperation.
Belarus-Bolivia. Defence cooperation
agreement.
Bosnia-Herzegovina Chile. UK - Colombia, Peru. Agreement for
Agreement on cooperation in cooperation in the field of defence
defence. and security. Cooperation agreement for
security and defence.
Spain-Brazil, Chile, Peru. Defence Sweden-Brazil (2). Cooperation in
cooperation, with a focus on cyber defence, procurement of fighters
defence and natural disasters. aircraft and memorandum on
cooperation in military aeronautics.
France-Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador, Agreement for the
Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru. mutual protection of
Agreement on cooperation in Ukraine-Argentina. Agreement for information on strategic
defence. technical-military cooperation.
military cooperation.
Italy - Brazil, Chile. Agreement for Visegrad countries (Poland,
training in maritime operations, peace Hungary, Tcheca Republic and
operations, acquisition of vessels and Slovakia) - Brazil. Technological
joint aircraft development. cooperation and in cyber defence.
Source: Annual Institutional Report of the Ministry of Defence of Bolivia (2013), Annual Report on the Management of the National Government of Uruguay (2012), An-
nual Report of the Nicaraguan Army (2012), websites of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs of Bolivia, and the Ministries of Defence of Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, Venezuela,
of the Ministry of Popular Power for Science and Technology of Venezuela, of the Presidency of the Republic of Brazil (Portal Brasil) and of the Argentine Navy.

Chapter 5: Hemispheric Relations

US Southern Command
US Southern Command (SOUTHCOM), headquartered in Miami, Florida, is one of the nine Unifi ed Combatant Commands (UCC) of the De-
partment of Defence. It is charged with the task of providing planning, operations, and security cooperation for 31 countries in the Americas,
with the exception of Mexico (which is part of the Northern Command (1), and the islands that constitute States or territories under European
sovereignty (territories under the administration of the United States are also exempted). It also has jurisdiction over part of the Atlantic and
Pacifi c Oceans (the waters adjacent to Central American and the Caribbean countries, between the 30° and 92° West meridians) and the Gulf
of Mexico. U.S. Naval Forces Southern Command (COMUSNAVSO) is responsible for naval operations in the assigned region, acting together
and in cooperation with Southern Command. The Panama Canal is also under Southern Command’s scope of action.
Joint Interagency Task Force-South (JIATFS) Its key strategic purposes include the following:
The working group has the mission to detect, follow-up and • Supporting allied countries and other agencies it works with, in order to counteract illicit
support interdiction to disarticulate illicit traffi cking, including traffi cking.
drug traffi cking in the Caribbean Sea, the Gulf of Mexico and • Strengthening security capabilities through bonds established with allied countries.
the Eastern Pacifi c. It is located in Key West and has repre- • Positioning the United States as a leader and an allied actor through information ex-
sentatives from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Dominican change, support to regional initiatives and inter-agency cooperation, as well as private
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, France, Mexico, Peru, Spain, The sector and NGO cooperation.
Netherlands, and United Kingdom. • Building a long-lasting relationship to enhance security, stability, governance and
prosperity.
In line with this, annual exercises are conducted, rotation is carried out and advisory as-
sistance is pprovided.
SOUTHCOM Security Assistance Offi ces in the Americas(2) (1) It comprises the continental territory of the United States, Alaska, Canada, Mexico
and the surrounding waters up to approximately 500 nautical miles. It also includes the
Argentina, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Gulf of Mexico, the Florida Strait and parts of the Caribbean to include Bahamas, Puerto
Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guy- Rico and US Virgin Islands.
ana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, (2) Each offi ce is composed of at least one serving military person established in the
Peru, Surinam, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay and Venezuela. US embassy. Its missions include providing fi nancial and technical assistance, transfer
of resources, and training and services to host countries, as well as promoting military-
military contacts.
U.S. Air Forces Southern U.S. Army South U.S. Naval Forces
Tucson, Arizona San Antonio, Texas Southern Command
Mayport, Florida
FOL: Foward Operating U.S. Marine Corps
Locations: Forces South
Miami, Florida
location estabished in the territory
of another country through an U.S. Southern
agreement, from which command Command
and control can be extended or U.S. Special Operations Miami, Florida
training and tactical operation Command South
support can be provided Homestead, Florida
Joint Interagency Task
Force South
Joint Task Force Guantanamo. Key West, Florida
U.S. Naval Station
Guantanamo Bay
Forth Fleet
Assigned to COMUSNAVSO. It operates jointly with
other Southern Command components.
One of the operations conducted is the Continuing Joint Task Force Bravo
Promise Mission. Soto Cano, Honduras
This is an annual humanitarian and civil assistance
operation developed in the Caribbean, Central and
South America under the naval component charge of
Southern Command and the US Naval Forces
Southern Command. This mission is conducted in SOUTHCOM Forward
cooperation with partners from other agencies, as Operating Location
well as non-governmental organizations and other
Comalapa, El Salvador
international partners.
Beyond the Horizon –New Horizons
Conducts humanitarian assistance exercises. As part of the program, troops specialized in
SOUTHCOM Forward
engineering, construction and healthcare provide services and information to local com- Operating Location
Aruba Curaçao, Antillas
munities. The 2014 exercise was held in Belize, Guatemala and Dominican Republic. Holandesas
Operation Martillo
Its objective is to interdict illicit maritime traffi cking in the Central American region.
Southern Command participates through the JITFS.*
* More information is found in the Public Security section.
Source:Southern Command Offi ce of Public Affairs, websites of US Southern Command and United States Army South andCommand Strategyy2020, Southern
Command.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Initiatives of the United States State Department
The US State Department develops diverse initiatives that, in cooperation with other government agencies, are destined to bring assistance in
the fi ght against drug traffi cking and organized crime. These include military assistance funds:
Merida CARSI (Central American Regional Security Initiative)
Created in 2007, initially it was divided between Merida-Mexico, Me- Regional security cooperation program between the United States
rida-Central America (now CARSI) and Merida-Caribbean (now CBSI). and Central America. CARSI funds programs ranging from technical
It initially centered around training and equipping forces to combat assistance and training to strengthening the institutional capacities of
organized crime and violence. governments and improving the economic and social situation of the
Objectives: In 2013, it was decided to change Merida’s focus, focus- population in general.
ing on four pillars:
1. Disrupt Organized Criminal Groups: For which an operational
Pillars
structure and training are provided to Mexican forces.
2. Strengthen the Institutionalization of the Rule of Law. Support- 1. Creating a safe environment for citizens of the region.
ing institutions with the creation of communication and data transmis- 2. Operate on the movement of offenders to and between coun-
sion system. tries.
3. Border Issues:With the installation of modern equipment for non-
3. Support the development of government capacity.
invasive regulation.
4. Reestablish effective state presence and security in high-risk
4. Build Strong and Resilient Communities: Strengthen local in-
communities.
stitutions, with an initiative for a Culture of Legality, which aims
to combat corruption and produce the most effective means for 5. Promote improved levels of cooperation among the countries
state action. of the region.
Merida Budget (US$ millions) CARSI Budget (US$ millions)
800 150

0 0
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013* 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
* Estimated.
Note:: More information on the CBSI (Caribbean Basin Security Initiative) is found in the Carib-
bean section, and information on CARSI (Central American Regional Security Initiative) in the Public
Security section.
Its name since 2009, once “Plan Colombia” had
Colombia fi nished. 460
Strategic Objective:Support the Consolidation Plan of the Co- CSDI Budget 440
Development l p o r m og b r i a a m n s g t o h v a e t r c n o m nt e r n ib t u t t h e r t o o u e g s h ta b re li g sh io in n g a l an d d ev c e o lo n p st m ru e c n t- t (US$ millions) 420
Initiative (CSDI) ing State presence in areas disputed by groups linked to 400
organized crime. 380
2012 2013
Exchange Activities - Courses in Military Institutions
During the 2013 – 2014 period the following countries sent personnel to engage in different activities, or training:
Argentina
Chile
37 in Brazil; 24 in Chile; 23 in the United States; 9 in Peru; 8 in Spain; 7 in France; 87 in total with Latin America; 67 with other countries across the world (includ-
4 in Germany; 4 in China; 3 in Italy; 3 in Paraguay; 3 in Uruguay; 6 in other coun- ing training of other in Chile).
tries of the region (Bolivia, Ecuador, Mexico and Venezuela); 6 in other countries
(Sweden, South Africa, Canada, Poland).
El Salvador
4 in the United States; 1 in Panama; 1 in Peru; 1 in Dominican Republic; 1 in
Bolivia Germany; 14 with the United States.
9 in Latin America (Argentina, Brazil and Venezuela); 13 in China; 3 in the United
México (Navy)
States.
77 in the United States; 27 in Colombia; 7 in Argentina; 5 in Chile; 3 in China; 3
in Canada; 3 in Spain; 2 in Ecuador; 2 in Peru; 1 in Panama; 1 in Uruguay; 1 in
South Korea; 1 in Germany.
Brazil
76 in the United States; 28 in Argentina; 23 in Peru; 22 in Chile; 19 in Colombia;
Panama
12 in Canada; 12 in Bolivia; 9 in Uruguay; 9 in Venezuela; 6 in South Africa; 6 in
Ecuador; 5 in Nicaragua; 4 in France; 4 in Spain; 7 in French Guiana, Guyana and 33 in Colombia; 29 in the United States; 15 in Nicaragua; 9 in El Salvador; 9 in
Haiti (trainers); 3 in Paraguay; 2 in Guatemala; 1 in Australia; 10 on other coun- Ecuador; 6 in Brazil; 5 in Guatemala; 5 in Peru; 4 in Honduras; 4 in Costa Rica;
tries (Germany, Belgium, Holland, Israel, Italy, Norway, Portugal and Sweden); 1 in 5 in other South American countries (Argentina, Bolivia, Chile and Peru); 3 in
China; 1 in Mexico. Belize; 1 in China; 1 in Russia; 1 in France; 1 in Mexico.
Source: Compilation based on information provided by the Ministries of Defence of Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, El Salvador, the Naval Secretariat of Mexico, the Ministry
of Public Security of Panama, the Brazilian Army and Navy.
Websites of the Embassy of the United States in Mexico, of the Department of State and Southern Command of the United States; U.S. Agencies Have Allotted Bil-
lions in Andean Countries, but DOD Should Improve Its Reporting of Results Report. Appendix IV: Western Hemisphere Initiatives to Combat Narcotics Traffi cking and
Related CrimesUnited States Government Accountability Offi ce (), Congressional Research Service ReportUS- Mexican Security Cooperation: The Merida
Initiative and Beyond (), Report of the Government Accountability Offi ce of the United States Status of funding, equipment and training for the Caribbean
Basin Security Initiative(), Congressional Research Service ReportUS-Mexico Security Cooperation, The Mérida Initiative and Beyond () and
Congressional Budget Justifi cation, Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs, Fiscal Year 2015, ().