A REPORT OF
THE CSIS
AEROSPACE
SECURITY
PROJECT
S P A C E
T H R E A T
A S S E S S M E N T
2 0 2 2
Authors
TODD HARRISON
KAITLYN JOHNSON
MAKENA YOUNG
NICHOLAS WOOD
ALYSSA GOESSLER
Foreword
SUSAN M. GORDON

S P A C E
T H R E A T
A S S E S S M E N T
2 0 2 2
Authors
TODD HARRISON
KAITLYN JOHNSON
MAKENA YOUNG
NICHOLAS WOOD
ALYSSA GOESSLER
Foreword
SUSAN M. GORDON
A REPORT OF THE
CSIS AEROSPACE SECURITY PROJECT

ABOUT CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, non-
profit policy research organization dedicated to advancing practical ideas to
address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in
2015, succeeding former U.S. senator Sam Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962,
CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president and chief executive
officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by
a distinct set of values—nonpartisanship, independent thought, innovative
thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity and professionalism, and
talent development. CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making
real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks
to their research, analysis, and recommendations. We organize conferences,
publish, lecture, and make media appearances that aim to increase the knowl-
edge, awareness, and salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders
and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key
policymakers and the thinking of key influencers. We work toward a vision
of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed
herein should be understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2022 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
All rights reserved.
ABOUT ASP
The Aerospace Security Project (ASP) at CSIS explores the technological,
budgetary, and policy issues related to the air and space domains and
innovative operational concepts for air and space forces. Part of the Inter-
national Security Program at CSIS, the Aerospace Security Project is led by
Senior Fellow Todd Harrison. ASP’s research focuses on space security, air
dominance, long-range strike, and civil and commercial space. Learn more
at aerospace.csis.org.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report was made possible by general support to CSIS. No direct sponsor-
ship contributed to this report. The Aerospace Security Project would also like
to thank Hawkeye360 for their contribution of imagery and analysis of GPS
jamming in Ukraine. Finally, many thanks to Katherine Stark, William Taylor,
and Phil Meylan for their support in the publication process.
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
202-887-0200 | 
II SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

CONTENTS
IV FOREWORD
1 INTRODUCTION
2 TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
3 Kinetic Physical
3 Non-kinetic Physical
4 Electronic
4 Cyber
8 CHINA
11 RUSSIA
14 INDIA
16 IRAN
18 NORTH KOREA
20 OTHERS
20 Australia
21 Israel
21 Japan
21 South Korea
22 COUNTERSPACE ACTIVITIES
23 Curated Analysis
23 Is It a Bird? Is It a Hypersonic Glide Vehicle? Is It a Chinese FOBS Test?
24 Busy Bee in GEO, China’s SJ-21 Satellite
25 Shot Heard around the World: Russia’s 2021 ASAT Test
25 All Is Not Quiet on the Eastern Front: Russian Jamming in Ukraine
27 Counterspace Timeline, 2021
32 WHAT TO WATCH
36 ABOUT THE AUTHORS
III

FOREWORD
I T SEEMS LIKE YESTERDAY that there was a de facto duopoly
in space—the United States and Russia being the only players
of significance. While there were nascent counterspace capa-
bilities being either contemplated or demonstrated, space
was an uncontested environment. And because there were so few
assets on orbit, freedom of movement and operation was a given.
A look at 2021 disabuses each of those notions and portends a
new era where space—as we have seen with cyber—has become
the domain in which every interest of adversary or competitor
is affected.
This fifth and latest Space Threat Assessment is at once unsurpris-
ing and startling in content—unsurprising in that it continues to
record the growth of space and concomitant space threats with
unambiguous clarity, startling in that the situation unfolding for
the past decade or so has come into such sharp operational focus
with a series of singular events. China, once an afterthought in
the space race, launched the most satellites of any nation last
year, demonstrated its intention to project hard and soft power
through the growth in on-orbit military support capabilities, and
grabbed our attention and imagination with its counterspace
demonstrations ranging from hypersonic missile launches to
co-orbital rendezvous with other satellites. Russia, the earliest
innovator in space, re-grabbed our attention with its direct-as-
cent ASAT test that created a threatening debris field as well as
apparent GPS jamming in Ukraine that showed how counterspace
is being integrated into combined operations. The proliferation of
international and commercial vehicles on orbit, while presaging a
new era of space use for every aspect of governmental, business,
and societal advance, will demand attention on the responsible
use of space as a shared environment.
As space is no longer niche, counterspace capabilities cannot be
considered one-offs but rather harbingers of future operational
intent. So broad and deep is our collective reliance on space and
space assets that these threats—from kinetic strikes, to other actions
that create physical damage, to electronic, to cyber—should impel
responsive actions within the United States, with our partners,
and in a way that includes the private sector.
I commend this easy read as a great point of departure for con-
sidering our future of a contested, congested space.
SUSAN M. GORDON
Former Principal Deputy Director of National Intelligence
IV SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

INTRODUCTION
W ELCOME TO THE FIFTH EDITION of Space Threat Assessment
by the Aerospace Security Project at the Center for Strategic
and International Studies (CSIS). Over the past five years, this
assessment has used open-source information to track the
developments of counterspace weapons that threaten U.S. national security
interests in space. The United States has relied heavily on its space infrastructure
since the first satellites were placed into orbit to track and monitor nuclear
missile launches during the Cold War. Over the past six decades, the United
States has grown more reliant on the information, situational awareness,
and connectivity provided by military, civil, and commercial space systems. It
should be no surprise that these assets are a target for adversaries attempting
to gain asymmetric military advantage. In , the vice chief of
space operations, General David Thompson, said that U.S. space systems are
attacked “every single day” by reversible forms of counterspace weapons.1 The
Space Threat Assessment is critical to understanding the changing nature of
the space domain and monitoring trends in space and counterspace weapons.
TOTAL SATELLITES IN SPACE More countries are investing in space and counterspace capabilities, and
4,8522 some countries are realigning military organizations, doctrine, and strategy
to include or better reflect space and counterspace capabilities. Additionally,
two destructive kinetic physical antisatellite (ASAT) tests have occurred in the
TOTAL LAUNCHES IN 2021
past three years, which is a worrisome trend. Also of concern is the clear use

of electronic warfare capabilities to deny or degrade access to space systems,
such as jamming and spoofing. The most recent example of this is the use of
TOTAL TRACKED ORBITAL DEBRIS
GPS jamming capabilities by Russia as part of its invasion of Ukraine.
30,0404
This edition of the Space Threat Assessment is in a different structure than in
years past. It provides a discussion of the technical details that define different
types of counterspace weapons and a “highlight” or quick overview of the
main countries being tracked—China, Russia, Iran, North Korea, India, and
others. The country sections include overviews of military space organizations,
as well as launch, satellite, and counterspace capabilities. Notable in this
year’s edition is the curated analysis; four key counterspace events in 2021
were identified and analyzed in detail, followed by a more comprehensive
list of all notable counterspace activities and developments over the past
year (–). The conclusion includes an analysis of
notable trends and key issues to watch in the coming year.
For more detail on past counterspace weapons tests, including historical
tests by the United States and the Soviet Union, please review the prior
Space Threat Assessments (editions 2018–2021) or visit the Aerospace Secu-
rity Project’s interactive online timeline at 
counterspace-timeline/.

COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
TYPES OF
COUNTERSPACE
WEAPONS
S PACE IS AN INCREASINGLY IMPORTANT ENABLER of economic and
military power. The strategic importance of space has led some na-
tions to build arsenals of counterspace weapons to disrupt, degrade,
or destroy space systems and hold at risk the ability of others to
use the space domain. However, the strategic importance of space has also
spurred renewed efforts to deter or mitigate conflict and protect the domain
for peaceful uses. For example, the U.S. Space Force’s capstone publication
on space power notes that “military space forces should make every effort
to promote responsible norms of behavior that perpetuate space as a safe
and open environment in accordance with the Laws of Armed Conflict, the
Outer Space Treaty, and international law, as well as U.S. Government and
DoD policy.”5 More recently, the United States, United Kingdom, Australia, New
Zealand, Canada, Germany, and France released a joint publication known
as “Combined Space Operations Vision 2031.” This document articulates
Illustration A ballistic missile
guiding principles for the use of space, which include freedom of access
can be used as a kinetic physical
and the responsible and sustainable use of space. It specifically notes the
counterspace weapon.
increasing threats to space systems, and it states that “the lack of widely
accepted norms of responsible behavior and historical practice increases
the possibility of misperceptions and the risks of escalation.”6
2 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

Counterspace weapons, particularly those a kinetic physical attack against another precisely—technology that is costly and
that produce orbital debris, pose a serious country’s satellite, but four countries—the requires a high degree of sophistication. A
risk to the space environment and the abil- United States, Russia, China, and India— laser can be effective against a sensor on
ity of all nations to use the space domain have successfully tested direct-ascent ASAT a satellite if it is within the field of view of
for prosperity and security. This chapter weapons. The former Soviet Union also the sensor, making it possible to attribute
provides an overview and taxonomy for tested co-orbital kinetic ASAT weapons as the attack to its approximate geographical
different types of counterspace weapons. early as the 1960s. origin. An HPM weapon can be used to
Counterspace weapons vary significantly in disrupt a satellite’s electronics, corrupt
the types of effects they create, how they data stored in memory, cause processors to
are deployed, how easy they are to detect NON-KINETIC restart, and, at higher power levels, cause
and attribute, and the level of technology permanent damage to electrical circuits
PHYSICAL
and resources needed to develop and field and processors. HPM attacks can be more
difficult to attribute because the attack can
them. This report categorizes counterpace
weapons into four broad groups of capabil- NON-KINETIC PHYSICAL COUNTERSPACE come from a variety of angles, including from
weapons have physical effects on satellites other satellites passing by in orbit. For both
ities: kinetic physical, non-kinetic physical,
or ground systems without making physical laser and HPM weapons, the attacker may
electronic, and cyber.
contact. Lasers can be used to temporarily have limited ability to know if the attack
dazzle or permanently blind the sensors on was successful because it is not likely to
satellites or cause components to overheat. produce visible indicators.
KINETIC PHYSICAL
High-powered microwave (HPM) weapons
The use of a nuclear weapon in space would
can disrupt a satellite’s electronics or cause
have large-scale, indiscriminate effects that
KINETIC PHYSICAL COUNTERSPACE weap- permanent damage to electrical circuits and
would be attributable and publicly visible.
ons attempt to strike directly or detonate a processors in a satellite. A nuclear device
A nuclear detonation in space would imme-
warhead near a satellite or ground station. detonated in space can create a high radia-
diately affect satellites within range of its
The three main forms of kinetic physical tion environment and an electromagnetic
EMP and create a high radiation environment
attack are direct-ascent ASAT weapons, pulse (EMP) that would have indiscrimi-
that would accelerate the degradation of
co-orbital ASAT weapons, and ground sta- nate effects on satellites in affected orbits.
satellite components over the long term for
tion attacks. Direct-ascent ASAT weapons Non-kinetic attacks operate at the speed of
unshielded satellites in the affected orbital
are launched from Earth on a suborbital light and, in some cases, can be less visible
trajectory to strike a satellite in orbit, while to third-party observers and more difficult
co-orbital ASAT weapons are first placed to attribute.
into orbit and then later maneuvered into
Satellites can be targeted with lasers and
or near their intended target. These maneu-
HPM weapons from ground- or ship-based
vers are commonly known as rendezvous sites, airborne platforms, or other satel-
and proximity operations (RPOs). Attacks lites. A satellite lasing system requires high
on ground stations are targeted at the ter- beam quality, adaptive optics (if being used
restrial sites responsible for command and through the atmosphere), and advanced
control of satellites or the relay of satellite pointing control to steer the laser beam
mission data to users.
Kinetic physical attacks tend to cause ir-
reversible damage to the systems affected
and demonstrate a strong show of force that
would likely be attributable and publicly
visible. A successful kinetic physical attack
in space will produce orbital debris, which
can indiscriminately affect other satellites
in similar orbits. These types of attacks are
one of the only counterspace actions that
carry the potential for the loss of human
life if targeted at crewed ground stations
or at satellites in orbits where humans
are present, such as low Earth orbit (LEO),
Illustration A laser is an
where the International Space Station (ISS) example of a non-kinetic
resides. To date, no country has conducted counterspace weapon.

COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
regime. The detonation of nuclear weapons Electronic forms of attack can be difficult
in space is banned under the Partial Test to detect or distinguish from accidental
Ban Treaty of 1963, which has more than interference, making attribution and aware-
100 signatories, although China and North ness more challenging. Both jamming and
Korea are not included.7 spoofing are reversible forms of attack be-
cause once they are turned off, communi-
cations can return to normal. Through a
ELECTRONIC type of spoofing called “meaconing,” even
the encrypted military P(Y) GPS signal can
be spoofed. Meaconing does not require
ELECTRONIC COUNTERSPACE weap-
cracking the encryption because it merely
ons target the electromagnetic spectrum
rebroadcasts a time-delayed copy of the
through which space systems transmit and
original signal without decrypting it or al-
receive data. Jamming devices interfere with
tering the data.9 The technology needed to
the communications to or from satellites by
jam and spoof many types of satellite signals
generating noise in the same radio frequency
is commercially available and inexpensive,
(RF) band. An uplink jammer interferes with
making it relatively easy to proliferate among
the signal going from Earth to a satellite,
state and non-state actors.
such as the command and control uplink.
Downlink jammers target the signal from
a satellite as it propagates down to users
CYBER
on Earth. Spoofing is a form of electronic
attack where the attacker tricks a receiver
into believing a fake signal, produced by WHILE ELECTRONIC FORMS OF ATTACK
the attacker, is the real signal it is trying attempt to interfere with the transmission
to receive. A spoofer can be used to inject of RF signals, cyberattacks target the data
false information into a data stream or, itself and the systems that use, transmit,
in extremis, to issue false commands to and control the flow of data. Cyberattacks
a satellite to disrupt its operations. User on satellites can be used to monitor data
terminals with omnidirectional antennas, traffic patterns, intercept data, or insert
such as many GPS receivers and satellite false or corrupted data in a system. These
phones, have a wider field of view and thus attacks can target ground stations, end-user
are susceptible to downlink jamming and Illustration equipment, or the satellites themselves.
spoofing from a wider range of angles on Uplink and downlink jamming are two forms While cyberattacks require a high degree
the ground.8 of electronic counterspace attack. of understanding of the systems being
Receiver Truck-Mounted Jammer Receiver Receiver Truck-Mounted Jammer Receiver
UPLINK JAMMER DOWNLINK JAMMER
4 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

targeted, they do not necessarily require significant
resources to conduct. The barrier to entry is relatively
low, and cyberattacks can be contracted out to private
groups or individuals. Even if a state or non-state actor
lacks internal cyber capabilities, it may still pose a
cyber threat.
A cyberattack on space systems can result in the loss
of data or services being provided by a satellite, which
could have widespread systemic effects if used against Illustration
a system such as GPS. Cyberattacks could have perma- Cyberattacks can be used to take
nent effects if, for example, an adversary seizes control control of a satellite and damage
of a satellite through its command and control system. or destroy it.
An attacker could shut down all communications and
permanently damage the satellite by expending its
propellant supply or issuing commands that would
damage its electronics and sensors. Accurate and
timely attribution of a cyberattack can be difficult
because attackers can use a variety of methods to
conceal their identity, such as using hijacked servers
to launch an attack.

Table 1
TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
Kinetic Physical Non-kinetic Physical
6 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022
kcattA
fo
sepyT
High Altitude High-
Ground Direct-Ascent High- Laser Dazzling
Co-orbital ASAT Nuclear Powered
Station Attack ASAT Powered Laser or Blinding Detonation Microwave
noitubirttA
Variable Can be Clear attribution
attribution, Launch site can attributed by Launch site can Limited of the laser’s Limited
depending on be attributed tracking previous- be attributed attribution location at the attribution
mode of attack ly known oribt time of attack
ytilibisreveR Reversible or Reversible or
Irreversible or re- irreversible; irreversible;
Irreversible Irreversible versible depend- Irreversible Irreversible attacker may or attacker may or
ing on capabilities may not be able may not be able
to control to control
ssenerawA
May or May or
Publicly known Only satellite Only satellite Only satellite
may not be may not be
depending on Publicly known operator will be operator will be operator will be
publicly publicly
trajectory aware aware aware
known known
egamaD
rekcattA
tnemssessA Limited Limited
Near real-time Near real-time Near real-time Near real-time confirmation of confirmation of
No confirmation
confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of success if satellite success if satellite of success
success success success success begins to drift begins to drift
uncontrolled uncontrolled
egamaD
laretalloC
Station may
Orbital debris Higher radiation Could leave Could leave target
control multi- May or may not
could affect levels in orbit target satellite satellite disabled
ple satellites; produce orbital None
other satellites in would persist for disabled and and uncontrol-
potential for loss debris
similar orbits months or years uncontrollable lable
of life

Electronic Cyber

kcattA
fo
sepyT
Uplink Downlink Data Interccept Data Seizure
Spoofing
Jamming Jamming or Monitoring Corruption of Control
noitubirttA
Modest attribution Modest attribution Modest attribution Limited or Limited or Limited or
depending on mode depending on mode depending on mode uncertain uncertain uncertain
of attack of attack of attack attribution attribution attribution
ytilibisreveR
Irreversible or
Reversible Reversible Reversible Reversible Reversible reversible, depending
on mode of attack
ssenerawA
Satellite operator Satellite operator Satellite operator Satellite operator
May or may not be May or may not be
will be aware; may will be aware; may will be aware; may will be aware; may
known to the known to the
or may not be or may not be known or may not be known or may not be known
public public
known to the public to the public to the public to the public
egamaD
rekcattA
tnemssessA
Limited
confirmation of Limited
Near real-time Near real-time Near real-time
No confirmation success if monitoring confirmation of
confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of of success of the local RF success if effects
success success success
environment is are visible
possible
egamaD
laretalloC
Only dirupts the Only disrupts the
Only corrupts the Could leave target
signals targeted and signals targeted and
specific RF signals None None satellite disabled
possible adjacent possible adjacent
targeted and uncontrollable
frequencies frequencies

CHINA
CHINA
"To explore the vast F ROM ITS FIRST SATELLITE LAUNCH IN 1970 to its new space sta-
tion, Tiangong, in LEO, China has quickly become one of the most
cosmos, develop the
capable space nations. To enable its growing space and counterspace
space industry and
capabilities, China operates four spaceports and a family of Long
build China into a
March launch vehicles with a range of sizes and capabilities. In 2021, China
space power is our conducted 52 successful space launches suffered three space launch failures,
eternal dream." and reportedly conducted a non-space test launch of a hypersonic glide vehicle,
which is discussed in more detail on .11 In , China successfully
PRESIDENT XI JINPING10
landed the Zhurong rover on Mars and became the second country to land
and maneuver on the Martian surface. The mission continues to be a success,
sending new data and observations back to Earth for further analysis.12
Civil, intelligence, and military space capabilities are a priority for China as
it continues to invest in and plan for greater access to space in the coming
decade, successfully executing on the vision statement of the 2016 white paper
on space activities: “To build China into a space power in all respects.”13 In
, China released the 2021 space white paper, which continues
this growing legacy. The 2021 white paper lays out a plan for Chinese space
developments—civil, military, and intelligence—for the next five years. Ac-
cording to the paper, China plans to become a leading actor in international
governance for the space domain. The white paper identifies several areas
for future international cooperation, such as global governance, manned
8 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

spaceflight, deep-space exploration, and capabilities sits alongside other informa-
personnel and academic exchanges.14 These tion-centric domains within China’s People’s
topics are fairly consistent with other na- Liberation Army (PLA). Founded in 2015,
tional perspectives on key areas for inter- the Strategic Support Force (SSF) manages
national cooperation. these areas of developing warfare, along
with space launch and the acquisition and
operation of satellites. Within the SSF, the
ORGANIZATION Space Systems Department and Network
Systems Department (co-equal semi-inde-
pendent branches) divide responsibilities,
Similar to the United States, China has dif-
with the Space Systems Department taking
ferent organizations managing its civil and
on space and counterspace capabilities and
military space activities; however, much of
the Network Systems Department manag-
the technology for both civil and military
ing cyber, electronic, and psychological
space capabilities is produced by the same
warfare.17
state-owned enterprises.
The China National Space Administration
leads all civil space missions and falls within
LAUNCH CAPABILITIES
the purview of the State Council’s State
Administration for Science, Technology,
and Industry for National Defense. Chi- China continues to develop the Long March
na’s space program primarily contracts SLV family. The Long March-2 (variants C,
through the China Aerospace Science and D, and F), -3B, -4C, -5, -5B, -6, -7, and -11
Technology Corporation, which is a state- rockets provide light, medium, and heavy
owned enterprise with many sectors that lift capability to LEO and geostationary
research and develop space launch vehicles orbit (GEO). Some are capable of launching
(SLVs), spacecraft, missile systems (includ- from a sea-based platform, but most launch
ing intercontinental ballistic missiles), and from traditional ground-based launch pads.
supporting ground equipment.15 The China Newer Long March SLVs are being integrated
Aerospace Science and Industry Corporation into regular use, including the Long March-
is another state-owned enterprise which
7A and -8. The Long March-8 successfully
specializes in space technologies.16
completed its first launch in 
Uniquely, the military organization for space and was designed to have a returnable,
reusable first stage (much like SpaceX’s
Falcon rockets). However, this capability
Figure 1 China’s Space Launch Sites has yet to be demonstrated.18
JIUQUAN SATELLITE LAUNCH CENTER
TAIYUAN SATELLITE LAUNCH CENTER
WENCHANG SATELLITE
LAUNCH CENTER
XICHANG SPACE CENTER

CHINA
The Chinese government may not view commercial
CHINA HAS
industry as a cornerstone of space progress; however,
it does consider the commercial sector to be an op-
A ROBUST
portunity to replace China’s reliance on international
companies or suppliers.19 In 2014, the Chinese govern-
ARSENAL OF
ment lifted a restrictive policy prohibiting the creation
of commercial space launch companies and commercial SPACE AND
launch technology. Since then, several Chinese com-
mercial launch companies have been founded, and COUNTERSPACE
several are testing SLVs. Since the relaxation of this
CAPABILITIES.
policy, both Chinese private and state investors have
given funding to new commercial space companies.20
China is also investing in new launch sites. Ningbo
city, in the eastern Zhejiang Province and just south of
Shanghai, began awarding contracts to construction
and engineering companies to build a new space Egypt, Pakistan, and Nigeria. Another stated
launch site in . The future spaceport is an- goal of the 2021 white paper is to contin-
ticipated to host about 100 launches per year—China ue building on the BRI Space Information
carried out 55 launches in 2021 among all its launch Corridor.25
sites—and has been compared to the United States’
Cape Canaveral Kennedy launch site in its location.21
China is also reportedly building a new sea-based COUNTERSPACE
space launch platform, which is expected to enter
OVERVIEW
service in 2022. This investment indicates that China
is looking to have a permanent and specialized sea-
based spaceport, after successful sea-based launches China has a robust arsenal of space and
in 2020 from converted barges.22 counterspace capabilities. The 2007 di-
rect-ascent ASAT test and subsequent
non-intercept tests have demonstrated that
China has further developed this capability.
SATELLITE CAPABILITIES
Co-orbital technology demonstrations also
prove China’s ability to rendezvous with
China has increasingly robust space capabilities, in-
other satellites in GEO, and likely in LEO.
cluding advanced positioning, navigation, and timing
These demonstrations are not counterspace
(PNT); satellite communications; intelligence, surveil-
weapons tests per se but prove that China
lance, and reconnaissance (ISR) and missile warning;
has the experience and know-how to operate
in-space logistics; and space situational awareness.
co-orbital counterspace weapons. Similar
The 2021 space white paper lays out specific goals
to many countries, including Russia and the
for space capability investment, including those for
United States, non-kinetic counterspace
satellite constellation upgrades and developments.23 weapons, such as lasing or high-powered
The Beidou constellation, made of 35 PNT satellites, microwaves, remain either classified or
acts as China’s alternative to GPS and is often used as have not been tested. However, China has
a tool for the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). In 2019, proven it has a growing suite of jamming and
China introduced the Belt and Road Space Information spoofing electronic warfare capabilities to
Corridor to build out Chinese space applications and be used against space and non-space signals
services in other nations. PNT, communications, and alike. Little is known about China’s cyber
remote sensing services are highlighted as the key counterspace capabilities, but as has been
cornerstones to this new pillar of the BRI.24 The 2021 stated in previous iterations of this report,
space white paper also highlights successes of the China’s cyber capabilities in other domains
BRI Space Information Corridor, including expanding form a solid foundation for potential cyber
satellite research and development infrastructure in counterspace capabilities as well.26
10 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

RUSSIA
RUSSIA
A FTER INHERITING A LARGE PORTION of the space infrastructure
from the successful Soviet space program, Russia has worked to
maintain the prowess the Soviet Union held in the space domain
with declining success. Though its civil program has slowed in
recent years, Russia’s military space endeavors and covert actions in the
domain mimic Russian investments in other domains by prioritizing tech-
nologies focused on information gathering, as well as those suitable to gray
zone and asymmetric warfare, such as jamming and spoofing technologies
and co-orbital systems capable of conducting RPOs and close inspection of
other satellites.
ORGANIZATION
Similar to the United States and China, Russia’s state space programs are split
between civil and military organizations. The civil space agency, Roscosmos,
is one of five principal partners that supports the ISS along with the civilian
agencies of the United States, Japan, Canada, and Europe. Roscosmos is also
responsible for the Soyuz SLV and the Global Navigation Satellite System
(GLONASS), Russia’s version of GPS. Military space activities are organized
within the Russian Aerospace Forces, which was reorganized in 2015 to
include air, space, and missile defense forces.27 They are responsible for the
operation of all space-based assets, military launches, and potential threats
to space systems.28
11 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

RUSSIA HAS WORKED TO
MAINTAIN THE PROWESS THE
SOVIET UNION HELD IN THE
SPACE DOMAIN WITH DECLINING
SUCCESS.
used for human spaceflight to the ISS.34 The
LAUNCH CAPABILITIES
Plesetsk Cosmodrome is located in northern
Russia and has been used for space launches
Russia has a storied history in space launch, since 1966.35 This launch facility is often used
and the Soyuz SLV has been a long-standing for missile launches, such as the November
cornerstone of the global space market. 2021 ASAT test of the Nudol system.36 Fi-
After the U.S. Space Shuttle’s final flight in nally, Vostochny Cosmodrome is currently
2011, U.S. astronauts exclusively launched under construction in eastern Russia near
out of Russia for almost 10 years before the Chinese border and is slated to replace
SpaceX’s Dragon capsule was proven suc- the Baikonur Cosmodrome once functional.37
cessful. At over $80 million per seat, carrying As of 2019, the launch site could successfully
passengers to orbit made up 17 percent of launch Soyuz-2 rockets.38 Additionally, Russia
the Russian space agency’s annual budget has used the low-latitude Guiana Space Cen-
in 2018.29 Russia has launched 53 foreign tre operated by the European Space Agency
astronauts to the ISS, including 34 Amer- to launch Soyuz rockets since 2011, making
icans.30 Russia had 25 orbital launches in it the only country in the world to launch a
2021, 24 of which were successful. native orbital SLV from a spaceport operated
by another space agency.39
Russia has a host of SLVs that have been
successful since the Soviet space program.
The most popular Russian SLV is the Soyuz,
SATELLITE
which launches both satellites and crewed
spacecraft missions.31 These vehicles have CAPABILITIES
had over 1,680 successful launches, includ-
ing 22 in 2021.32
Russia has advanced space capabilities,
Currently, Russia is continuing tests on a a reputation it has maintained since the
new SLV called the Angara. This family of 1960s. It operates its own satellite navigation
SLVs will be capable of reaching both LEO system as an alternative to GPS, the 24-sat-
and GEO once complete. Angara A5, the ellite GLONASS constellation. GLONASS
heavy-lift vehicle, was tested in December has been in operation since 1993, and an
2021 but missed its intended orbit due to update to the constellation has been in the
an engine malfunction in the upper stage. works since 2017.40
This was only the third test flight of this
Russia is also pursuing new capabilities on
rocket, previously tested in 2014 and again
orbit. It has proven the capability to have
in 2020. A fourth test flight is scheduled
satellites that “nest” inside one another and
for some time in 2022, with hopes that
then separate in space, as well as the ability
the vehicle will be fully functional by the
to perform RPOs and to synchronize orbits
late 2020s.33
with other satellites. A consistent reminder
Russia has three main launch sites in oper- of Russia’s aptitude in orbital operations is
ation. The main space launch site is the Bai- the GEO satellite Luch that was launched
konur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, frequently in 2014. Each year Luch continues to move

RUSSIA
around in the GEO belt, getting close to a variety of
Learn more about the history of
satellites from a multitude of nations. Satellites in Luch’s behavior, including a list of
GEO are ordinarily stationary relative to the Earth, the satellite’s nearest neighbors,
which makes the activity of Luch highly atypical year at aerospace.csis.org/luch, and
after year.41 track its current location at sat-
ellitedashboard.org.
COUNTERSPACE OVERVIEW
Russia possesses counterspace weapons in all four under the name Sledopyt with
categories: kinetic physical, non-kinetic physical, the capability to gain access to
electronic, and cyber. Russia has demonstrated its radio signals emitted by foreign
kinetic capabilities frequently, including the November satellites orbiting above Russian
2021 test of a direct-ascent ASAT weapon and success- territory.43 Russia’s cyber exper-
ful co-orbital ASAT missions. Russia has maintained tise is often used for political
non-kinetic physical counterspace weapons through gain by infiltrating foreign gov-
systems such as the Peresvet high-powered laser. Its ernment systems. Space systems
electronic warfare capabilities have been on display in do not seem to be frequently
conflict areas where mobile electronic attack systems targeted through cyber warfare,
are jamming satellite communications and GPS signals though Russia is certainly ca-
over wide areas. pable of doing so. In , the director of the U.S.
A recent focus of the space program seems to be sig-
National Reconnaissance Office,
nals intelligence satellites (SIGINT) through the Liana
Christopher Scolese, warned
constellation, which is designed to intercept commu-
of potential Russian cyberat-
nications and detect objects on the ground as small
tacks against commercial and
as a car. Two additional satellites joined the Liana
government satellites, urging
constellation in February and .42 Addition-
satellite operators to “ensure
ally, Russia is developing ground-based SIGINT sites
that your systems are secure
and that you’re watching them
very closely because we know
that the Russians are effective
cyber actors.”44
Increased space debris from the Russian direct-ascent ASAT test in .
This kinetic test created over 1,500 pieces of debris in LEO.
numerica corporation
13 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

INDIA
INDIA
I NDIA’S 2019 ASAT TEST SHOCKED the global space community, as it
made India the fourth state with demonstrated direct-ascent ASAT capa-
bilities. Despite this worrisome milestone, the state has had no further
public demonstrations of counterspace capabilities or intentions. 2021
proved to be a slow year for Indian space activities across sectors. Only two
Indian space launches took place in 2021—the second of which suffered a
catastrophic failure due to a technical anomaly.85 Reports throughout 2021
claimed that border tensions with China are driving a new wave of military
space development in India.86 However, it remains to be seen if such devel-
opment is possible given the country’s ongoing budget restraints.87
ORGANIZATION
The Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) is the civilian branch of India’s
national space program. It superseded the Indian National Committee for
Space Research in 1969 and has evolved into the sixth-largest space agency in
the world.88 ISRO operates under the Department of Space, which is headed
by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
14 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

Founded in , the Defence Space Agency (DSA) geosynchronous transfer orbit and geosyn-
is charged with upholding India’s national security chronous orbit.101 The GSLV’s most recent
concerns in space, operating under the Ministry of launch in was unsuccessful,
Defence.89 The DSA is the result of a merger of the De- and the ISRO later attributed the failure to
fence Imagery Processing and Analysis Centre and the a loss of pressure in the fuel tank.102
Defence Satellite Control Centre and is headed by Air
India has two launch sites: the Thumba
Marshal Sujeet Pushpajar Dharkar.90 To date, there are
Equatorial Rocket Launch Station (TERLS)
no comprehensive publications by the agency nor its
and the Satish Dhawan Space Centre (SDSC).
subsidiary, the Defence Space Research Organisation,
The TERLS site is used predominantly for
to describe its mandate, goals, or direction.91 However,
launching sounding rockets, while the SDSC
India’s Defence Research and Development Organisation
is used primarily for space launches, al-
has been advocating for “hypersonic launch vehicle
though it has a special pad for sounding
[sic], small Inter Continental Ballistic Missiles, and
rockets.103 In , the Indian gov-
ASAT capability with capacity to strike both LEO and
ernment announced that it was drafting
Geosynchronous Orbit (GEO).”92 India has also been
a policy to enable private companies to
investing heavily in military intelligence satellites and
establish and operate launch sites both in
focusing on the contested China-India border.
and beyond the country.104 It is therefore
India’s commercial space sector continues to grow, possible that more Indian-backed launch
thanks to public-private partnerships.93 In October sites will develop in the coming years.
2021, Prime Minister Modi launched the Indian Space
Association in an effort to allow Indian space industry
actors to better engage the government.94 During the COUNTERSPACE
association’s launch, Modi praised the entrepreneurial
OVERVIEW
spirit of India in the space sector, noting the association’s
future role in capitalizing on this talent.95
India has demonstrated a successful kinetic
India has so far been silent in the wake of Russia’s ASAT
direct-ascent ASAT capability, but there
test on November 15, 2021, likely due to India’s own
have been no public reports confirming
ASAT test in 2019 and long-standing security partner-
non-kinetic capabilities. India has developed
ship with Russia.96 While India’s test was at a lower
electronic warfare systems on the ground
orbit and produced less long-lasting space debris, Jim
and has demonstrated cyber proficiency,
Bridenstine, the former NASA administrator, reported
though it not clear if India targets space sys-
that over 400 pieces of orbital debris were created by
tems in its electronic or cyber systems. India
the Indian ASAT test, causing a 44 percent increase
is also placing an emphasis on encouraging
in the potential risk posed to the ISS.97 Indian space
developments in the commercial sector in
officials stated that there is no need for a second test
hopes for an increase in the space economy
of their ASAT capabilities, noting that the kill vehicle
both domestically and internationally.105
“had the capability to neutralise the target satellites
in the entire LEO region.”98
LAUNCH CAPABILITIES
India currently has two types of operational launch-
ers: the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) and the
Geosynchronous Launch Vehicle (GSLV). The PSLV has
been dubbed “the workhorse of ISRO” as it consistently
delivers payloads to LEO.99 Its most recent launch took
place on February 14, 2022, when it successfully placed
three satellites into orbit. This marked the 54th launch
of the PSLV vehicle.100
The GSLV is the largest launch vehicle developed by
India. It has been used 14 times since its first flight
in 2001 and is primarily used to deliver payloads to

IRAN
IRAN
I RAN’S SPACE PROGRAM IS AMONG THE LARGEST in the Middle East,
and the country’s leaders regularly invoke the program as a symbol of
national strength and progress. Two failed orbital launches and one
successful suborbital launch in 2021 have complicated the ongoing re-
negotiations of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) after official
U.S. withdrawal in .45 Other countries continue to insist that Iran’s
civil and military space programs are transparent attempts to circumvent
international sanctions for an offensive ballistic missile and nuclear pro-
gram. However, Iran publicly denies any interest in pursuing such a program,
claiming its right to pursue a peaceful space program as a function of state
sovereignty.46 Majid Takht-Ravanchi, the Iranian permanent representative to
the United Nations, said that ballistic missiles and satellites are “essential to
our security and socio-economic interests” and that Iran rejects any proposal
to limit their missile and satellite programs.47
ORGANIZATION
Iran’s space program is divided between its civilian branch, the Iranian Space
Agency (ISA), and its military branch, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
(IRGC) Aerospace Force. The ISA is responsible for peaceful civilian space-
flight development and policy. It falls within the Ministry of Information and
Communication Technology and under the direction of the Supreme Space
Council, which is chaired by Iran’s president, Ebrahim Raisi.48
16 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

The IRGC Aerospace Force was created throughout the 1990s and remains the
in 2009 out of the IRGC Air Force to show primary launch site of the ISA. Shahrud was
greater attention to space as a field of na- IRAN’S PRIVATE also the site from which the IRGC launched
tional security.49 The Aerospace Industries the Noor-1 satellite aboard the Qased rocket
Organization is a military industrial sub- SECTOR HAS in .63 In 2021, satellite imagery
sidiary of Iran’s Ministry of Defense and revealed a significant buildup of adminis-
Armed Forces Logistics and is responsible BEEN USED AS trative and storage capabilities at Shahrud,
for the production of dozens of varieties likely in preparation for the solid rocket
A FRONT FOR
of Iranian missiles and rockets.50 In 2019, fuel-propelled Zaljanah and Raafe SLVs.64
the organization designed a satellite for ACQUIRING Construction of the Semnan Spaceport,
the IRGC Aerospace Force and reportedly now officially known as the Imam Khomeini
designed launchpads for satellite launches. SPACE LAUNCH Space Center, was completed in 2008 with
While the ISA is technically separate from an inaugural launch of a Shahab rocket.65
the IRGC Aerospace Force, there is sig- TECHNOLOGY Following a 2012 destructive rocket launch
failure and significant construction, the
nificant bleed-through of authority and
TO AVOID
agenda.51 Due to international sanctions center reopened its doors on July 27, 2017,
with the successful launch of a Simorgh SLV.66
against trading ballistic technology with
IMPORT AND
the Iranian government, Iran’s private sec-
tor has been used as a front for acquiring EXPORT LAWS.
space launch technology to avoid import COUNTERSPACE
and export laws. These companies, like OVERVIEW
the Iranian government, lack transparency
and accountability, and many could likely
Iran appears far from developing kinetic
be called state-owned enterprises rather
physical or non-kinetic physical counter-
than independent businesses contracted
space weapons. The country continues to
by the government.52
Vehicles develop electronic and cyber capabilities
and has been successful in jamming and
Iran’s SLV and ballistic missile technology
hacking against foreign governments and
LAUNCH CAPABILITIES is heavily influenced by or acquired from
civilian systems. Iran is developing other
other nations, particularly Russia and North
space capabilities as well and is a member
Korea.57 For example, the Shahab-3 series,
A February 1, 2021, suborbital test launch of the Asia Pacific Space Cooperation Organ-
which includes the Safir-1 and Qased SLVs,
of the new Zuljanah rocket was successful.53 isation, a China-led association “dedicated
is derived from the North Korean Nodong
On June 12, 2021, a Simorgh rocket was to promote and strengthen the development
design.58
launched without success.54 It is unclear at of collaborative space programs among its
what stage the mission experienced failure, The Shahab-5 series includes the Simorgh Member States by establishing the basis
but the Simorgh did not successfully place (also known as Safir-2), an updated design for cooperation in peaceful applications
any satellites into orbit. While satellite pho- of the Safir-1. The Sejil series includes the of space science and technology.”67 In
tography showed quick preparations for Zuljanah, which has completed suborbital 2017, Iranian officials stated that Iran has
another launch, this launch did not occur until testing and may be the most powerful Ira- a working telescope in collaboration with
December 30, 2021, and the Simorgh rocket nian rocket to date.59 In , the the group, including a domestic space sit-
again failed to enter orbit and deliver its three Iranian news agency Mehr shared a video uational awareness radar capability and
payloads.55 This was the fifth consecutive of the successful firing of the new Raafe an optical telescope capable of tracking
failure of a Simorgh rocket to achieve orbit. solid-fueled rocket motor.60 Analysts have satellites in LEO.68
noted that the new Raafe rocket motor is
President Raisi’s comments on the country’s
the same diameter as Iran’s Shahab-3 and
recent space activity categorized the launch
its variants.61
failures as “sorrowful” and “lackluster,” but
there appears to be real urgency on his
Facilities
part to get Iran’s space capabilities back on
track. His stated goals for the burgeoning Iran constructed the Shahrud Missile Test
space program include routinely launching Site with Chinese and North Korean assis-
satellites into LEO, attaining GEO by 2026, tance in the 1980s.62 This site, located over
and sending an Iranian astronaut to space 400 kilometers east of Tehran, was the main
aboard an Iranian SLV by 2032.56 launch site for the Shahab rocket series

NORTH KOREA
NORTH
KOREA
A S IN YEARS PRIOR, NORTH KOREAN STATE MEDIA emphasized
the state’s space ambitions throughout 2021. In ,
Kim Jong Un declared that the country would operate a military
reconnaissance satellite “in the near future.”69 State media also
claimed in that “Kim Jong Un set it as an immediate goal of
space development to launch a geostationary satellite into the outer space
[sic] in the near future.”70 It remains to be seen if these statements will be
matched with action, as no evidence of increased investment in North Ko-
rean space activities has surfaced. Throughout 2021, Pyongyang continued
to conduct several controversial missile tests. These tests and those that
preceded them illustrate that North Korea has adequate missile capability for
some counterspace weapons, but it has yet to exhibit the necessary sensing
and altitude control capabilities for a direct-ascent ASAT weapon.
ORGANIZATION
Most of North Korea’s public statements on its space program continue to em-
phasize its peaceful intentions. Pyongyang’s space activities are centralized in the
National Aerospace Development Administration, founded in 2014.71 A report from a state propaganda platform reiterated North Korea’s intention
to develop its space sector “in keeping with the positive international efforts for
developing and using space, a common wealth of mankind, and to developing
the economy of the country.”72 Statements of this nature have been regarded
18 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

NORTH KOREA HAS ADEQUATE MISSILE
CAPABILITY FOR SOME COUNTERSPACE
WEAPONS, BUT IT HAS YET TO EXHIBIT
THE NECESSARY SENSING AND ALTITUDE
CONTROL CAPABILITIES FOR A DIRECT-
ASCENT ASAT WEAPON.
with skepticism from the global community, which views tests indicate “continued progress in solid-propellant
North Korea’s space ambitions as part and parcel of its SRBM deployment,” they did not definitively exhibit any
nuclear ambitions. Observers have also noted a recent advances in North Korea’s missile guidance systems, a
uptick in North Korean space propaganda, as evidenced requisite step toward advancing its counterspace capa-
by “an escalation of North Korea’s messaging” on satellite bilities.81 Pyongyang wrapped up the month of January
launches.73 Despite the increase in state comments on with a test of the Hwasong-12 intermediate-range ballistic
space, no major space developments have occurred in missile that was first tested in 2017.82 While this test had
the past year. important political impacts—most prominently marking
the end of Kim Jong Un’s self-imposed moratorium on
long-range missile testing—it did not significantly advance
the state’s counterspace capabilities.83
LAUNCH CAPABILITIES
North Korea began 2022 with a bang, performing seven
COUNTERSPACE OVERVIEW
missile launches in the month of January alone.74 How-
ever, no activity has been reported at North Korea’s two
Despite consistent claims from state officials that space
known space launch facilities, Tonghae and Sohae, in
is a priority for the nation, there is no indication that
several years. In 2016, 38 North reported that the Tonghae
North Korea has made any exceptional advancements
Satellite Launching Ground remained in “caretaker status,”
in the space domain. Its missile activity has not trans-
and no launches have been reported at this facility since
lated to the space program, and it remains unlikely that
2009.75 The Sohae launch facility was partially dismantled
North Korea is actively pursuing kinetic direct-ascent
in 2018 following the summit between former president
or co-orbital ASAT weapons or any non-kinetic physical
Donald Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong Un.76
capabilities. However, the country has demonstrated
The facility was restored to full functionality following the
successful electronic warfare by showcasing its jamming
breakdown of U.S.-North Korea diplomacy.77 Despite this
capabilities, and its cyberattack threat is active and
restoration, no launches have occurred at Sohae since
viable, though most often used for economic bolstering
2016, and satellite imagery of the facility in 
rather than aimed at space assets. It is these latter two
indicated no signs of an imminent launch.78
capabilities that have the greatest potential for coun-
North Korea’s missile tests throughout January exhibited terspace applications. As the country acquires more
a range of launch capabilities that predominantly indi- advanced technology, likely through illicit means, and
cate an advanced ability to circumvent missile defense gains operating experience, threats to space systems
systems. Pyongyang announced that its January 5th and ground stations will likely become more credible.84
launch was its second test of a hypersonic missile. 38
North assesses that, like the hyperson-
ic test, it was launched from a mobile launcher using
either a medium-range ballistic missile or a boost-glide
vehicle.79 Launches three and four tested existing launch
capabilities: rail-mobile KN-23 and road-mobile KN-24
short-range ballistic missiles (SRBMs).80 While these two

OTHERS
OTHERS
W HILE CHINA, RUSSIA, IRAN, NORTH KOREA, AND INDIA
have the most public counterspace activities, other actors
are advancing counterspace capabilities as well. This chapter
examines the counterspace applications that other countries
were developing in 2021, including public remarks and changes in doctrine
and military organization.
AUSTRALIA
In , Australia announced that it would create a new military space
division within the Royal Australian Air Force in early 2022.106 This new space
division will invest $7 billion AUD on military space capabilities over the next
decade.107 Australia opened up bidding on military communication satellites
(as many as four) in and intends to spend $4 billion AUD on the
satellites.108 This new space division is likely to continue building on the close
relationship between Australia and the United States for national intelligence,
defense, and space as a close ally and Five Eyes partner.
20 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

public comments by Japan on this squadron continued
ISRAEL
to emphasize its defensive posture.118
In , Japan announced that it will soon
Israel has continued to develop its ground-
launch a second space defense unit that specializes in
based laser technology systems to help
protecting its satellites from electromagnetic attacks.119
intercept incoming attacks in its airspace.109
This unit, like the first, aims to align its activities closely
In , the head of Israel’s Missile
with the United States. Per the terms of an 
Defense Ministry announced that this laser
memorandum of understanding signed by U.S. Space
technology would be integrated into its
Command and JASDF, a JASDF liaison officer will be
Iron Dome missile defense system.110 The
stationed full-time at U.S. Space Command’s head-
development of this system has sped up in
quarters in Colorado.120
response to House Democrats’ removal of
$1 billion of funding for the Iron Dome sys- While Japan has not demonstrated any direct-ascent
tem in .111 Reports indicate ASAT systems, the country has U.S.-made SM-3 mis-
that Israel aims to have this system fully sile defense interceptors that have a latent ability to
operational by mid-2022.112 However, there attack space assets in LEO. In , Lockheed
are many additional technical challenges Martin confirmed that it had successfully integrated
for lasing a satellite from Earth that Israel an enhanced radar system into Japan’s Aegis Weapon
has not yet demonstrated. System, enabling it to “detect, track and discriminate
ballistic missile threats, and successfully guide inter-
Israel has also been partnering with other
ceptors to those threats.”121
nations in space. In the wake of the signing
of the Abraham Accords in 2020, several
reports indicate that Israel and the United
SOUTH KOREA
Arab Emirates (UAE) have discussed col-
laboration in military space efforts.113 Few
details on the form of this collaboration South Korea expanded the purview of its military forces
have emerged, but the UAE recently inquired in the space domain with the relaxation of a restriction
about obtaining a missile defense system on the country’s missile and SLV production in 2020
from Israel.114 and by pursuing several steps to work closer with the
U.S. Space Force, including a formal space security
partnership between the two nations.122 South Korea
JAPAN tested its first domestic national SLV on October 21,
2021. Though unsuccessful at placing the test satellite
into orbit, it was a significant first step for the burgeon-
Japan continues to advance its civil and mil-
ing space nation.123 South Korea intends to invest $13
itary space operations. Prior to the passage
billion from 2020 to 2030 in its domestic industry to
of the 2008 Basic Space Law, Japan had a
develop military satellite technologies.124
national policy that prohibited the use of
space for national defense.115 The 2008 law
permitted the country to begin military
developments in space, and government
officials have begun to speak about the
development of defensive counterspace
capabilities.116 The timing of this law and
the ramping up of many counterspace de-
velopments are in response to actions by
China in space, such as the 2007 Chinese
ASAT test.
Japan established its first military space
squadron in 2021, the Space Domain Mission
Unit within the Japan Air Self-Defense Force
(JASDF). The squadron is slated to be fully
operational by 2023, with plans to launch
the first satellite for monitoring the space
environment by 2026.117 Throughout 2021,

COUNTERSPACE ACTIVITIES
COUNTERSPACE
ACTIVITIES: A
YEAR IN REVIEW
T HIS EDITION OF THE SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT highlights four
key events from the year: the Chinese hypersonic glide
vehicle test; the launch and behavior of a new Chinese GEO satellite,
SJ-21; the Russian direct-ascent ASAT test in LEO;
and Russia’s GPS jamming in Ukraine. Two of these events, both conducted
by China, are not counterspace weapons tests but received significant press
coverage that regularly implied that they could be space or counterspace
weapons. The curated analyses that detail the four selected key events are
followed by a timeline of other counterspace incidents over the past year.
For a complete timeline of counterspace activities from 1959 to 2021, visit
aerospace.csis.org/counterspacetimeline/.
22 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

system that basically goes into orbit and the hypersonic missile in orbit or merely on
CURATED ANALYSIS
then de-orbits to a target.”129 an extended suborbital trajectory, which
would be normal for a long-range missile
Outgoing vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs
Is It a Bird? Is It a Hypersonic test. The official Space-Track.org catalog
of Staff, General John Hyten, also confirmed
maintained by the Space Force does not
Glide Vehicle? Is It a Chinese parts of the story in a in-
include any items with a launch date from
FOBS Test? terview. Speaking of the reported July test,
July 22 through July 28, either in orbit or
he said, “They [China] launched a long-
One of the most significant space-related having re-entered.134
range missile. . . . It went around the world,
stories that emerged in 2021 was the alleged
dropped off a hypersonic glide vehicle that The idea of placing a hypersonic missile into
test of a Chinese hypersonic glide vehicle,
glided all the way back to China, that im- orbit around the Earth would not appear to
which some have called a Fractional Or-
pacted a target in China.”130 Importantly, he be as advantageous as some have assumed.
bital Bombardment System (FOBS) test,
Traveling at a higher altitude for a longer
went on to add that these weapons “look
although the reporting on this event has
time makes the missile more likely to be
like a first-use weapon,” which could be
been inconsistent, incomplete, and largely
detected and tracked, and completing a
used to launch a surprise nuclear attack.131
based on anonymous sources. Importantly,
full orbit around the Earth takes roughly 90
Hyten made these public remarks about
the details reported to date do not indicate
minutes. The main advantages of hypersonic
it being a first-use weapon as the Biden
that this was a test of a Chinese space or
glide weapons are that they travel below
administration was considering adopting
counterspace weapon.
the typical trajectory of long-range ballistic
a no-first-use policy in its Nuclear Posture
The story first appeared in a Financial Times missiles, are highly maneuverable, and can
Review.132 General Hyten has previously
article on October 16, 2021, that claimed reach their targets quickly leaving little time
voiced his opposition to the United States
the test took place sometime in August.125 to react. Sending one of these weapons
adopting a no-first-use policy, and several
Later reporting by the Financial Times cor- into orbit and on a trajectory that is nearly
reports and op-eds appeared around the
rected the date to July 27.126 Both the initial 25,000 miles longer than necessary (the
time the Financial Times story leaked which
report and the follow-up claim that the circumference of the Earth) would negate
argued against the United States adopting
test involved a nuclear-capable hypersonic many of these advantages. Moreover, if the
a no-first-use policy.133
weapon that circled the Earth for at least weapon was nuclear-armed, placing it on
one orbit. According to the Financial Times, Since the story broke, little additional ev- a trajectory that makes a full orbit would
the weapon deorbited and glided toward a idence has emerged to clarify how U.S. violate the Outer Space Treaty of 1967, of
target, missing it by two dozen miles. The intelligence determined that this was a which China is a signatory.135
initial reporting was based on five anon- “nuclear-capable” weapon being tested, It is possible that two separate test events
ymous sources that leaked the classified nor has it been confirmed that a projectile in July were conflated in the reporting:
information at roughly the same time. It was fired from the hypersonic missile in the test of a hypersonic missile on a more
is not clear if these leaks were coordinat- flight. It is also not clear if the test placed traditional trajectory that fired projectiles
ed or coincidental. The follow-up report (countermeasures) in flight and a separate
included additional details, claiming that test of a hypersonic glide vehicle on an
the hypersonic missile fired a projectile orbital trajectory. When responding to the
during its flight and that it was an “orbital DETAILS initial Financial Times article, the Chinese
bombardment system.”127 Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a state-
REPORTED ment pointing to its test of a hypersonic
Parts of the story appear to be substanti-
glide reusable spaceplane on July 16, 2021.136
ated by separate on-the-record comments
TO DATE DO
from senior U.S. government officials both The headlines calling this an “orbital bom-
before and after the story appeared. In a NOT INDICATE bardment system” may have sounded alarm
speech on September 20, 2021, Air Force bells about Chinese advancements in space
secretary Frank Kendall alluded to Chi- THAT THIS weapons, but the reality appears to be much
na developing “precision weapons with different. The complete details of the test
steadily increasingly range . . . including WAS A TEST and what the United States was able to
the potential for global strikes, strikes observe (rather than infer) may never be
from space.”128 In follow-up questioning by OF A CHINESE fully revealed. However, what is clear is
reporters, he spoke in more hypothetical that nothing in the reporting suggests that
SPACE OR
terms, saying that “ there is a potential this is a weapon that would be stationed
for weapons to be launched into space, in space for periods longer than one orbit,
COUNTERSPACE
then go through this old concept from nor does it indicate that the weapon would
the Cold War called the Fractional Orbit- be capable of targeting satellites. The test
WEAPON.
al Bombardment System . . . which is a underscores the need for the United States

and its allies to improve defenses against orbit after orbital insertion.”140 Given what graveyard on January 26, 2022.141 The GEO
hypersonic weapons, but it does not ap- followed these maneuvers, this series of graveyard is several hundred kilometers
pear to be a new development in space or RPOs could have been a series of on-orbit higher than the geostationary belt in order
counterspace weapons. tests for the new satellite, with a relatively to keep “dead” or inoperable satellites out
low-stakes space object, before moving on
of the way from active satellites. Compass
Busy Bee in GEO, to the satellite’s next mission.
G2 is now in a more sustainable location
China’s SJ-21 Satellite
and has a negligible likelihood of interfering
Graveyard Tug
The Shijian-21 (SJ-21) satellite was launched Following its RPOs with SJ-21 AKM, SJ-21 with active GEO satellites.
on October 24, 2021, and inserted into GEO maneuvered westward to rendezvous with
China is no novice in performing RPOs in
soon after. According to Xinhua, Chinese the Compass G2 satellite, part of the Chinese
GEO. SJ-17, another inspector satellite,
state media, the satellite’s mission is to test Beidou constellation of PNT satellites. Prior
has been conducting similar operations
technologies that will mitigate space debris.137 to SJ-21’s encounter, Compass G2 was drift-
for years. However, with SJ-17 seeming-
Within its first couple of months on orbit, ing westward and increasing in inclination.
ly completing or pausing its mission (it
SJ-21 has performed several advanced tests The satellite failed not long after its launch
has not been within 10 km of any satellite
and maneuvers, including the release of a in 2009 and has been uncontrolled since.
subsatellite or apogee kick motor (AKM), since 2020), SJ-21 may be China’s next GEO
According to Exoanalytic Solutions, a com-
close approaches with other satellites in demonstrator.142 These RPO and tug capa-
mercial space situational awareness and
GEO, and removal of a non-functioning bilities are akin to other on-orbit servicing,
satellite tracking company, SJ-21 performed
satellite to a disposal orbit. assembly, and manufacturing satellites, and
RPOs around Compass G2 for several days
the test was not used for counterspace pur-
Subsatellite or before docking with the inactive satellite
poses.143 However, the technical capabilities
Apogee Kick Motor? on January 22, 2022. SJ-21 then began to
move Compass G2 3,000 km above GEO, to perform such maneuvers, and grapple
One week after SJ-21’s launch, the U.S. Space
drifting in a westward direction. The full with inactive satellites, are some of the
Force noted that a new satellite, possibly an
AKM, was next to SJ-21 in GEO.138 AKMs are maneuver lasted about three days, with same capabilities necessary for co-orbital
SJ-21 releasing Compass G2 into the GEO counterspace weapons.
additional power sources in order to place a
satellite into a specific orbit, and some can
detach and become unmaneuverable space
debris. Since GEO is a limited and highly
valued orbit, most AKMs in GEO are released
in such a manner that they separate and put
significant distance between the payload
and the AKM so as to not interfere with that
satellite’s future operations. The U.S. Space
Force labeled the space object as SJ-21 AKM
in the Space-Track.org database. What caused
concern and confusion among satellite ob-
servers was the close proximity SJ-21 AKM
maintained to SJ-21. In the following weeks,
SJ-21 performed several RPOs around SJ-21
AKM, a highly unusual behavior.139
In mid-December, SJ-21 maneuvered away
from the possible AKM. Several days later,
on December 22, it returned to perform
more RPOs in the space nearby. As MIT’s
Thomas Roberts has noted, “On December
28, the two objects separated again when
SJ-21 AKM suspended its westward drift,
further exhibiting behavior that is unfit- Figure 2 Historical longitudes showing the rendezvous of SJ-21 with Compass G2.
ting for an apogee kick motor, a launch
satellite dashboard (data available at satellitedashboard.org)
vehicle component that rarely remains in
24 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022
)˚(
EDUTIGNOL
COUNTERSPACE ACTIVITIES
200˚E
150˚E
100˚E
50˚E
0˚E
50˚W
100˚W
150˚W
200˚W
NOV DEC JAN FEB MAR
COMPASS G2 SJ-21

can be created after a demonstration. This
Shot Heard around the World:
became notable after the 2007 Chinese
Russia’s 2021 ASAT Test
ASAT test—the largest single debris creation THE 2021
One of the most notable and visible counter- event—which created a cloud of debris in
space activities of 2021 was a Russian ASAT LEO.147 The 2021 Russian ASAT test created RUSSIAN ASAT
test performed on November 15. A PL-19 a near-immediate debris field of over 1,500
TEST CREATED
Nudol interceptor missile was launched objects according to U.S. Space Command
from the Plesetsk mobile missile launch and likely hundreds of thousands of smaller
A NEAR-
complex and successfully hit and destroyed pieces of debris that are unable to be con-
a defunct Russian satellite, Cosmos 1408, sistently tracked.148 The debris field is so
IMMEDIATE
that had been in orbit since 1982.144 Russia serious that two American astronauts, one
has possessed this kinetic direct-ascent ASAT German astronaut, and notably two Russian DEBRIS FIELD
capability for years. From 2015 to 2020, the cosmonauts on the ISS had to shelter in
Nudol system was tested 10 times, of which place immediately after the test. NASA’s OF OVER 1,500
the last 8 were successful. Though they did move to protect the astronauts was at odds
not hit targets in orbit, these 8 successful with the Russian Foreign Ministry, which OBJECTS.
tests showcased the full capability of the denied any danger to the orbital space
Nudol system, which made this kinetic station the day after the test took place.
impact test a surprise to many space an- U.S. officials from the State Department,
alysts around the world. After the test, an members of Congress, and NASA were all
anchor on a state-run program on Channel quick to speak out against the kinetic ASAT
One indicated that Russia was capable of test. UK defense secretary Ben Wallace
destroying all 32 U.S. GPS satellites, which added to these statements, as did French
are also used by the North Atlantic Treaty defense minister Florence Parly and NATO
Organization (NATO) alliance—although secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg.149 In
the November test did not demonstrate early 2022, the China National Space Admin-
such a capability.145 istration, issued a possible collision warning
between a piece of trackable debris from this
Russia’s Rationale
test and a Tsinghua science satellite.150 This
Russia has taken great pride in being on the
event was shared widely by Chinese media
cutting edge of space technology since the
and corroborated by U.S. space tracking
1960s space race, but in recent years the
data. Despite widely reporting this close
country has launched significantly fewer
approach warning, Chinese officials have
space objects. This ASAT test may have
not commented on the Russian ASAT test,
been a way to loudly remind the world that
likely because of its own history with de-
the country is still a major space power
bris-creating ASAT demonstrations and its
with meaningful military capabilities and tenuous geopolitical alliance with Russia.151
ensure that Russia was not left out of any
norms-building discussions surrounding All Is Not Quiet on the
ASAT weapons. Only three other countries Eastern Front: Russian
have demonstrated this kinetic capabili- Jamming in Ukraine
ty: China, India, and the United States. In
Russian forces are actively using GPS jam-
, the United Nations General
ming and other forms of electronic attack in
Assembly First Committee, which addresses
the escalating conflict in Ukraine. Russian
disarmament and international security
troops moved jamming equipment into the
issues, was set to hold an international
areas where troops were massing ahead of
working group designed to thwart an arms
the invasion. GPS jamming has become a
race in space, but the discussion was de-
common tool in Russia’s arsenal, and the
layed after Russia requested more time to
Russian military has frequently jammed
prepare—likely due to its plan to invade
GPS signals in Ukraine since 2014.152 Well
Ukraine.146
before the invasion began on the morning
Impact and Implications of February 24, 2022, Russia was actively
ASAT tests have been widely condemned jamming GPS signals throughout the area.
because of the amount of space debris that This story is an ongoing development, and it

COUNTERSPACE ACTIVITIES
is likely that events have changed between
the writing of this paper and its publication.
In , the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
confirmed the presence of R-330Zh Zhitel
jammers in the area. The R-330Zh Zhitel
system has the capability to interfere with
satellite and cellular communications.153
However, these reports did not specify which
systems are currently active in the region.
Krasukha-4 jammers were reportedly spot-
ted near Gomel, Belarus, a city near the
southern border.154 While mainly used to
jam airborne radar, Krasukha-4 also report-
edly interferes with “observations of radar
reconnaissance satellites.” The Krasukha-4
has a 180-mile range, indicating that these
systems are likely being used to hide or
Figure 3 Map of GPS interference
mask Russian troops or machinery from
in .
others’ systems rather than counter the
ELECTRONIC
use of GPS or satellite communications hawkeye360
within Ukraine.155
AND CYBER
As early as April 6, 2021, the OSCE, which
was monitoring the Russian buildup of WARFARE
forces around Ukraine, reported that one
CONTINUE
of their uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAVs) was
unable to take off and perform its monitor-
TO BE KEY
ing mission due to GPS interference. The suspected GPS jammers identified as the
press release noted that this had been a possible causes of the interference shown in
COMPONENTS
consistent issue for OSCE UAVs for several Figure 3 may be operated by either Russian
weeks, but this incident was the first that forces, which moved into the Donbas region OF RUSSIAN
completely halted a mission. It is likely that early in the invasion, or separatist militias,
Russian electronic warfare technology was which were already in Donetsk and Luhansk. STRATEGY
the cause.156 Ambassador Michael Carpenter,
Emissions from the GPS jammers were de-
the U.S. ambassador to the OSCE, stated AND MILITARY
tected and geolocated by the Hawkeye360
in that “Last week monitors
constellation of satellites. The orange el-
noted instances of GPS signal interference OPERATIONS IN
lipses in the figure indicate the estimated
caused by probable jamming.”157 More recent
locations of the RF interference, and over-
UKRAINE.
reporting, as of mid-, notes
lapping ellipses from multiple satellite
that GPS jamming continues to hinder the
passes can be used to more precisely locate
OSCE monitoring mission.158
a jammer. The data shown in Figure 3 was
As shown in Figure 3, data and analysis obtained between November 13, 2021, and
from U.S. commercial firm Hawkeye360 was December 1, 2021, before Russia’s invasion
used to estimate the locations of suspect- of Ukraine. However, electronic and cyber
ed Russian GPS jammers near Varvarivka warfare continue to be key components of
in the Donetsk region of Ukraine. Since Russian strategy and military operations
the 2014 invasion of Crimea, two regions in Ukraine, and GPS and satellite commu-
in particular, Donetsk and Luhansk, have nications jamming is likely to continue or
been divided into Ukrainian-controlled increase as the war unfolds.159
and Russian-backed separatist areas. The
26 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

COUNTERSPACE TIMELINE, 2021

JAN. 9, 2021 RUSSIA
Kinetic Physical Russia jammed GPS for NATO sources
Non-kinetic Physical
Jamming
Electronic
Russia has been intermittently jamming Ukrainian radio, cell, and satellite
Cyber
signals for years. With the growing presence of Russian troops in and
Other outside of Ukraine, reports of GPS jamming have increased.160
JAN. 23, 2021 INDIA
Indian thieves attempt GPS jamming in India
Jamming
Thieves in India attempted to use localized GPS jamming devices to
steal gold. The devices failed and police were able to locate the truck
with the stolen goods.161
FEB. 1, 2021 UNITED STATES
Unintentional localized GPS jamming in the United States
Jamming
Localized jamming near the Wilmington airport in North Carolina was
detected and disrupted air traffic. The source of the unintentional jam-
ming was identified as a utility company’s wireless control system near
the airport.162
MAR. 12, 2021 CHINA
Commercial jammers that look like everyday objects
Jamming
Localized jamming equipment designed to look like everyday objects,
such as USB drives or art, have been identified in China, but they are not
for sale to private citizens or organizations.163
APR. 6, 2021 RUSSIA
GPS jamming of OSCE mission in Ukraine by Russian troops
Jamming
Russia uses GPS jamming throughout the growing tension on the Ukrainian
border. The OSCE reports GPS interference on its UAVs that assist in the
monitoring mission.164 For more information, see .

COUNTERSPACE ACTIVITIES
APR. 20, 2021 CHINA
Kinetic Physical SJ-17 reported to have a robotic arm
Non-kinetic Physical Co-orbital
Electronic
In a statement to the Senate Armed Services Committee, commander of
Cyber United States Space Command, General James H. Dickinson, announced
Other that China’s GEO inspector satellite SJ-17 had a robotic arm onboard,
which had not previously been disclosed.165 SJ-17 has a documented
history of inspection and RPOs with other Chinese satellites in GEO.
See previous issues of the Space Threat Assessment for more details.166
MAY 28, 2021
Tanker spoofs own location to hide activities
Spoofing
In late , news reports surfaced of a Cyprus-flagged oil tanker
named Berlina, which had seemingly spoofed its own GPS-backed au-
tomatic identification system (AIS) signal in order to evade sanctions
and transport illegal oil from Venezuela.167 Events such as this have been
occurring for years and are becoming increasingly common in order to
hide illegal shipping activities from authorities.168
JUN. 17, 2021 RUSSIA
Two NATO ships’ locations spoofed
Spoofing
The positions of a UK Royal Navy destroyer and a Dutch Royal Navy ship
moored in Odessa, Ukraine, on the Black Sea on a mission for NATO
were falsified via spoofing. The two ships’ AIS signals reported them as
being near a Russian naval base in Crimea, which was 180 miles away
from their actual location.169
JUN. 30, 2021 RUSSIA
U.S. warship’s location spoofed
Spoofing
Similar to the spoofing case in mid-June of two NATO vessels, the posi-
tion of a U.S. Navy Arleigh Burke destroyer was also spoofed. The ship’s
position was similarly spoofed to indicate it was near a Russian naval
base in Crimea when it was actually within Ukrainian waters.170
28 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

JUL. 27, 2021 CHINA
Kinetic Physical Possible Chinese hypersonic weapon or FOBS test
Non-kinetic Physical
Neither a hypersonic glide vehicle nor a FOBS capability would fall
Electronic
within this assessment’s definition of a counterspace weapon. However,
Cyber discussion is included on this event because it was widely reported as a
Other potential space or counterspace weapon. The lack of reliable information
about the Chinese test makes open-source analysis challenging. For
more information, see .
JUL. 29, 2021 AUSTRALIA
Australia announces electronic warfare project
Jamming
Australian minister for defense Peter Dutton announced the establish-
ment of a new defense project that will explore the potential research,
development, and acquisition of space electronic warfare capabilities,
such as jamming and spoofing. There was no anticipated timeline for
the project, dubbed Defence Project 9358.171
SEPT. 25, 2021 OTHER
Instructions for GPS spoofing easily found online
Spoofing
An article showcases that GPS spoofing code is easily found on Github
and other online sites such as YouTube. Similar to how public instruc-
tions for GPS jammers flooded the open market years ago, this wave
of spoofing instructions could lead to the wholesale of cheap spoofing
equipment worldwide.172
OCT. 23, 2021 CHINA
On-Orbit ASAT capture and destruction
Co-orbital
Chinese scientists publish a paper in a journal entitled Electronic Tech-
nology and Software Engineering, organized by the Chinese Association
for Science and Technology and the Chinese Institute of Electronics. The
paper describes how an explosive device could be placed on an enemy
satellite via another satellite. According to the paper, the research was
funded by the Chinese government.173
NOV. 1, 2021 CHINA
SJ-21 performs first RPOs in GEO
Co-orbital
Chinese satellite SJ-21, launched in late , was observed
performing RPOs with either a subsatellite or the satellite’s AKM. This
new satellite was labeled by the U.S. Space Force’s 18th Space Control
Squadron as SJ-21 AKM in the Space-Track database.174 For more infor-
mation on SJ-21 and its activities, see .

COUNTERSPACE ACTIVITIES
NOV. 15, 2021 RUSSIA
Kinetic Physical Russia tests a direct-ascent ASAT capability in LEO
Non-kinetic Physical Direct-Ascent
Electronic
Russia conducted a live fire test of a ground-based kinetic physical di-
Cyber rect-ascent ASAT weapon in LEO, at about 400–500 km above the Earth’s
Other surface. The warhead impacted a long defunct Soviet satellite and created
significant amounts of space debris.175 For more information, see .
NOV. 21, 2021 CHINA
New facilities for electronic warfare built on Hainan Island
Jamming
Satellite imagery analysis shows new signals intelligence facilities being
built on Hainan Island, likely for Chinese operations in the South China
Sea. These facilities may contribute to the interception and collection
of satellite signals, potential jamming technology, or other electronic
warfare capabilities.176
NOV. 29, 2021 RUSSIA
Russia threatens GPS on state TV
Direct-Ascent
On Russian state TV, the Kremlin warned that the direct-ascent ASAT
capability it tested days earlier could destroy U.S. GPS satellites in space.
This indicates that the system tested may have the capacity to reach
higher altitudes than where it was tested in LEO. The comments also
indicated that Russia has enough missiles (or warheads) to target and
destroy all 32 GPS satellites simultaneously.177
DEC. 29, 2021 RUSSIA
S-550 missile could be used against satellites
Direct-Ascent
Russia’s new long-range interceptor missile, the S-550, was brought online
and “entered combat duty” in . A state media outlet, TASS,
reported on comments by Russian defense officials who stated that the
new missile system was capable of intercepting intercontinental ballistic
missiles as well as satellites in orbit.178
30 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

JAN.–DEC. 2021 INDONESIA
Kinetic Physical Delivery drivers using jamming and spoofing
Non-kinetic Physical Spoofing
Electronic
Delivery drivers in Indonesia have begun to spoof their own GPS signal
Cyber in order to circumvent food delivery app locations. This allows them
Other to remain under cover instead of in an open parking lot or be on the
move delivering one order and receiving instructions for a second one
simultaneously. While not harmful to nation-states, these activities
further highlight the ease, accessibility, and proliferation of electronic
counterspace systems.179

JAN. 7, 2022 UNKNOWN
Undersea cable cut to Nordic ground station
Ground Station Attack
An undersea cable between Norway and the Svalbard archipelago in the
Arctic Ocean was severed. This was announced by Space Norway AS, a
state-run company that maintains the fiber-optic cable and operates
the Svalbard Satellite Station.180 There has been no identification of the
attacker. The system had redundancy built in and was fully reliant on
the second undersea cable until January 21, 2022, when the damaged
cable was restored.181
FEB. 24, 2022 RUSSIA
Suspected hack of Viasat ground terminals in Eastern
Europe, including Ukraine
Denial of Service
Viasat, a space broadband communications company, reported severe
disruption to its ground terminals in Eastern Europe, including Ukraine,
beginning on the day of the Russian invasion into Ukraine.182 Russian
involvement in this cyber denial of service attack is suspected, but has
not been confirmed.183

WHAT TO WATCH
WHAT TO WATCH
U NFORTUNATELY, MANY PREDICTIONS FROM PREVIOUS assess-
ments have been realized over the past five years. The 2020 edition
noted that “the rate of satellite jamming and spoofing incidents
will only increase as these capabilities continue to proliferate
and become more sophisticated” and that “more nations may continue to
reorganize and elevate space forces within their militaries both to focus at-
tention internally and to signal externally.”184 The 2021 edition of this report
predicted that Russia was the “most likely nation” to conduct additional
counterspace testing, which proved true only months later.185 These and other
identified trends signal that counterspace weapons are no longer emerging
technologies—many are fully developed, tested, and operational systems.
While more sophisticated counterspace weapons, such as direct-ascent ASAT
missiles, belong to only a handful of nation states, many nations have access
to electronic and cyber counterspace technologies, and these capabilities
are proliferating among non-state actors and individuals as well. This has
created a self-reinforcing cycle of more nations investing in counterspace
weapons, both offensive and defensive, to deter attacks in space and provide
the ability to respond in kind if deterrence fails.
32 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

ELECTRONIC WARFARE
MANY PREDICTIONS FROM
Notably, this year’s assessment highlights the prolifera-
tion of electronic warfare to counterspace capabilities, PREVIOUS ASSESSMENTS
particularly GPS. The proliferation is twofold; this year
saw an increase in both the amount of activity and the HAVE BEEN REALIZED OVER
depth and complexity of the attacks being used. The
THE PAST FIVE YEARS.
cases noted in the timeline section of thieves in India,
food delivery drivers in Indonesia, illegal shipping, and
open access to spoofing code on Github all serve to
denote the ease of access to localized jamming and
spoofing capabilities and how they are proliferating
around the globe. Moreover, the use of GPS jamming
aggression in space (see Defense Against
in Russia’s war on Ukraine and the Chinese military’s
the Dark Arts in Space for more details on
advancement of electronic warfare capabilities in the
space defense).186 Over the course of the
South China Sea showcase the uses this technology
past five years, more countries have re-
has for nation-states both before and during a poten-
organized their national security space
tial conflict. These trends are likely to continue, as the
enterprises and have begun to speak more
denial of GPS or satellite communications can have a
openly about defending space assets. This
great effect, be conducted with little risk for the user,
wave of countries includes Australia, China,
and has already been shown to not pass the threshold
France, Germany, South Korea, the United
of triggering or escalating a conflict.
Kingdom, and the United States. NATO has
also signaled an expanded focus on military
operations in the space domain.
RUSSIAN ASAT TEST
At NATO’s 2021 summit in Brussels, lead-
ers announced that an attack on a NATO
The importance of the debris-creating direct-ascent member’s space assets could result in an
ASAT test conducted by Russia in invocation of Article 5, which provides that
cannot be overstated. The motivations are still largely an attack on one ally is an attack on all.187 In
unknown as to why Russia broke its decades-long , NATO published its first public
moratorium on debris-producing tests after its Nudol space policy for the alliance, which notes
system had been proven successful time and time that potential adversaries are pursuing a
again through tests that did not create orbital debris. wide range of counterspace capabilities
The international uproar following the test, and many designed to impair NATO’s access to space.188
collision avoidance warnings to the occupied ISS, may In 2020, NATO members decided
have discouraged Russia from conducting a similar to establish a joint space center
test in the near future. Nonetheless, the 2021 test has in Ramstein, Germany, to coor-
shaken the international space community’s belief dinate the allies’ space activi- A GROWING
in the sanctity and safety of the space environment ties, as well as a Space Center of
TREND IS THE
for all nations. The international condemnation from Excellence in Toulouse, France.189
this test may also sway other nations from testing In 2021, Germany stood up INCREASING
debris-creating ASAT weapons or ensure that such a military space unit, joining
tests are conducted at an altitude where less debris other NATO members, name- NUMBER OF
will remain in orbit, as India did in 2019. ly the United States, United
Kingdom, Italy, and France, in COUNTRIES
taking similar steps. France has
INTERESTED
COUNTERING also publicly stated its intent to
develop defensive anti-satellite
COUNTERSPACE IN DEFENSIVE
laser weapons which would be
able to blind, but not destroy,
COUNTERSPACE
A growing trend is the increasing number of countries an adversary’s satellite.190 A key
interested in defensive counterspace weapons or active trend to watch in the coming
WEAPONS.
defenses to protect valuable space assets and deter year is whether NATO mem-

WHAT TO WATCH
researching and integrating defenses into
satellites will become a more important
consideration.
CONFLICTS ON
EARTH AFFECTING
COOPERATION IN
SPACE
The potential geopolitical ramifications of
conflicts on Earth for international space
cooperation cannot be ignored. Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine highlights long-standing
tensions and shifts in global relationships,
bers and other non-NATO allies continue
U.S. Space Force chief General Raymond even those in space. While NASA and Ro-
establishing national space commands
briefing NATO in 2019. scosmos have thus far continued their
and military space units to focus more
working relationship on the ISS, the future
nato193
directly on the challenges they face in the remains uncertain as sanctions impact the
space domain. Russian aerospace sector and other space
The United States government is also pub- agreements come into question.194 Ros-
licly discussing the advantages of building cosmos director general Dmitry Rogozin
has been outspoken against sanctions
better protections against counterspace
and implied on Twitter that further U.S.
attacks. In , chief of space op-
sanctions may destroy the relationship
erations General John “Jay” Raymond
with NASA, including on the ISS. Rogozin
publicly stated that the Space Force was
rhetorically questioned the future of the ISS
pursuing research and development of
based on the fact that the Russian Progress
directed-energy weapons to defend satel-
cargo capsules and the Russian servicing
lites from attack.191 With the establishment
module provide primary propulsion and
of the Space Force in 2019, conversations
orbit raising maneuvers for the station. At
about how to better protect valuable space
the end of a tweet thread about the ISS’s
assets, such as GPS and ISR satellites,
reliance on Russia, Rogozin rhetorically
have provided insight into the priorities
asks the United States “Do you want to
of the newest military service and how it
destroy our cooperation on the ISS?”195 After
views the utility of defensive counterspace
the European Union imposed sanctions
capabilities.
on Russia, Roscosmos pulled out of all
China is also investing in defensive coun- agreed launches of Soyuz rockets from the
terspace technologies. A recent article by European Spaceport in French Guiana and
Chinese scientists announces that they have withdrew its workforce from the region.196
pioneered a way for satellites to remain The joint ExoMars program with European
operational during and after an HPM or EMP Space Agency and Roscosmos was sup-
attack. This new technology protects and posed to launch in 2022 from the Baikonur
absorbs the extra electromagnetic energy Cosmodrome. The European Space Agency
in order to protect the satellite’s electrical has since announced that “the sanctions
circuits.192 As the threat of counterspace and the wider context make a launch in
weapons proliferates, and as China becomes 2022 very unlikely.”197
increasingly reliant on its own space systems The ripple effects from the Russian war on
for economic activity and national security, Ukraine are certainly spreading. With the
34 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

end of life of the ISS in sight, ISS partner the international space policy community
nations, including the United States and because of the new UN open-ended working
Russia, have started making plans for the group on space weapons, norms of behavior,
next phase of space science, habitation, and best practices for space-faring nations.
and exploration. The divide between Russia How recent events will affect this working
and the United States was already growing group remains to be seen. If nations can
in this respect, as Russia has not signed on move past geopolitical conflict to estab-
to the Artemis Accords nor contributed to lish better rules and regulations for space,
the U.S.-led Lunar Gateway and instead has curbing the development and deployment
pledged to establish a joint lunar base with of space weapons may still be within reach.
China.198 This divide may further deepen and At the least, it is possible that debris-creating
alter a long-standing partnership between events, such as direct-ascent ASAT testing,
the United States and Russia in human may be limited by international agreement,
spaceflight, which dates to the Cold War which would certainly contribute to a safer
and more sustainable space environment.
and the successful Apollo-Soyuz test project.
CONCLUSION
In summary, 2021 was a year of transition,
surprises, and disappointments in space
security. While the United States and many
other nations shifted their attention to
building norms of responsible behavior in
space, Russia reminded the world with its
destructive ASAT test in 
that space remains a contested warfighting
domain.
Furthermore, 2022 may prove to be a pivotal
turning point in space security as the con-
flict in Ukraine rages. If the conflict further
extends into space with more aggressive
attacks against space systems, such as laser
dazzling of imagery satellites or cyberattacks
against satellite ground stations, it could
become the first major conflict in which
counterspace weapons play a significant
role. Even if conflict does not directly extend
into space, the geopolitical fallout could
rupture relationships and the decades-long
cooperation between Russia and the United
States, Europe, Japan, Canada, and all of
the ISS partners. While cooperation in space
science and exploration has endured crises
in the past, including the 2014 Russian
invasion and occupation of Crimea, it is
not yet clear if the partnership will survive
this latest challenge. Should cooperation
with Russia on the ISS end abruptly, the
implications for space security could be
far reaching.
Prior to the Russian invasion
of Ukraine, there was a growing hope in

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
TODD HARRISON is the director of Defense Budget Analysis and director of the Aerospace Security
Project at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). As a senior fellow in the Inter-
national Security Program, he leads the center’s efforts to provide in-depth, nonpartisan research
and analysis of defense funding, space security, and air power issues. He has authored publications
on trends in the defense budget, military space systems, threats to space systems, civil space ex-
ploration, defense acquisitions, military compensation and readiness, and military force structure,
among other topics. He teaches classes on military space systems and the defense budget at the
Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies.
Mr. Harrison joined CSIS from the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, where he was
a senior fellow for defense budget studies. He previously worked at Booz Allen Hamilton, where
he consulted for the U.S. Air Force on satellite communications systems and supported a variety of
other clients evaluating the performance of acquisition programs. Prior to Booz Allen, he worked
for AeroAstro Inc. developing advanced space technologies and as a management consultant at
Diamond Cluster International. Mr. Harrison served as a captain in the U.S. Air Force Reserves. He
is a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with both a BS and an MS in aeronautics
and astronautics.
KAITLYN JOHNSON is deputy director and fellow of the Aerospace Security Project at CSIS. Ms.
Johnson supports the team’s strategic planning and research agenda. Her research specializes in
topics such as space security, military space systems, and commercial and civil space policy. Ms.
Johnson has written on national security space reorganization, threats against space assets, the
commercialization of space, escalation and deterrence dynamics, and defense acquisition trends.
She is also a cohost of the CSIS podcast Tech Unmanned, which features guests with both policy
expertise and technical expertise in order to break through the national security jargon and technol-
ogy hand-waving to get to the core of the technical realities of these emerging capabilities, benefits
to development, and the barriers to success. Ms. Johnson holds an MA from American University in
U.S. foreign policy and national security studies, with a concentration in defense and space security,
and a BS from the Georgia Institute of Technology in international affairs.
MAKENA YOUNG is an associate fellow with the Aerospace Security Project at CSIS. Her research
interests include international collaboration, space security, and orbital debris. Prior to joining
CSIS, Ms. Young worked for the Federal Aviation Administration as an aerospace engineer, focusing
on automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast certification and integration in small aircraft. She
holds a BS in aeronautical and astronautical engineering from Purdue University with minors in
international relations and environmental engineering.
NICHOLAS WOOD is a research intern with the Aerospace Security Project at CSIS. His research
interests include space diplomacy, international politics, and intelligence policy. Mr. Wood is a
current Master of Science in Foreign Service candidate at Georgetown University and a graduate
of the National Intelligence University’s Master of Science in Strategic Intelligence. Mr. Wood is also
an Air Force enlisted reservist with seven years of active-duty experience.
ALYSSA GOESSLER is a third-year graduate student pursuing a dual master's degree in global policy
and Middle Eastern studies at the LBJ School of Public Affairs and the Center for Middle Eastern
Studies at the University of Texas at Austin (UT). Prior to joining the UT community, Alyssa worked
in foreign policy in New York City—first at the Mission of Jordan to the United Nations and thereafter
in the Executive Office of the Council on Foreign Relations. Alyssa is currently a research intern with
CSIS’s Aerospace Security Project, and she also serves as a policy officer of the Space Generation
Advisory Council’s Advocacy and Policy Platform. She is a senior Brumley fellow at the Strauss
Center for International Security and Law’s Space Security, Safety, and Sustainability Program.
Her thesis research focuses on the role of emerging spacefaring nations in the space sustainability
agenda, with an emphasis on the United Arab Emirates.
36 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

ENDNOTES
INTRODUCTION
1 Josh Rogin, “A shadow war in space is heating up fast,” Washington Post, November 30, 2021, https://

2 “UCS Satellite Database,” Union of Concerned Scientists, Last updated January 1, 2022, December 8,
2005, 
3 Ed Kyle, “Orbital Launch Summary by Year,” Space Launch Report, Last updated December 31, 2021,

4 “Space Environment Statistics,” European Space Agency, Last updated January 5, 2022, 
esoc.esa.int/discosweb/statistics/.
TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
5 U.S. Space Force, Spacepower: Doctrine for Space Forces (Washington, DC: ), 34, https://

6 “Combined Space Operations Vision 2031,” U.S. Department of Defense, February 22, 2022, 1, https://
media.defense.gov/2022/Feb/22/2002942522/-1/-1/0/CSPO-VISION-2031.PDF.
7 “Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space, and Under Water,” U.S.
Department of State, 
8 Brian Garino and Jane Gibson, “Space System Threats,” in AU-18 Space Primer (Maxwell Air Force
Base, AL: Air University Press, ), 277, 
chap21.pdf.
9 Richard B. Langley et al., “Innovation: GNSS Spoofing Detection,” GPS World, June 1, 2013, 
sworid.com/innovation-gnss -spoofing-detection-correlating-carrier-phase-with-rapid-antenna-moh-
tion/.
CHINA
10 “China’s Space Program: A 2021 Perspective,” State Council, People’s Republic of China, January 28,
2022, 
11 Gunter D. Krebs, “Orbital Launches of 2021,” Gunter’s Space Page, retrieved February 2, 2022, https://
space.skyrocket.de/doc_chr/lau2021.htm.
12 Smriti Mallapaty, “China’s Mars rover has amassed reams of novel geological data,” Nature, November
30, 2021, 
13 “Full Text of White Paper on China’s Space Activities in 2016,” State Council, People’s Repub-
lic of China, December 28, 2016, 
tent_281475527159496.htm.
14 “China’s Space Program,” State Council, People’s Republic of China.
15 “Company Profile,” China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation, 
com/n16421/n17138/n17229/index.html.
16 Alexander Bowe, “China’s Pursuit of Space Power Status and Implications for the United States,”
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, April 11, 2019, 
default/files/Research/USCC_China’s%20Space%20Power%20Goals.pdf.
17 John Costello and Joe McReynolds, China’s Strategic Support Force: A Force for a New Era (Washing-
ton, DC: Institute for National Strategic Studies, ), 10–12, 15, 16, 
edu/Portals/68/Documents/stratperspective/china/china-perspectives_13.pdf.
18 Stephen Clark, “China’s Long March 9 rocket successful in debut launch,” SpaceflightNow, December
26, 2020, 
launch/.

19 Irina Liu et al., “Evaluation of China’s Commercial Space Sector,” Science and Technology Policy
Institute, , 
nas-commercial-space-sector/d-10873.ashx.
20 Ibid., 49.
21 “China begins construction of its fifth rocket launch site,” Reuters, April 7, 2021, 
com/article/us-space-exploration-china/china-begins-construction-of-its-fifth-rocket-launch-site-
idUSKBN2BV0CF.
22 Andrew Jones, “China is building a new ship for sea launches to space,” Space.com, November 14,
2021, 
23 “China’s Space Program,” State Council, People’s Republic of China.
24 Hui Jiang, “Programme and Development of the ‘Belt and Road’ Space Information Corridor,”
(presentation, United Nations Office of Outer Space Affairs, ), 
documents/pdf/psa/activities/2019/UNChinaSymSDGs/Presentations/Programme_and_Develop-
ment_of_the_Belt_and_Road_Space_Information_Corridor_V5.1.pdf.
25 “China’s Space Program,” State Council, People’s Republic of China.
26 Todd Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2020 (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 
csis.org/analysis/space-threat-assessment-2020.
RUSSIA
27 Matthew Bodner, “Russia Merges AF with Missile Defense, Space Commands,” Defense News, August
8, 2015, com/2015/08/08/russia-merges-af-with-missile-defense-space-
commands/.
28 “Aerospace Defence Forces,” Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, 
structure/forces/cosmic.htm; Matthew Bodner, “As Trump Pushes for Separate Space Force, Russia
Move Fast the Other Way,” Defense News, June 22, 2018, 
europe/2018/06/21/as-trump-pushes-for-separate-space-force-russia-moves-fast-the-other-way/;
and “Advanced military technology in Russia,” Chatham House, September 23, 2021, https://

tems-and-risk-weaponizing-space.
29 Anatoly Zak, “Russian space program in the 2010s: decadal review,” Russian Space Web, February 11,
2019, and Mike Wall, “Here’s How Much NASA
Is Paying Per Seat on SpaceX’s Crew Dragon & Boeing’s Starliner,” Space.com, November 16, 2019,

30 Thomas G. Roberts, “International Astronaut Database,” Aerospace Security Project, CSIS, accessed
February 10, 2020, 
31 “The Russian Soyuz spacecraft,” European Space Agency, 
Space_Transportation/Launch_vehicles/The_Russian_Soyuz_spacecraft.
32 Ibid.; and Anatoly Zak, “Soyuz rocket operations in 2021,” Russian Space Web, last updated December
27, 2021, 
33 Rahul Rao, “Russia launches heavy-lift Angara rocket on 3rd test flight, but misses intended orbit: re-
ports,” Space.com, December 30, 2021, 
partial-failure.
34 Elizabeth Howell, “Baikonur Cosmodrome: Russian Launch Complex,” Space.com, June 16, 2018,

35 “Plesetsk,” European Space Agency, 
sia/Plesetsk.
36 Thomas Nilsen, “Russia hit own satellite with missile from Plesetsk,” The Barents Observer, November
16, 2021, 
37 Matthew Bodner, “The long road to Vostochny: Inside Russia’s newest launch facility,” SpaceNews,
January 30, 2019, 
facility/.
38 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

38 Ibid.
39 Thomas G. Roberts, Spaceports of the World (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 21, 
space.csis.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/190313__SpaceportsOfTheWorld.pdf.
40 “About GLONASS,” Glonass-IAC, 
41 Todd Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2021 (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 
space.csis.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/CSIS_Harrison_SpaceThreatAssessment2021.pdf.
42 “Liana - Lotus C and Pion-NCC,” GlobalSecurity.org, 
russia/liana.htm; and Anatoly Zak, “Lotos-S spacecraft for the Liana system,” Russian Space Web, last
updated July 9, 2021, 
43 Bart Hendrickx, “Russia Gears up for Electronic Warfare in Space (Part 2),” The Space Review, Novem-
ber 2, 2020, 
44 Sandra Erwin, “NRO warns satellite operators of possible Russian attacks,” SpaceNews, February
23, 2022, 
ukraine-crisis-unfolds/.
IRAN
45 “Iran announces new space launch amid nuclear talks,” The Jordan Times, December 31, 2021, http://
jordantimes.com/news/region/iran-announces-new-space-launch-amid-nuclear-talks; David Axe,
“Iran’s New Space Rocket Could Double as a Nuclear Missile,” Forbes, February 1, 2021, 
forbes.com/sites/davidaxe/2021/02/01/irans-new-space-rocket-could-double-as-a-weapon/?sh=2b-
d5eec82d40; and Patrick Wintour, “Iran nuclear talks deadlock risks dangerous vacuum,” The Guard-
ian, January 17, 2022, 
lock-risks-dangerous-vacuum.
46 “Views and Analysis of the Islamic Republic of Iran on the resolution ‘Reducing Space Threats through
Norms, Rules, and Principles of Responsible Behavior’ proposed by United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland in the First Committee of the UN (A/C.1/75/L.45/Rev.1) 11/6/2020,” Permanent
Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations, 2021.
47 “Iran to continue its ballistic missiles program,” Mehr News Agency, December 15, 2021, https://
en.mehrnews.com/news/181807/Iran-to-continue-its-ballistic-missiles-program.
48 Jim Lamson and Jeffrey Lewis, “Iranian President Raisi’s Renewed Emphasis on Space Is Likely to
Create New Tensions,” War on the Rocks, December 20, 2021, 
iranian-president-raisis-renewed-emphasis-on-space-is-likely-to-create-new-tensions/.
49 Anthony Cordesman, Iran and the Changing Military Balance in the Gulf (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 
tors.
50 “Aerospace Industries Organization (AIO),” Iran Watch, last modified October 28, 2019, 
iranwatch.org/iranian-entities/aerospace-industries-organization-aio.
51 “Iranian Laws & Government - The Structure of Power in Iran,” Iran Chamber Society, accessed Febru-
ary 3, 2022, 
52 “MKS International Co. Ltd.,” Iran Watch, last modified February 7, 2017, 
iranian-entities/mks-international-co-ltd.
53 Axe, “Iran’s New Space Rocket.”
54 Zachary Cohen and Oren Libermann, “Pentagon tracked failed Iranian satellite launch and new imag-
es reveal Tehran is set to try again,” CNN, June 22, 2021, 
iran-failed-satellite-launch/index.html.
55 William Graham, “Iran’s Simorgh rocket falls short of orbit with three payloads aboard,” NASA Space-
flight, December 30, 2021, 
and “Iran announces new space launch amid nuclear talks,” The Jordan Times.
56 Lamson and Lewis, “Renewed Emphasis on Space.”
57 Andrew Hanna, “Iran’s Ambitious Space Program,” The Iran Primer, last updated February 1, 2021,

58 Gunter D. Krebs, “Safir,” Gunter’s Space Page, retrieved February 3, 2022, 
doc_lau/safir.htm.
59 Axe, “Iran’s New Space Rocket.”
60 Kamal Iranidoost, “VIDEO: Successful test of ‘Raafe’ solid-fueled space engine,” Mehr News Agency,
January 14, 2022, 
led-space-engine.
61 Behnam Ben Taleblu, “Solid-Propellant Motor Test Proves Iran’s Continuing Missile Development,”
National Interest, February 2, 2022, 
roves-iran%E2%80%99s-continuing-missile-advancement-200245.
62 “Shahroud Missile Test Site,” Nuclear Threat Initiative, last modified October 25, 2021, 
nti.org/education-center/facilities/shahroud-missile-test-site/.
63 Jeremy Binnie, “Iran launches military satellite into orbit,” Janes, April 23, 2020, 
com/defence-news/news-detail/iran-launches-military-satellite-into-orbit.
64 John Krzyzaniak, “Iran’s Military Space Program Picks Up Speed,” Newslines Institute, October 27,
2021, 
65 “Imam Khomeini Space Center,” Nuclear Threat Initiative, last modified October 25, 2021, https://

66 Ibid.
67 “Asia Pacific Space Cooperation Organisation (APSCO),” United Nations, 
asia-pacific-space-cooperation-organisation-apsco.
68 “Iran Claims to have SSA Radar Capabilities of Detecting Satellites in LEO,” Spacewatch.global,

leo/.
NORTH KOREA
69 Frank Ruediger, “Key Results of The Eighth Party Congress in North Korea (Part 2 of 2),” 38 North, Jan-
uary 15, 2021, 
korea-part-1-of-2/.
70 “For Conquering Outer Space,” KCNA Watch, October 12, 2021, 
stream/1634050872-273502404/for-conquering-outer-space/.
71 “National Aerospace Development Administration of DPRK,” Korean Central News Agency, April 1,
2014, 
72 “Symposium on Space Science and Technology-2021 Held,” KCNA Watch, November 21, 2021, https://
kcnawatch.org/newstream/1637446196-88385857/symposium-on-space-science-and-technolo-
gy-2021-held/.
73 “North Korea Is Hyping Citizens Up For Submarine Missile And Satellite Launches,” NK News, April 21,
2021, 
and-satellite-launches/.
74 “North Korea tests longest-range missile since 2017,” NPR, January 29, 2022, 
org/2022/01/29/1076751251/north-korea-missile-launch.
75 “North Korea’s Tonghae Satellite Launching Ground: Caretaker Status,” 38 North, October 28, 2016,

76 Geoff Brumfiel, “North Korea Seen Expanding Rocket Launch Facility It Once Promised To Dismantle,”
NPR, March 27, 2020, 
et-launch-facility-it-once-promised-to-dismantle.
77 Ibid.
78 Mike Wall, “North Korea Launches Satellite To Space,” Space.com, February 8, 2016, 
space.com/31860-north-korea-satellite-launch.html; and Collin Zwirko, “North Korea Boasts Of
‘Full-Scale’ Work Towards New Space Capabilities,” NK News, October 11, 2021, 
org/2021/10/north-korea-boasts-of-full-scale-work-towards-new-space-capabilities/.
40 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

79 Vanh H. Van Diepen, “Another North Korean ‘Hypersonic’ Missile?,” 38 North, January 7, 2022, https://

80 Van H. Van Diepen, “Implications of North Korea’s January 14 and 17 Short-Range Ballistic Missile
Launches,” 38 North, January 25, 2022, 
reas-january-14-and-17-short-range-ballistic-missile-launches/.
81 Ibid.
82 Ankit Panda, “North Korea’s Hwasong-12 IRBM Missile Test: The Road Back To 2017?,” 1945, January
30, 2022, 
back-to-2017/.
83 Ji Da-gyum, “N. Korea’s Hwasong-12 missile launch breaks self-imposed moratorium: UN chief,” The
Korea Herald, February 2, 2022, 
84 Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2021.
INDIA
85 Tariq Malik, “Indian rocket suffers catastrophic failure during launch, Earth-watching satellite lost,”
Space.com, August 11, 2021, 
86 Anjana Pasricha, “India Looks to Enhance Military Capabilities in Space,” VOA News, June 27,
2021, 
ties-space/6207536.html; and “Two years after Mission Shakti, India increasing its military capa-a
bilities in Space,” Economic Times, March 26, 2021, 
defence/two-years-after-mission-shakti-india-increasing-its-military-capabilities-in-space/article-
show/81707328.cms.
87 Sudhi Ranjan Sen, “India Military Sees Tiny Budget Rise Despite Modernization Plan,” Bloomberg,
February 1, 2022, 
ny-budget-rise-despite-modernization-plan.
88 “About ISRO,” Department of Space, Indian Space Organization, accessed February 17, 2022, https://

89 Vivek Raghuvanshi, “India to launch a defense-based space research agency,” DefenseNews, June 12,
2019, 
search-agency/.
90 “Defence Space agency to come up at Bengaluru,” ANI, May 15, 2019, 
national/general-news/defence-space-agency-to-come-up-at-bengaluru20190515191050/.
91 Aditya Pareek and Megha Pardhi, “India needs a comprehensive space strategy,” Hindustan
Times, February 11, 2022, 
sive-space-strategy-101644571361711.html.
92 Namrata Goswami, Indian Space Program and its Drivers: Possible Implications for the Global Space
Market (Paris: IFRI, European Space Governance Initiative, ), 16, 
sites/default/files/atoms/files/goswami_indian_space_program_2022_.pdf.
93 Ibid., 19.
94 “Hon’ble PM Shri Narendra Modi launches the Indian Space Association (ISpA),” Department of Space,
Indian Space Research Organisation, October 11, 2021, 
hon%E2%80%99ble-pm-shri-narendra-modi-launches-indian-space-association-ispa.
95 Ibid.
96 Nivedita Raju, “Russia’s anti-satellite test should lead to a multilateral ban,” Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute, December 7, 2021, 
sias-anti-satellite-test-should-lead-multilateral-ban.
97 Sarah Lewin, “India’s Anti-Satellite Test Created Dangerous Debris, NASA Chief Says,” Space.com, April
1, 2019, 
98 Dinakar Peri, “Two years since ASAT test, DRDO working on several key space technologies,” The
Hindu, March 26, 2021, 
working-on-several-key-space-technologies/article34171447.ece.

99 “Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle,” Indian Space Research Organisation, 
ers/pslv.
100 “ISRO’s first launch in 2022: PSLV-C52 successfully launches earth observation and 2 small satellites,”
Economic Times, February 14, 2022, 
et-lifts-off-with-indias-new-eye-in-the-sky-satellite/articleshow/89554765.cms.
101 “Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV),” Indian Space Research Organisation, 
isro.gov.in/launchers/gslv.
102 “GSLV-F10/EOS-03 Mission Failure: Failure Analysis Committee submits conclusions & recom-
mendations,” Indian Space Research Organisation, March 25, 2022, 
date/25-mar-2022/gslv-f10-eos-03-mission-failure-failure-analysis-committee-submits-conclusions.
103 “Satish Dhawan Space Centre (SDSC) SHAR,” Indian Space Research Organisation, 
gov.in/about-isro/satish-dhawan-space-centre-sdsc-shar.
104 “Private players in India can build and operate rocket launch sites,” Economic Times, June 26, 2021,

ate-rocket-launch-sites/articleshow/83869508.cms.
105 Meera Rohera, “Indian Space Policy for the Private Sector,” CSIS, December 7, 2021, 
csis.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/20211213_IndiaSpaceBill_Rohera-compressed.pdf.
106 “Defence announces Space Division,” Australian Department of Defense, May 19, 2021, 
defence.gov.au/media/media-releases/defence-announces-space-division.
107 “Australian military to set up space division with $7bn budget,” The Guardian, May 19, 2021, https://

with-7bn-budget.
108 Colin Clark, “JP 9102: Australia opens bidding on its biggest space contract ever,” Breaking Defense,
February 4, 2022, 
gest-space-contract-ever/.
OTHERS
109 Seth Frantzman, “Israel Is Developing Lasers to Kill Drones and Rockets,” Defense One, January 9,
2020, 
kill-drones-and-rockets/.
110 Seth Frantzman, “Israel Plans ‘Laser Wall,’ but Questions Remain about Effectiveness and Cost,”
Defense News, February 16, 2022, 
israel-plans-laser-wall-but-questions-remain-about-effectiveness-and-cost/.
111 Benjamin Siegel, “House Democrats Remove Money for Israel's Iron Dome System in Funding Bill,”
ABC News, September 21, 2021, 
israels-iron-dome-system/story?id=80155316.
112 Yaniv Kubovich, “Israeli Army Wants Laser Interceptors Operational by 2022,” Haaretz, October 19,
2021, 
sile-defense-ready-by-2022-1.10305898.
113 “Potential for Israeli, Emirati Space Force Collaboration,” i24NEWS, November 9, 2021, https://

ti-space-force-collaboration.
114 Arie Egozi, “Amid Attacks, UAE Quietly Asks Israel about Defense Systems: Sources,” Breaking Defense,
January 25, 2022, 
defense-systems-sources/.
115 Joanne Wheeler ed., The Space Law Review, 2nd ed. (London: ), 
co.uk/title/the-space-law-review.
116 Doug Messier, “An Overview of Japan’s Counterspace Strategy,” Parabolic Arc, April 26, 2020, http://
parabolicarc.com/2020/04/26/an-overview-of-japans-counterspace-strategy/.
117 Mari Yamaguchi, “Japan Launches New Unit to Boost Defense in Space,” Defense News, May 18, 2020,

42 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

fense-in-space/; Yuka Koshino, “Japan’s New Space Domain Mission Unit and Security in the Indo-Pa-
cific Region,” International Institute for Security Studies, May 1, 2020, 
itary-balance/2020/05/japan-space-domain-mission-unit-security; and Suzuki Kazuto, “Space: A New
Battleground for Japan,” Nippon, December 5, 2018, 
118 Robert Farley, “Managing the Military Problem of Space: The Case of Japan,” The Diplomat, April 23,
2021, 
119 Frantzman, “Israel Plans ‘Laser Wall’.”
120 “Japan’s Office of National Space Policy Signs Historic MOU with the U.S. Space Force,” United States
Space Force, December 18, 2020, 
of-national-space-policy-signs-historic-mou-with-the-us-space-for/; Sandra Erwin, “Japanese Military
Strengthens Ties with U.S. Space Command,” SpaceNews, April 1, 2021, 
nese-military-strengthens-ties-with-u-s-space-command/; and “U.S. Space Command Invites Liaison
Officer From Japan Air Self-Defense Force To The Command,” SatNews, April 2, 2021, 
satnews.com/2021/04/02/u-s-space-command-invites-liaison-officer-from-japan-air-self-defense-
force-to-the-command/.
121 “Japan Defense Enhanced with Aegis and Spy-7 Software Demonstration,” Lockheed Martin, January
27, 2022, 
SPY-7-Software-Demonstration.
122 Kelsey Davenport, “South Korea to Pursue Military Satellites,” Arms Control Association, , and
Felix Kim, “South Korea accelerates space defense program,” Indo-Pacific Defense Forum, November
14, 2021, 
123 Yosuke Onchi, “South Korea chases global ambitions in space and defense,” Nikkei Asia, November 7,
2021, 
space-and-defense.
124 Brian Kim, “With restrictions lifted, South Korea launches $13B space power scheme,” Defense News,
September 6, 2021, 
korea-launches-13b-space-power-scheme/.
COUNTERSPACE ACTIVITIES: A YEAR IN REVIEW
125 Demetri Sevastopulo and Kathrin Hille, “China tests new space capability with hypersonic missile,”
Financial Times, October 16, 2021, 
843fb.
126 Demetri Sevastopulo, “Chinese hypersonic weapon fired a missile over South China Sea,” Financial
Times, November 21, 2021, 
127 Ibid.
128 Colin Clark and Theresa Hitchens, “‘Global Strike From Space;’ Did Kendall Reveal Chinese Threat?,”
Breaking Defense, September 29, 2021, 
space-did-kendall-reveal-chinese-threat/.
129 Ibid.
130 David Martin, “Exclusive: No. 2 in U.S. military reveals new details about China’s hypersonic weapons
test,” CBS News, November 16, 2021, 
ons-test-details-united-states-military/.
131 Ibid.
132 Amy F. Woolf, “U.S. Nuclear Weapons Policy: Considering ‘No First Use’,” Congressional Research Ser-
vice, updated October 13, 2021, 
133 “House Armed Services Subcommittee on Strategic forces Holds Hearing on Fiscal 2020 Budget
Request for Defense Nuclear Activities,” Stratcom, April 3, 2019, 
Speeches/Article/1800469/house-armed-services-subcommittee-on-strategic-forces-holds-hear-
ing-on-fiscal-2/; Andrew Latham, “The folly of a no-first-use nuclear policy,” The Hill, November 18,
2021, 
Robert Einhorn, “No First Use of Nuclear Weapons Is Still a Bridge Too Far, but Biden Can Make

Progress toward That Goal,” Foreign Policy, , 
uploads/2021/10/FP_20211020nfu_einhorn.pdf; and Michael Krepon, “Biden Should Endorse No Use
and Reject No First Use in the Pentagon’s Nuclear Posture Review,” Forbes, December 2, 2021, https://

use-in-the-pentagons-nuclear-posture-review/?sh=42608c932cfa.
134 “Space-Track.Org,” Space-Track.org, 
135 Department of Defense, Department of Defense Law of War Manual (Washington, DC: ),
Section 14.10.3.1, 
136 “The first flight of my country’s suborbital reusable vehicle flight demonstration project was a com-
plete success,” Xinhuanet, July 16, 2021, 
137 “China launches Shijian-21 satellite,” Xinhua, October 24, 2021, 
lish/2021-10/24/c_1310265138.htm.
138 Andrew Jones, “An object is now orbiting alongside China’s Shijian-21 debris mitigation satellite,”
SpaceNews, November 5, 2021, 
nas-shijian-21-debris-mitigation-satellite/.
139 “The Shi Jian 21 satellite launched in October released a subsatellite on around Nov 1 and performed
rendezvous manuevers . . .” Jonathan McDowell (@planet4589), Twitter post, January 1, 2022, 5:19
p.m., 
140 Thomas Roberts, “SJ-21/SJ-21 AKM,” Satellite Dashboard, January 7, 2022, 
board.org/analysis/sj-21-sj-21-akm.
141 “SJ-21 Quick Look Report (),” YouTube video, posted by ExoAnalytic Solutions, January
28, 2022, 1:43, 
142 Authors’ analysis of data from Satellite Dashboard, 
143 “China’s SJ-21 Framed as Demonstrating Growing On-Orbit Servicing, Assembly, and Manufacturing
(OSAM) Capabilities,” China Aerospace Studies Institute, December 13, 2021, 
ty.af.edu/CASI/Display/Article/2867652/chinas-sj-21-framed-as-demonstrating-growing-on-orbit-ser-
vicing-assembly-and-ma/.
144 Shannon Bugos, “Russian ASAT Test Creates Massive Debris,” Arms Control Association, , 
and Brandon W. Kelley and Brian G. Chow, “Op-ed: Lessons to learn from Russia’s Nudol ASAT test,”
SpaceNews, November 17, 2021, 
asat-test/.
145 Doug Messier, “Russia Threatens to Destroy U.S. GPS Satellite Constellation,” Parabolic Arc, December
1, 2021, 
stellation/.
146 Bryan Bender, “U.N. postpones space diplomacy talks after Russia asks for more time,” Politico, Feb-
ruary 9, 2022, 
sia-00007241.
147 Brian Weeden, “2007 Chinese Anti-Satellite Test Fact Sheet,” Secure World Foundation, last updated
November 23, 2010, 
148 Ankit Panda, “The Dangerous Fallout of Russia’s Anti-Satellite Missile Test,” Carnegie Endowment,
November 17, 2021, 
satellite-missile-test-pub-85804.
149 Bugos, “Russian ASAT Test Creates Massive Debris”; and “‘Space Vandals’: Russian Missile Test Draws
Western Outrage, Moscow Denies Threat,” Radio Free Europe, November 15, 2021, 
org/a/international-space-station-debris-russia/31562770.html.
150 Andrew Jones, “Chinese satellite in near miss with Russian ASAT test debris,” SpaceNews, January 20,
2022, 
151 Ibid.
152 Theresa Hitchens, “Russia could target American space firms to blind Ukraine,” Breaking Defense,
February 15, 2022, 
american-commercial-isr-providers/.
44 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

153 “OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine (SMM) Daily Report 308/2020 issued on 29 De-
cember 2020,” OSCE, December 29, 2020, 
sion-to-ukraine/474998; and “R-330Zh Zhitel Russian Cellular Jamming and Direction Finding
System,” U.S. Army, 
lular_Jamming_and_Direction_Finding_System.
154 Digital Forensic Research Lab, “Russian Hybrid Threats Report: Missile battalion confirmed in Be-
larus,” Atlantic Council, February 4, 2022, 
russian-hybrid-threats-report-missile-battalion-confirmed-in-belarus/; and Michael Sheldon, Twitter
post, February 1, 2022, 9:25 p.m., 
155 Bart Hendrickx, “Russia gears up for electronic warfare in space (part 1),” The Space Review, October
26, 2020, and Christoph Keottl et al., “Tracking
Russia’s Latest Military Movements Around Ukraine,” New York Times, February 14, 2022, 
nytimes.com/video/world/europe/100000008206442/russia-military-ukraine.html.
156 Iryna Korobko, “Spot Report 6/2021: SMM long-range UAV unable to take off due to dual
GPS signal interference,” OSCE, April 7, 2021, 
sion-to-ukraine/483008.
157 Ambassador Michael Carpenter, “Ongoing Violations of International Law and Defiance of OSCE
Principles and Commitments by Russia in Ukraine,” U.S. Mission to the OSCE, January 20, 2022,

tion-of-crimea-47/.
158 “Daily Report 36/2022,” OSCE, February 16, 2022, 
Report_ENG.pdf?itok=36184.
159 James Pearson, Raphael Satter, Christopher Bing, and Joel Schectman, “Exclusive: U.S. spy agency
probes sabotage of satellite internet during Russian invasion, sources say,” Reuters, March 11, 2022,

net-during-russian-2022-03-11/.
160 Sebastien Roblin, “Russia is Working to Jam NATO Communications in a War,” The National Interest,
January 9, 2021, 
tions-war-176111.
161 Abhinay Deshpande, “Two GPS trackers helped police in tracking stolen gold,” The Hindu, January 23,
2021, 
ing-stolen-gold/article33645416.ece.
162 Russ Niles, “Wireless Utility Controls Jammed GPS Near Airport,” AVweb, January 31, 2021, https://

163 “Find the Jammer! Camouflaged devices more common,” Resilient Navigation and Timing Foun-
dation, March 12, 2021, 
es-more-common/.
164 Iryna Korobko, “Spot Report 6/2021: SMM long-range UAV unable to take off due to dual
GPS signal interference,” OSCE, April 7, 2021, 
sion-to-ukraine/483008.
165 Statement of General James H. Dickinson, “Presentation to the Senate Armed Services Committee
U.S. Senate,” United States Space Command, April 21, 2021, 
imo/media/doc/Dickinson04.20.2021.pdf.
166 “Space Threats,” Aerospace Security Project, 
167 Joshua Goodman, “Tanker’s impossible voyage signals new sanction evasion ploy,” AP News, May
28, 2021, 
95cb9e26.
168 Joshua Goodman, “Digital warfare tech at sea helping US foes evade sanctions,” AP News, February
3, 2022, 
589c44a7bb0fc5be59d156.
169 H I Sutton, “Positions of Two NATO Ships Were Falsified Near Russian Black Sea Naval Base,” USNI
News, June 21, 2021, 
near-russian-black-sea-naval-base.

170 “U.S. Navy Ship Spoofed to Crimea,” Resilient Navigation and Timing Foundation, June 30, 2021,

171 “Defence explores options for Space Electronic Warfare,” Australian Government Department of
Defence, July 29, 2021, 
defence-explores-options-space-electronic-warfare.
172 “680 Forks on GitHub for GPS Signal Simulation,” GPSpatron, 
github-for-gps-signal-simulation/.
173 Sun Yunzhong, Tan Qing, and Wu Chen, "Yi Zhong Kongjian Yong Rongzhu Zhayao Luoji Shensuo
Jigou Sheji." [A Flexible Mechanism Design for Melt-Cast Explosives for Space Use], Dianzi Jishu Yu
Ruanjian Gongcheng [Electronic Technology and Software Engineering], no. 18 (2021): 223–224.
 and Stephen Chen, “Chinese
scientists build anti-satellite weapon that can cause explosion inside exhaust,” South China Morning
Post, October 21, 2021, 
tists-build-anti-satellite-weapon-can-cause.
174 “China’s SJ-21 Framed as Demonstrating Growing On-Orbit Servicing, Assembly, and Manufacturing
(OSAM) Capabilities,” China Aerospace Studies Institute, December 13, 2021, 
versity.af.edu/CASI/Display/Article/2867652/chinas-sj-21-framed-as-demonstrating-growing-on-
orbit-servicing-assembly-and-ma/; and Andrew Jones, “An object is now orbiting alongside China’s
Shijian-21 debris mitigation satellite,” SpaceNews, November 5, 2021, 
ject-is-now-orbiting-alongside-chinas-shijian-21-debris-mitigation-satellite/.
175 Aaron Boley and Michael Byers, “Russian ASAT test: A preliminary discussion,” Outer Space Institute,
updated December 7, 2021, 
Dec).pdf.
176 Matthew P. Funaiole, Joseph S. Bermudez Jr., and Brian Hart, “China Is Ramping Up Its Electronic
Warfare and Communications Capabilities near the South China Sea,” CSIS, Commentary, December
17, 2021, 
tions-capabilities-near-south-china-sea.
177 Tracy Cozzens, “Russia issues threat to GPS satellites,” GPS World, November 29, 2021, 
gpsworld.com/russia-issues-threat-to-gps-satellites/.
178 Elena Teslova, “Russia ‘successfully’ tests new S-550 air defense system: Report,” Anadolu Agen-
cy, December 29, 2021, 
air-defense-system-report/2460620; and “Russia Boasts of New S-550 Missile System Capable
of Targeting Satellites,” Warsaw Institute, December 30, 2021, 
sia-boasts-new-s-550-missile-system-capable-targeting-satellites/.
179 Rida Qadri, “Delivery Drivers Are Using Grey Market Apps to Make Their Jobs Suck Less,” VICE, April
27, 2021, 
make-their-jobs-suck-less.
180 “Space Norway in brief,” Space Norway, 
181 Jason Rainbow, “Space Norway restores redundancy for Svalbard ground stations,” Space News, January
21, 2022, 
182 Michael Sheetz, “Viasat believes ‘cyber event’ is disrupting its satellite-internet service in Ukraine,
CNBC, February 28, 2022, 
ber-event-disrupting-satellite-internet-service.html.
183 Mark Kleinman, “Satellite giant Viasat probes suspected broadband cyberattack amid Russia fears,”
Sky News, February 28, 2022, 
ed-broadband-cyberattack-amid-russia-fears-12554004; and Pearson, Satter, Bing, and Schectman,
“Exclusive: U.S. spy agency probes sabotage of satellite internetduring Russian invasion, sources say.”
WHAT TO WATCH
184 Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2020.
185 Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2021.
186 Todd Harrison, Kaitlyn Johnson, and Makena Young, Defense Against the Dark Arts in Space (Washing-
46 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2022

ton, DC: CSIS, ), 
tecting-space-systems-counterspace-weapons.
187 “NATO’s Approach to Space,” North Atlantic Treaty Organization, December 2, 2021, 
nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_175419.htm; and “Collective Defence - Article 5,” North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, 
188 “NATO’S Overarching Space Policy,” North Atlantic Treaty Organization, 2022, 
cps/en/natohq/official_texts_190862.htm.
189 “NATO’s Approach to Space,” North Atlantic Treaty Organization; and Christina Mackenzie, “NATO
names location for new military space center,” DefenseNews, February 5, 2021, 
news.com/space/2021/02/05/nato-names-location-for-new-military-space-center/.
190 “France to develop anti-satellite laser weapons: defense minister,” France24, July 25, 2019, https://

191 Nathan Strout, “The Space Force wants to use directed-energy systems for space superiority,” C4ISR
Net, June 16, 2021, 
wants-to-use-directed-energy-weapons-for-space-superiority/.
192 Stephen Chen, “New device could protect satellites from microwave attacks, say Chinese scientists,”
South China Morning Post, February 23, 2022, 
cle/3167937/chinese-scientists-say-new-device-could-protect-satellites.
193 “Space is essential to NATO’s defence and deterrence,” North Atlantic Treaty Organization, last updat-
ed November 5, 2019, 
194 Elizabeth Howell, “Russian space program chief says US sanctions could 'destroy' International Space
Station partnership,” Space.com, February 25, 2022, 
sia-iss-space-sanctions; and Tariq Malik, “Russia halts Soyuz rocket launches from French Guiana over
European sanctions on Ukraine invasion,” Space.com, February 26, 2022, 
russia-halts-soyuz-launches-french-guiana.
195 Tweet translated by Thomas G. Roberts, CSIS non-resident affiliate. Dmitry Rogozin (@Rogozin), Twit-
ter post, 11:43 a.m., February 24, 2022, 
196 Malik, “Russia halts Soyuz rocket launches.”
197 “N° 6–2022: ESA statement regarding cooperation with Russia following a meeting with Member
States on 28 ,” European Space Agency, February 28, 2022, 
room/Press_Releases/ESA_statement_regarding_cooperation_with_Russia_following_a_meeting_
with_Member_States_on_28_February_2022.
198 “The Artemis Accords,” NASA, accessed February 28, 2022, 
mis-accords/index.html; and Mike Wall, “Russia and China just agreed to build a research station
on the moon together,” Space.com, March 10, 2021, 
search-station-agreement.

1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202 887 0200 |