Annual Report 2022
Stanford Institute
for Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence
HAI built considerable momentum across our research, policy,
and education programs during the 2021-22 academic year.

Contents Letter from the Denning Co-Directors
Silicon Valley startups are notorious for the demands
they place on early employees—and the more
1 Letter from the Denning Co-Directors successful they are, the more demanding they can
2 HAI Events 2021-22 be. For the past three years, Stanford HAI has been
an academic startup. We have accomplished a lot
Research
since our launch, and we are deeply grateful to our
hardworking staff, faculty leaders, and generous
5 HAI Research Focus
donors for getting us where we are today.
6 Grant Programs for AI Research
In three years, HAI has established itself not only
10 Center for Research on Foundation Models
as a leading presence at Stanford, but as one of
12 Stanford Digital Economy Lab the leading centers for AI in the world. We’ve Fei-Fei Li and John Etchemendy, Denning Co-Directors of the Stanford
Institute for Human-Centered AI
14 AI Index earned a reputation as a catalyst for innovative
15 Research Events cross-disciplinary research and have developed a Stanford as well as other universities and organizations
dynamic ecosystem for the study and advocacy of a worldwide–in helping us achieve these goals.
distinctively human-centered approach to AI.
In the broader world of AI, 2021-2022 has been an
Policy As we reflect on the past academic year, we’re excited extraordinary year, one that has convinced even the most
to see the Stanford campus active again with faculty, diehard skeptics of the importance of AI technology.
17 Education and Training for Policymakers staff and students back in person. We’ve settled into a Gone are any worries about a coming “AI winter” or the
new home on the ground floor of the Gates Computer sudden deflation of a hype-fueled bubble. It is impossible
18 Policy Briefings in Washington, D.C.
Science Building, where we can host groups of people to ignore such developments as DeepMind’s near
19 U.S. and E.U. Policymakers Visit Stanford /
from across the campus and beyond. complete solution of the protein-folding problem, or the
Policy Initiatives
steady release of new foundation models for generating
Our foundational programs in research, education
20 Policy Publications
text, images and even computer code.
and policy are all thriving in the wake of an extremely
21 Faculty Engagement
productive year. Among the highlights from the 2021- These developments are being addressed, from very
2022 academic year: different perspectives, by our Center for Research on
Foundation Models and our Digital Economy Lab, the
• In Research: We’ve strengthened our Stanford
former focusing on expanding research, resources and
scholar community through more than 20 in-
Education
community around emerging AI technology, while the latter
person and hybrid format workshops, meetings
assesses its impact on the economy and the future of work.
and collaborations, while also collaborating with
23 Special Initiatives /
About HAI
external organizations including the IEEE on its The breathtaking pace of AI technology only
For Current Leaders /
For Future Leaders Planet Positive 2030 campaign. magnifies the importance of an institute devoted to
24 Denning Co-Directors
a thoroughly human-centered perspective on this
• In Education: More than 7,000 individuals took
25 Associate Directors / Staff rapidly evolving technology. It is undeniable that AI
part in our educational programs, and we helped
28 Faculty and Fellows to organize the largest AI+Health conference in holds extraordinary promise for improving the human
condition, but only if we can successfully guide its
30 Research Centers and Partners Stanford’s history.
future in a responsible direction.
31 Corporate Members Program • In Policy: We engaged with more than 30 U.S. federal
32 Financials agencies, congressional offices, foreign government Thank you for being with us on this most important journey.
representatives and delegations this past academic
year, which deepened HAI’s relationships with
policymakers and accelerated their understanding
about the impact of AI.
This Annual Report reflects the research, We sincerely appreciate the support and engagement Fei-Fei Li John Etchemendy
activities, and impact of Stanford HAI between
 to of our advisors, affiliates, scholars and students–at

HAI Events
HAI brings its extended community together by hosting a variety of events
throughout the year, including workshops, conferences, and seminars. The
institute held 81 events during AY 2021-22, reaching a total 19,475 attendees
between in-person and virtual platforms.
Artificial Intelligence and
Strengthening the HAI Spring Conference the Economy: Charting a
Technical Foundations of Key Advances in Artificial Path for Responsible and Advancing Technology for
HAI Fall Conference on Policy & AI
U.S. Security Intelligence Inclusive AI a Sustainable Planet
Four Radical Proposals for a
HAI Managing Director for Policy and The HAI Spring Conference explored This symposium brought together Hosted together with IEEE and the
Better Society
Society Russell Wald, CSET Senior three key advances in artificial leaders from government, industry, Stanford Woods Institute for the
Hoffman-Yee Symposium
Proposals were presented to a panel Fellow Andrew Lohn, and Stanford intelligence—accountable AI, civil society, and academia to explore Environment, this event explored
Inaugural recipients of Hoffman-Yee of experts from multiple disciplines HAI Postdoctoral Fellow Jeff Ding foundation models, and embodied potential opportunities and challenges regulatory, policy, and financial
Research Grants presented results and backgrounds, who vetted, discussed how a National AI Research AI in virtual and real worlds—as well posed by artificial intelligence and frameworks critical to advancing
from their research to date and plans debated, and judged the merits of Resource (NAIRR) will impact U.S. as what the future of this technology machine learning deployment across technology which prioritizes people,
for the future. each one. national security. might hold. different economic sectors. planet, and purpose-driven progress.
September November December January February April July August
Data-Centric AI Virtual AI+HEALTH Creating a National AI DEL Spring Workshop Stanford HAI Congressional
Workshop This recorded online conference Research Resource Avoiding the Turing Trap: Boot Camp on Artificial
This workshop explored challenges convened experts and leaders HAI Managing Director for Policy and Workshop on AI & the Future Intelligence
and opportunities across the data-for- from academia, government, and Society Russell Wald, Center for Data of Work This multi-day, bi-partisan educational
AI pipeline. clinical practice to explore critical Innovation Policy Analyst Hodan Omaar,
event for a diverse cohort of 26
This workshop brought together DEL’s
and emerging issues related to AI’s and Founder & President of SeedAI
congressional staffers unpacked what
community of faculty, students, fellows, industry
impact across the spectrum of health, Austin Carson held a discussion on how
AI means for international security,
leaders, and supporters to share research and
healthcare, and related arenas. to design, implement and maintain a
the future of work, and healthcare,
discuss groundbreaking ideas related to the
National Artificial Intelligence Research
and included field trips to Stanford
future of work and the digital economy.
Resource (NAIRR).
labs for interactive experiences.
2 33

HAI Research Focus
Research HAI focuses its research initiatives around three main priorities, each with its
own vision and mission.
An Interdisciplinary
Approach Human Impact Spotlight
Civics Education for a Just
To develop technology that is equitable,
and Sustainable Future
researchers must understand how AI
interacts with humans, as well as how it Understanding and changing textbook content is
HAI’s research efforts gained significant momentum
interacts with vital social structures and one important lever in the multifaceted process
in the 2021-22 academic year. The team was excited institutions. required to redesign history and civics education.
to return to in-person events and to establish the Patricia Bromley in the Graduate School of
Education has designed a study that uses Natural
Ethics and Society Review process as part of HAI’s
Language Processing (NLP) to assess textbook
grant programs. content and document depictions of diversity,
equity, and sustainability.
Augment Human Spotlight
Capabilities Rating Systems and the Future of
Algorithmic Worker Evaluation
HAI believes that breakthroughs in
A team from the Schools of Engineering and
human-centered design methods will
Humanities and Sciences is developing a forward-
further progress in healthcare, education,
looking digital resumé for workers in online labor
sustainability, automation, and countless
platforms. The project brings together statistical
other domains.
methodology, algorithm design, human-computer
interaction, and political economy to enable the
same career pathways for online workers that
society takes for granted in offline work.
Intelligence Spotlight
Toward Machine Models of
To create a machine-assisted—yet
human-centered—world, the AI Structured Human Reasoning through
community must develop the next Explanation-based Meta-learning
generation of techniques that overcomes
Some of the most impressive achievements of the
the limitations of current algorithms,
human mind have led to deep scientific understanding
expands the class of problems that can
and powerful technologies. Two researchers from the
be addressed, and complements human
Schools of Engineering and Humanities and Sciences
cognitive and analytic styles.
seek to combine human and machine learning
research to build artificially intelligent systems that
could potentially achieve these abilities.
4 5

Grant Programs for AI Research Seed Research Grants
Since its founding, HAI’s grant programs have supported 248 faculty members HAI seed research grants are designed to bring faculty together across
from all seven Stanford schools. Many of these projects span multiple departments, disciplines to share knowledge and pursue new ideas. Three projects received
in keeping with the commitment to support interdisciplinary AI research. notable awards to continue their research:
How HAI Research Grants Connect Departments
Decision Systems that Reflect
Minority Perspectives
Stanford Doerr School School of Engineering
In , Computer Science Professor Michael
of Sustainability
Graduate School of Business Bernstein won the CHM Patrick J. McGovern Tech
School of Medicine
Graduate School of Education for Humanity Prize for his work toward introducing
Law School
diversity and reducing bias in AI systems. The project
School of Humanities includes a public-awareness website and open-
and Sciences
source models for developers.
Prototyping an Intelligent Agent for CO

Sequestration in Saline Aquifers
This project addresses the urgent need to develop and
scale commercial operations for sequestering CO in

the earth’s subsurface. Professor of Geological Sciences
Jef Caers received significant support from an Austrian
company that is working toward sustainability.
Equitable Education Access in
San Francisco
After winning seed funding in 2020 from HAI for a
project project called “School Choice Mechanisms:
Improving Diversity and Equity,” Irene Lo and Itai
Ashlagi from the School of Engineering received
follow-on funding from Stanford Impact Labs to
develop a method that San Francisco and other
districts can use to improve equity in school
assignment policies and practices.
Faculty members
Funded connections
90 188
6 7
total research grants since 2018 faculty funded in AY 2021-22

Hoffman-Yee Research Grants Cloud Credit Program
Hoffman-Yee research grants are made possible by a gift from philanthropists Reid HAI saw record demand for cloud credit grants during AY 2021-22. This program
Hoffman and Michelle Yee. In , HAI announced its second cohort of provides advanced computational resources that researchers need to conduct
Hoffman-Yee Grant recipients. Six research teams were each awarded a total of rigorous AI projects. HAI allocates these credits to studies showing promising,
$2.75 million to solve some of the most challenging problems in the field of AI. Each novel, or emerging ideas.
of the proposals went through a rigorous review with faculty, as well as an Ethics
In the second year of the Google Cloud Credit Grants, Human Impact—Azure
and Society review.
HAI awarded a total of $2.5 million in GCP credits “Foundation Models Homogenize
to 48 faculty across 59 projects. The institute also
Outcomes,” Percy Liang, Director, Center
Tuning Our Algorithmic Amplifiers: EAE Scores: A Framework for Explainable, launched the Microsoft Azure Cloud Credit Grants
for Research on Foundation Models, and
Encoding Societal Values into Social Actionable and Equitable Risk Scores for and awarded $330,000 in Azure credits to 7 faculty
Associate Professor of Computer Science
Media Algorithms Healthcare Decisions across 11 projects.
This study seeks to bring attention to a new class of
Main PI: Michael Bernstein Main PI: Carlos Ernesto Guestrin
Featured Cloud Grants potential harms that may arise with the increasing
Co-PIs: Angele Christin, Jeffrey Hancock, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Co-PIs: Carissa Carter, Emily Fox, Ramesh Johari, David Maahs, Priya Prahalad,
use of algorithmic systems—ones that are especially
Nathaniel Persily, Jeanne Tsai, Johan Ugander Sherri Rose, David Scheinker
Intelligence—Google problematic at scale. The research looks at whether
Imagine a future in which the AI algorithms that Researchers in medicine and engineering are
foundation models tend to homogenize outcomes,
underpin social media platforms help us achieve collaborating to develop new AI algorithms and “Large-scale Evaluation of Visual Intuitive
producing results that are more similar across
societal goals rather than undermining them. A team open-source tools that will transform the patient risk Physics,” Dan Yamins, Assistant Professor
different tasks or applications. The team aims to
of social science, engineering, and policy researchers assessment process. Their ultimate goal is to improve of Psychology and of Computer Science
provide a scientific understanding of the principles
is studying how to encode societal values into social clinical outcomes for Type 1 Diabetes, epilepsy, and
An artificial system that could mimic human-like intuitive that dictate how foundation models homogenize
media AIs. opioid overdose risk.
physical prediction abilities, given real-world visual outcomes, as well as evaluate possible interventions
input in complex environments, would be useful for to correct for homogenization.
MARPLE: Explaining What Happened Matching Newcomers to Places:
applications in computer vision, robotics, reinforcement
through Multi-modal Simulation Leveraging Human-Centered AI to
learning, and other areas. To help advance research Augment Human Capabilities—Google
Main PI: Tobias Gerstenberg Improve Immigrant Integration
in this area of AI, this team plans to create a large- “Online Surgical Analytics through
Co-PIs: Chelsea Finn, Noah Goodman, Thomas Icard, Robert MacCoun, Main PI: Jens Hainmueller
Jiajun Wu scale evaluation benchmark that captures a variety Computer Vision via Multi-task Learning,”
Co-PIs: Avidit Acharya, Yonatan Gur, Tomas Jimenez, Dominik Rothenhaeusler
of aspects of intuitive physics. Afterward, they will
Serena Yeung, Assistant Professor of
This project aims to bridge the gap between vision and
Exactly where immigrants settle within a host country evaluate a large set of state-of-the-art models on
language models by creating a way for AI systems to Biomedical Data Science
shapes the experience they have, as well as their this new benchmark and provide a comprehensive
integrate different sources of evidence into a causal contributions to the local economy and society. comparison to human performance in a unified way. Due to complexity and lack of suitable data training
model of the world. The resulting framework will seek The goal of this project is to develop data-driven sets, AI has not been widely developed for open
to mimic the human ability to infer what happened. matching tools for location decision-makers—both surgical procedures. This project aims to overcome
governments and immigrants themselves. existing limitations by curating the largest dataset of
Foundation Models: Integrating Technical
open surgical videos to date. Using this dataset, the
Advances, Social Responsibility,
Dendritic Computation for team has developed a multi-task AI model that is
and Applications
Knowledge Systems capable of understanding surgical behaviors, hands,
Main PI: Percy Liang and tools across both space and time.
Co-PIs: Kwabena Boahen, Scott W Linderman, H.-S. Philip Wong, Matei Zaharia
Co-PIs: Russ B. Altman, Jeannette Bohg, Akshay Chaudhari, Chelsea Finn,
This team is working on a way to rein in AI’s
Tatsunori Hashimoto, Dan E. Ho, Fei-Fei Li, Tengyu Ma, Christopher Manning,
Christopher Re, Rob Reich, Dorsa Sadigh, Matei Zaharia unsustainable energy, carbon, and monetary costs,
Foundation models represent a paradigm shift in AI. But distribute its productivity gains equitably, transform
developers need to improve their technical capabilities, its users’ experience, and restore their privacy. Their
while being sensitive to social responsibility and finding aim is to move away from learning with synapses (2-
more real-world applications. A diverse team with D) to learning with dendrites (3-D).
expertise in machine learning, law, political science,
biomedicine, vision, and robotics is on the case.
248 faculty members supported through
8 9
HAI research grants to date

HAI Research Center Research Community
Center for Research on During the past academic year, CRFM scholars To build community at Stanford, CRFM holds weekly
authored dozens of papers, including: meetings that bring together scholars from different
departments, including computer science, law,
Foundation Models
The Time Is Now to Develop Community political science, and biomedicine. To build norms and
Norms for the Release of Foundation Models standards across the foundation model ecosystem,
Center for Research on Foundation Models (CRFM) celebrated its one-year In this paper, the authors propose setting up a review board the center has put forth a proposal (featured as an
op-ed in Protocol) on norms for the release of and
anniversary in and now counts more than 300 students, faculty, and to develop community norms and encourage coordination
access to foundation models. CRFM researchers
on release of foundation models for research access.
postdocs working on relevant research projects. engaged with policymakers at the HAI Congressional
FlashAttention: Fast and Memory-Efficient AI Bootcamp and are beginning to write a series
This center was founded to drive fundamental models provide valuable representations for many
Exact Attention with IO-Awareness of policy briefs together with HAI’s policy team on
advances in the responsible study, development, and downstream applications; however, the technology is
foundation models, the evolving ecosystem, and
deployment of foundation models. Foundation models advancing at a rapid pace and there are unknown risks This innovation enables significant gains in speed for
norms/standards/benchmarks for ensuring the impact
are resource-intensive AI systems, such as GPT-3, that must be considered. training foundation models and has been integrated
of this technology is in the interest of public good.
Codex, StableDiffusion, Imagen, and AlphaFold, into major frameworks, as well as adopted by many
Stanford established CRFM to focus on three pillars:
which are trained on broad data at scale. Foundation industry teams. In collaboration with HAI’s Industry Programs
team, CRFM presented its work at key community
Large Language Models Can Be Strong engagement events with Google, IBM, and Wells Fargo.
Differentially Private Learners
Research Resources Community
Contrary to conventional wisdom that DP optimization
The center conducts The center builds and releases CRFM engages with universities, fails at learning high-dimensional models, empirical
interdisciplinary research that lays foundation models, code, and companies, policymakers, results from this study revealed that private learning with
groundwork for how foundation tools to improve the ecosystem. and civil society to develop pre-trained language models doesn’t tend to suffer from
models should be built to make professional norms that govern dimension-dependent performance degradation.
them more efficient, robust, the responsible development and
Meet CoAuthor, an Experiment in
interpretable, multimodal, and just. deployment of foundation models.
Human-AI Collaborative Writing
A team of researchers studied how humans and AI can
write together by designing large interaction datasets. This
paper won an honorable mention at the 2022 ACM CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
Percy Liang, Director of the Center for
Borrowing from the Law to Filter Training
Research on Foundation Models
Data for Foundation Models
Percy Liang is an associate professor of computer science
Using “Pile of Law,” a dataset of legal materials, at Stanford University and the director of the Center for
Stanford researchers explore filtering private or toxic Research on Foundation Models. His research spans many
content from training data for foundation models. topics in machine learning and natural language processing,
including robustness, interpretability, semantics, and
Notably, CRFM was awarded a 2022 Hoffman-Yee
reasoning. Percy’s awards include the Presidential Early
Research Grant to continue this important work.
Career Award for Scientists and Engineers (2019), IJCAI
Computers and Thought Award (2016), an NSF CAREER
Resources
Award (2016), a Sloan Research Fellowship (2015), and a
Microsoft Research Faculty Fellowship (2014).
To make progress on building concrete artifacts and
tools, CRFM has hired its first few engineers. This As the director of CRFM, he is leading Stanford’s efforts to
make fundamental advances in the study, development, and
is a critical step for building the infrastructure and
deployment of foundation models through an interdisciplinary
expertise in academia to grapple with the scale and
group of faculty, students, postdocs, and researchers.
complexity of foundation models.
10 11

HAI Research Center Research Highlights The Turing Trap: The Promise & Peril
of Human-like Artificial Intelligence
Stanford Digital Economy Lab
National Employment Report
AI that complements or augments humans
The lab collaborated with the ADP Research Institute has a lot of economic potential, but right
Over the last academic year, the Digital Economy Lab has been focused on on a new version of the National Employment Report. now the incentives for entrepreneurs,
This work represents an important step toward engineers, and governments are misaligned
conducting research and hosting major events. The lab currently has more than
properly measuring labor and the economy using fine- in favor of substituting human labor. In
50 research projects in its portfolio. Those projects fall into four areas of research: grained and high-frequency data. , Digital Economy Lab Director
Erik Brynjolfsson published an essay
Digital Resilience: How Work-from-Home outlining the social and economic dangers
Feasibility Affects Firm Performance of disproportionately focusing on AI that
Measuring the Digital Economy AI & The Future of Work
automates human tasks. The essay explains
In this exploration of remote-work, researchers
Creating better methods of measuring the health of an Understanding the future of the workforce in a rapidly provided a first look at how work-from-home that engineers have strong incentives to focus
increasingly digital economy changing global economy practices improved resilience to a major, on automation, but for AI to create economic
value in the long term, ideas that lead to
unanticipated social and economic shock. The team
augmentation are essential. It was widely
also completed a second wave of its survey with
covered in the media and has continued to
Gallup, which measures how Covid-19 and remote
gain traction and seed new research ideas.
work affected organizations and workers.
Adoption of Advanced Technologies Digital Platforms and Society
and Management Practices Exploring how digital technologies can transform Community Engagement
platforms and social media infrastructure to
Measuring, assessing, and predicting how data-driven and Public Outreach
benefit society
decision-making and management practices are
impacting the global economy and workforce To gather high-level feedback on its research areas,
the lab hosted two advisory group meetings, which
pointed the organization toward some key directions
for growth and the expansion of its work. To build
community at Stanford, the lab hosted two Stanford
faculty roundtable discussions as well as a summer
community BBQ in collaboration with HAI, the Golub
Capital Social Impact Lab, and Stanford’s RegLab.
The Digital Economy Lab is building community
beyond Stanford, too. Two major hybrid events were
hosted on campus, and a biweekly hybrid seminar
during the academic school year featured top thinkers
Erik Brynjolfsson, Director of the Stanford
and academics from around the world.
Digital Economy Lab
Efforts like the DigDig, a semimonthly newsletter that
Jerry Yang and Akiko Yamazaki Professor and Senior Fellow at HAI, Ralph
captures both important Digital Economy Lab and HAI Landau Senior Fellow at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research
(SIEPR), and professor, by courtesy, at the Stanford Graduate School of
content, provide a way of reaching audiences outside
Business and Stanford Department of Economics
the academic community. Finally, in social media, the
Christie Ko, Executive Director
lab’s audience continues to grow primarily on Twitter,
where it introduced a weekly update on important
news from the digital economy.
12 13

Research Program Research Program
AI Index Research Events
Measuring trends in artificial intelligence.
HAI and the AI Index Steering Committee published the • Policy events included a trip to Washington, DC
2022 AI Index report in . The latest edition to brief policymakers and tech policy experts, 21

included data from a broad set of academic, private, and briefings with Canadian Members of Parliament,
13 20
nonprofit organizations as well as more self-collected data and a general reception with the British Consulate
18 10

and original analysis than any previous edition. The authors General in San Francisco. 6 233 122 21
included a variety of new data points to cover technical • For the academic audience, HAI presented to the 56 68 12 24 7 6 2 1
performance in reinforcement learning, the pricing of 4829 5 4 1
robotic arms, and artificial intelligence legislation. W Da o t r a l d E t E h c ic o s n o a m nd ic I n F n o o ru va m ti ’ o s n A , I a T n e d a m th , e t h C e e C nt e e n r t f r o e r f or 4458 24 46 23 22 16 6 4
2 17

The AI Index received positive press coverage, both around AI Governance. 1 15 11
the time of the launch and throughout the rest of the The findings in the 2022 report also were used to 62 3 15 4 2 104 3 1 6 4
academic year: highlights included pieces from publishers inform policy-making in Canada and the European 1 5 7
like IEEE Spectrum, Fast Company and Morning Brew. Union. Canadian parliamentarians consulted with 1 1 4 10 4 6
A number of prominent publications cited information the AI Index team on the current state of facial 5 21 1 11 7 2 1

contained in the report—TechCrunch, Fortune, Forbes
recognition, and data from the AI Index made it into 3
11 62
and the Harvard Business Review among them.
the official report that the parliamentary committee

released on its recommended regulation of facial
HAI organized a total of 17 policy, public, and

recognition technology in Canada. Meanwhile,
academic events to promote the findings in the 2022
13 10
report. Some of the most notable public events were: members of the European Commission consulted 9 2
with the AI Index team to better understand the
• Virtual briefings at the HAI weekly seminar and a European Union’s relative position in the international
virtual presentation and fireside chat with a Chinese AI ecosystem.
translation partner.
Weekly seminars In , the HAI Collaboration Workshop
provided a great example of community building
HAI’s research team hosted 19 weekly seminars for more than 40 Stanford faculty. Designed as an
from Stanford and non-Stanford researchers across in-person workshop to support faculty in forming
a wide range of topics, from “Decolonial AI” to interdisciplinary research collaborations, the three-
“Embodied Intelligence.” Seminars for the academic hour event included a combination of interactive
year were held as virtual live events averaging about activities and discussion.

170 attendees. In all, the seminars reached more than
In , HAI collaborated with the IEEE Standards
3000 3,300 people from 90 countries.
Association and Stanford Woods Institute for the
Environment to host Advancing Technology for a
2500 Workshops
Sustainable Planet, a two-day event as part of IEEE’s
2000 In , HAI partnered with ETH Zurich AI Planet Positive 2030 campaign. Panel sessions explored
regulatory, policy, and financial frameworks critical to
Center to host the Data-Centric AI Virtual Workshop.
1500 advancing technology that prioritizes people, planet,
Sessions were hosted in both the U.S. and Europe.
and purpose-driven progress. After the keynotes
The recorded version of this event is one of HAI’s

and panels, attendees were invited to contribute to most-viewed videos on YouTube. At the end of the
a compendium document, “Strong Sustainability by
500 workshop, HAI Research launched the Data-Centric
Design,” which seeks to address climate change issues
AI Benchmarking Competition.
0 with recommendations and practical approaches.
erocS
olE
Chess Software Engines: Elo Score
Progress in reinforcement learning, an important AI skill capability, can be captured by the performance of the world’s top chess software engines.
Computers surpassed human performance in chess a long time ago, and since then have not stopped improving.
Source: Swedish Computer Chess Association, 2021. Chart: 2022 AI Index Report
3,581
2882, Magnus Carlsen
2300, Expert
1700, Intermediate
800, Novice
1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012 2017 2022
14 1155

Education and Training for Policymakers
Promote National AI Research
Resource (NAIRR)
In an effort to better educate policymakers and
combat false narratives on the NAIRR, the policy team
partnered with organizations on two events, one with
Georgetown CSET and another with the Center for
Data Innovation and SeedAI.
Artificial Intelligence and the Economy:
Charting a Path for Responsible and
Inclusive AI
In , HAI co-hosted a one-day symposium
with the Department of Commerce, National Institute
of Standards and Technology, and FinRegLab at the
Commerce Department in Washington, D.C. The
symposium focused on responsible AI integration in the
economy, general risk, financial services, and healthcare.
HAI Congressional Staff Boot Camp
In , HAI welcomed a diverse cohort of
26 congressional staffers from both the House and
Senate for a three-day educational event. Sessions
Policy covered what AI means for international security,
the future of work, and healthcare. The event also
included fireside chats with leading AI experts,
Engaging AI
networking dinners, and field trips to Stanford labs.
Leaders and
Policymakers
Stanford HAI’s policy team studies AI governance
and appropriate uses, with a commitment to
bringing AI leaders and policymakers together
to learn about and discuss strategies for guiding On April 27, former HAI Associate Director Susan Athey joined Deputy From August 8-11, a bipartisan cohort of 26 congressional staffers from the
Secretary of Commerce Don Graves and Acting Comptroller of the Currency House and the Senate joined our first Congressional Bootcamp on AI. They
human-centered AI. Activities include education and Michael J. Hsu in a fireside chat during a symposium co-hosted by HAI, the participated in sessions which explored what AI means for international
U.S. Dept. of Commerce, NIST, and FinRegLab. security, future of work, healthcare, and more.
training for policymakers, as well as policy initiatives,
publications, and events.
16 17

Policy Briefings in Washington, D.C. U.S. and E.U. Policymakers Visit Stanford
The HAI policy team led Stanford faculty members to hold briefings for Throughout the academic year, HAI hosted a number
of visits from high-level representatives to engage and
policymakers in D.C. on AI-related research at Stanford.
inform government officials on AI policy opportunities
and challenges.
U.S. Federal Agencies Congressional Offices
Meetings included Senator Mark Warner,
and Committees
White House office of Science and Technology Representative Jerry McNerney, Representative
(OSTP) Anna Eshoo, then-UK Chancellor of the Exchequer
Congressional Black Caucus
Rishi Sunak, eight members of the E.U. parliament
Department of State (Bureau of Cyberspace and
Congressional and Senate AI Caucuses with MEP Victor Negrescu, an Austrian government
Digital Policy, Office of the Science and Technology
delegation, a Norwegian government delegation,
Adviser to the U.S. Secretary of State, Center for Senate and House Intelligence Committee
an Estonian government delegation, and the Taipei
Analytics)
Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, Economic and Cultural Office (TECO). On May 25, HAI faculty affiliates and directors met with members of the
General Accountability Office (GAO) and Transportation European Parliament at Stanford University to discuss the Digital Revolution,
privacy, surveillance, and other AI regulatory issues.
These visits served to enhance the visibility of cutting-
National Security Council (NSC) House Select Committee on Economic Disparity
edge Stanford AI research, promote direct dialogues
and Fairness in Growth
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) between the federal government and academia, and
House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology identify opportunities and gaps for collaboration in AI
National Science Foundation (NSF)
R&D, governance initiatives, and development of AI
Office of Senator Martin Heinrich
policy norms.
Office of Senator Mark Warner
Think Tanks
Office of Senator Cory Booker
Policy Initiatives
Special Competitive Studies
Project (SCSP) Office of Senator Alex Padilla
Center for a New American Office of Senator Rob Portman
Emerging Technology Policy Multilateral AI Research
Security (CNAS)
Office of Senator Mike Rounds Writing Competition Institute (MAIRI)
Georgetown Center for Security
Office of Representative Anna Eshoo HAI worked together with the Digital Economy HAI published this white paper to map a
and Emerging Technology (CSET)
Lab and the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy blueprint for a research institute that would
Office of Representative Ted Lieu
Center for Strategic and Research (SIEPR) to seek submissions of policy briefs provide a way to accelerate AI research and
International Studies (CSIS) Office of Representative Jerry McNerney from Stanford graduate students. The competition development collaboration among like-
Office of Representative Jay Obernolte aimed to cultivate succinct, effective, and evidence- minded countries. The authors make the
based policy writing that can help policymakers case for how an institute like this could help
map out a human-centric approach to responsible to establish better AI research standards
development and deployment of AI technologies. worldwide for the responsible and inclusive
development of AI.
AI Audit Challenge
In , HAI’s policy team coordinated with
Marietje Schaake, Rob Reich, and Jack Clark to
launch an algorithmic auditing competition. HAI
invited participants to design and create applied
tools to assess whether deployed AI systems exhibit
bias or other harm. With a grant from the Rockefeller
Foundation, the competition had a total of $71,000
to offer the winning submissions. The application
process was still underway at the end of AY 2021-22
with awards planned to be announced in early 2023.
18 1199

Policy Publications Faculty Engagement
Healthcare Policy Steering Committee
HAI’s policy team translates cutting-edge, multidisciplinary AI research into digestible
A committee led by HAI Associate Director
formats for policymakers. The team also produces original AI-related policy research to
Curt Langlotz met three times during the
equip policymakers with tools to understand and govern this technology. academic year to build the community and
discuss research agendas. The committee
also funded three policy-related healthcare
research grants.
Policy Briefs Federal Requests for Information
International Security
During the last academic year, we published five Federal Requests for Information (RFIs) synthesize Steering Committee
policy briefs: academic research and perspectives to provide the
Led by Hoover Institution Senior Fellow and
federal government with necessary tools and knowledge
Risks of AI Race Detection in the Medical System Professor of Political Science (by courtesy),
to develop AI-related governance initiatives. In response
Amy Zegart, the committee commissioned a
Using Satellite Imagery to Understand and Promote to the White House Office of Science and Technology
study on DOD use cases in AI at the non-
Sustainable Development Policy, HAI prepared the following:
combat level and supported participation in
Toward Stronger FDA Approval Standards for AI
AI Bill of Rights for public and private sector use of the newly launched Stanford Emerging Tech
Medical Devices
biometric technologies Review. It also held various engagements
A New Direction for Machine Learning in
across campus.
Recommendations on updating the National AI R&D
Criminal Law
Strategic Plan
Promoting Algorithmic Fairness in Clinical Faculty-originated Policy Research
Feedback to the National AI Research Resource
Risk Prediction
Interim Report HAI’s policy team is working with Professor
of Law and Health Policy Michelle Mello on a
comprehensive study of liability related to AI
use in healthcare, funded by the Healthcare
Policy Steering Committee.
Policy Explainers Recommendations to the
National Institute of Standards
HAI’s policy explainers summarize key points of AI-
relevant legislation or other legal documents to help and Technology
decision-makers find the information they need to
make effective decisions. These three explainers were To assist the National Institute of Standards and
published in AY 2021-22: Technology, HAI prepared recommendations on
how standards can be applied to a more productive
EU AI Act digital economy.
AI-related Provisions from the National Defense
Authorization Act 2022
What The CHIPS and Science Act means for
Artificial Intelligence

Reaching Faculty at Stanford and Beyond
During AY 2021-22, HAI enrolled more than 7,000 people across its education
Education
programs, including 50 faculty from Stanford and other institutions who were
trained in matters related to human-centered AI.
Educating the
Special Initiatives For Current Leaders
Leaders of Today
Stanford AI+Health Conference Government Education
The inaugural Stanford AI+Health Conference, held HAI now offers six distinct programs targeting more
and Tomorrow December 8-9, 2021, was the largest AI+Health than 100 government executives and policymakers.
Conference in Stanford’s history in terms of audience In addition to the Congressional Boot Camp, four
size and faculty participation, with more than 150 additional training programs provided opportunities
Stanford faculty presenting. During this online event, for executives across federal government bodies in
HAI’s growing portfolio of programs helps Stanford HAI, the Artificial Intelligence in Medicine & the U.S. and internationally to learn about the latest AI
Imaging (AIMI) center, and the Center for Continuing trends and issues.
high-impact decision-makers and emerging leaders
Medical Education (CME) convened experts and
to pursue cutting-edge research, create useful and leaders from academia, industry, government, and Executive Education
responsible AI, and respond thoughtfully to the clinical practice to explore emerging issues related to 5,000 executives and professionals enrolled in HAI’s
AI’s impact on healthcare. Executive and Professional Education offerings during
societal and ethical implications of global AI.
the academic year. Highlights included the launch
Stanford Art + Tech Salon
of an invitation-only CEO Roundtable Series and
Stanford Art + Tech Salon is a quarterly get-together a new custom Executive Education program that
for affiliated artists, researchers, scholars, and students gives organizations the option to choose among 100
who work at the intersection of arts and tech to share AI topics. In , Journalist Day at HAI
work and engage in discussions. Events are produced focused on AI Imperatives for 2022. The education
through a partnership with Stanford Arts. AY 2021-2022 team also provided faculty training on “Teaching
events included a spotlight on Jeremy Bailenson and AI and Ethics: Lessons from Stanford’s Embedded
Cyan DeVeaux’s work creating classes and new worlds EthiCS Team” for the Stanford Educational Partnership
in VR; Lark Alder and Khuyen Le on Queer Technology for Internationalizing Curriculum (EPIC) Community
and Speculative Design; and Ge Wang and Kunwoo College Faculty Fellowship.
Kim on Music, Computing and Design.
For Future Leaders
A group of high school students attended a three-
week live virtual program called Stanford AI4ALL
to get immersed in AI through a combination of
lectures, hands-on research projects, and mentoring
activities. HAI also offered two courses in Stanford’s
Pre-collegiate Summer Institutes: Artificial
Intelligence and Fundamentals of Augmented Reality.
In the spring, HAI’s “Visions of the Future” online
In the summer of 2022, 30+ high school students participated in a three-week
course reached 500 global students, covering the
AI4ALL program where they learned about AI through lectures, mentorship,
and hands-on research projects. future impact of AI, as well as AI and the metaverse,
healthcare, and blockchain.
22 23

Denning Co-Directors Associate Directors
HAI’s co-directors lead the institute much like an academic startup, making HAI’s associate directors bring a diverse mix of backgrounds and experience
sure that all of the institute’s work reflects a passion for the safe and responsible to the institute. They are essential to the execution of HAI’s multidisciplinary
development of AI technology. approach to studying AI.
Russ Altman Susan Athey Michele Elam
Kenneth Fong Professor and Professor of Economics of Technology Professor, Senior Fellow William Robertson Coe Professor of Humanities,
Bioengineering, of Genetics, of Medicine (General at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Department of English, Center for Comparative
Medical Discipline), of Biomedical Data Science, Research and Professor, by courtesy, of Economics Studies in Race & Ethnicity, African & African
John Etchemendy Fei-Fei Li and, by courtesy, of Computer Science Susan published “Uncovering American Studies
Russ co-hosted the HAI Fall interpretable potential confounders Michele presented on AI & the Future
Provost, Emeritus, and Patrick Suppes Family Professor in the School of Sequoia Professor, Computer Science Department
Humanities and Sciences Conference with James Landay and in electronic medical records” in of the Creative Industry at the Stanford
Fei-Fei co-led the HAI Spring Conference on Key co-chaired the search for HAI Junior MedRxiv and spoke at the HAI HAI Congressional Boot Camp on
In AY 2021-22, John served as chair of the Hoffman-
Advances in Artificial Intelligence and spoke at the Fellows with John Etchemendy, joint event with IEEE, “Advancing Artificial Intelligence, and with Russell
Yee Grant Selection Committee and was named to
Stanford HAI Congressional Boot Camp on Artificial which resulted in the hiring of Shriti Technology for a Sustainable Future.” Wald, briefed congressional staffers
the AI Index Steering Committee. He also taught Intelligence in AY 2021-22. She was named to the Raj, HAI’s newest Junior Faculty In July, she moved on from HAI to on art, equity, and generative AI. She
“Philosophy of Artificial Intelligence” to undergraduate The Center for Strategic and International Studies Fellow (). Russ also served accept a position as chief economist authored four peer-reviewed articles
students. Notably, John received the K. Jon Barwise (CSIS) AI Council, and she published several papers: as Faculty Director for AI100, spoke of the antitrust division at the U.S. placed in top journals in the humanities
Prize from the American Philosophical Association, “Embodied intelligence via learning and evolution” at the School of Engineering event on Department of Justice. as well as “The Stanford HAI Bill of
honoring “significant and sustained contributions to Principled Engineering: AI and Drug Rights,” co-led with Rob Reich. She
in Nature Communications; “Advances, challenges
the intersection of philosophy and computation.” Development, and worked with Curt taught two interdisciplinary classes
and opportunities in creating data for trustworthy AI”
Langlotz to strengthen ties between on human-centered AI that examine
in Nature Machine Intelligence; and “Searching for
HAI and the School of Medicine. race, gender, disability & equity, and
Computer Vision North Stars” (co-author) in Dædalus.
gave keynote talks on human-centered
Fei-Fei received the Thomas S. Huang Memorial
AI at the University of Chicago,
Prize which honors scientists who are recognized as Ohio State, UCLA, Princeton, and
examples in research, teaching/mentoring and service Cambridge (UK). Her HAI committee
to the computer vision community. work included Hoffman-Yee and
Junior Fellows selection, and faculty
lead for the HAI Visiting Artist
selection committee. Michele is the
faculty lead for the Arts & Tech Salon
and represented HAI on the Race &
Tech Initiative (co-sponsored by HAI
and Center for Comparative Studies
in Race & Ethnicity).

Surya Ganguli Daniel E. Ho James Landay Curtis P. Langlotz Christopher Manning Rob Reich
Associate Professor of Applied Physics, and, William Benjamin Scott and Luna M. Scott Anand Rajaraman and Venky Harinarayan Professor of Radiology, Medicine and Biomedical Professor of Political Science, Faculty Director
Thomas M. Siebel Professor in Machine
by courtesy, of Neurobiology, of Electrical Professor of Law; Professor of Political Science; Professor in the School of Engineering, Professor Data Science; Director, Center for Artificial of the McCoy Family Center for Ethics in Society,
Learning, Professor of Linguistics and of
Engineering, and of Computer Science Senior Fellow, SIEPR; Faculty Fellow, CASBS; of Computer Science Intelligence in Medicine & Imaging and the Marc and Laura Andreessen Faculty
Computer Science; Director, Stanford Artificial
Faculty Director, Stanford RegLab Co-Director of the Stanford Center on
Surya published “Embodied James co-hosted the HAI Fall Curtis chaired the HAI Steering Intelligence Laboratory (SAIL)
Philanthropy and Civil Society
intelligence via learning and Daniel was appointed to the National Conference with Russ Altman on Committee on Healthcare Policy, Chris co-led the HAI Spring
evolution” in Nature Communications AI Advisory Commission to advise the “AI in the Loop: Humans in Charge.” which initiated studies of tort liability Conference on Key Advances in Rob published a paperback version of
and co-led an HAI seminar on this White House on AI policy, as well as to He was named Vice Director and and medical AI and dangers of Artificial Intelligence. He also leads the System Error: Where Big Tech Went
work. He also published “Emergent the Committee on National Statistics Faculty Director of Research for health AI dual use. He published HAI cloud credit grant programs. He Wrong and How We Can Reboot,
reliability in sensory cortical coding at the National Academies. He served HAI, and he continued to lead HAI’s “Implementation of Clinical Artificial published papers including “Human with Mehran Sahami and Jeremy M.
and inter-area communication” in as co-lead for the HAI Fall Conference grant programs and to co-lead the Intelligence in Radiology: Who language understanding and reasoning” Weinstein, with Brazilian, Korean, and
Nature and gave a lecture on Applied on Policy & AI: Four Radical Proposals Hoffman-Yee Symposium. James gave Decides and How?” which proposed a in Dædalus and “Fast model editing Japanese translations also released
Physics/Physics Colloquium. for a Better Society. Daniel spoke a keynote on “‘AI for Good’ Isn’t Good risk model and governance structure at scale” and “GreaseLM: Graph in 2022. He spoke at the HAI Spring
about Public Sector AI at the Artificial Enough: A Call for Human-Centered for the implementation of AI in health REASoning Enhanced Language Conference on Key Advances in
Intelligence and the Economy event in AI” at MobiCom 2022 in Sydney, imaging. He also led the AIMI-HAI Models” at ICLR 2022. Artificial Intelligence and co-authored
Washington, D.C., which was co-hosted The Australian National University, partnership grant program, which a HAI blog post, “The Time Is Now to
with the Department of Commerce Brown University, and Northwestern provided over $1 million in new and Develop Community Norms for the
and FinRegLab. He also spoke at the University. In , he ambitious ideas that reimagine AI in Release of Foundation Models.” He
Stanford HAI Congressional Boot Camp published “End-User Audits: A System healthcare, using real clinical datasets, continued to guide development of
on Artificial Intelligence. Additionally, Empowering Communities to Lead with near-term clinical applications. the Embedded EthiCS initiative.
he taught “Antidiscrimination Law and Large-Scale Investigations of Harmful Curtis also helped organize the
Algorithmic Bias,” and co-led a HAI Algorithmic Behavior,” along with Stanford AI+Health conference, which
seminar on “A Blueprint for the National Michelle S. Lam, Mitchell L. Gordon, explored critical and emerging issues
Research Cloud.” His publications included Danaë Metaxa, Jeffrey T. Hancock, related to AI’s impact across the
“Advances, challenges and opportunities and Michael S. Bernstein, in Proc. spectrum of healthcare.
in creating data for trustworthy AI” in ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 6,
Nature Machine Intelligence. CSCW2, Article 512.
Staff Krysten Hommel Vanessa Parli Michael Sellitto
Senior Associate Director, Strategic Initiatives Associate Director of Research Programs
Deputy Director (through )
HAI depends on an exceptionally (through )
Stacy Peña Michael Sellitto led the institute through a substantial growth phase, more than
capable staff to realize its mission Amita Kumar
Director of Communications doubling its size during the pandemic and significantly expanding its internal
and run programs that have wide
Director of Administration and external reach. In , Mike joined AI startup Anthropic as Head of
appeal and global impact. John Robichaux
Geopolitics and Security. He is also a co-author of the annual AI Index report and
Panos Madamopoulos-Moraris
Director of Education
co-chairs an experts working group on national AI policy implementation at the
Managing Director of Industry Programs and
Partnerships Russell Wald Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
Managing Director for Policy & Society
Maura McGinnity
Senior Director of Development,
Strategic Initiatives
26 2277

Faculty and Fellows Junior Faculty Fellows
2021–22 HAI Fellows
HAI currently has 250 affiliated Stanford faculty from across all seven schools.
Diana Acosta Navas
Each year, the institute aims to support the work of researchers who focus on
Embedded EthiCS Fellow
the intersection of multiple disciplines. In AY 2021-22, HAI launched two new
Sarah Bana
graduate fellowships: The HAI Graduate Fellowship Program, led by HAI Junior DEL Postdoctoral Fellow
Faculty Fellow and Assistant Professor in the Psychology Department, Johannes
Kathleen Creel
Eichstaedt, and the Technology and Racial Equity Graduate Fellowship offered in Embedded EthiCS Fellow
partnership with the Center for Comparative Studies in Race and Ethnicity (CCSRE). Ruyu Chen
Hariharan Subramonyam Johannes Eichstaedt
DEL Postdoctoral Fellow
HAI Junior Faculty Fellow HAI Junior Faculty Fellow
Featured Fellows
Jeffrey Ding
Hari Subramonyam is an Assistant Johannes is a computational social
HAI-CISAC Postdoctoral Fellow
Professor at the Graduate School of scientist jointly appointed as a Ram
Education and Computer Science and Vijay Shriram HAI Faculty Fellow Vael Gates
(by courtesy). He is a Ram and Vijay and Assistant Professor (Research) of HAI-CISAC Postdoctoral Fellow
Shriram Faculty Fellow at Stanford Psychology. He analyzes large social
HAI. Hari’s research looks at enabling text (Twitter, Facebook, Reddit, etc.) Jazmia Henry
multidisciplinary teams to design and with NLP and AI to understand and HAI-CCSRE Practitioner Fellow
develop ethical, responsible, and measure psychological processes for
Todd Karhu
human-centered experiences with individuals and populations—such
HAI-EIS Postdoctoral Fellow
AI. A specific application area of his as building early warning systems for
research is AI in education, where mental health. Currently, Johannes Jennifer King
he draws from cognitive psychology is focused on leveraging generative HAI Privacy and Data Policy Fellow
Kathleen Creel Jazmia Henry Peter Norvig
principles to augment human learning, language models (like ChatGPT) to
Embedded EthiCS Fellow HAI-CCSRE Practitioner Fellow Distinguished Education Fellow Jae Joon Lee
creativity, and visual sensemaking. deliver high-fidelity therapy and positive
DEL Postdoctoral Fellow
In her second year of a two-year Machine learning specialist Jazmia AI expert Peter Norvig has joined interventions (like gratitude exercises).
fellowship, Kathleen Creel seeks Henry focuses on finding a way to Stanford HAI as a Distinguished
J. Frank Li
to understand ethical questions responsibly incorporate African Education Fellow to help develop a
DEL Postdoctoral Fellow
posed by emerging technologies American Vernacular English (AAVE) human-focused AI curriculum and
with an interdisciplinary approach. into natural language processing broaden access to education. A Evelyn Mei
She teaches in and creates course models. As a fellow at HAI and the longtime innovator in the field, he co- HAI-CCSRE Practitioner Fellow
material for a program designed to Center for Comparative Studies in wrote Artificial Intelligence: A Modern
Collier Navaroli
embed ethical considerations into Race and Ethnicity, she has created Approach, an introductory textbook Content
HAI-CCSRE Practitioner Fellow
the computer science curriculum. an open-source corpora of more used by 1,500 universities worldwide.
She’s also pursuing her own research, than 141,000 AAVE words to help He has taught hundreds of thousands HAI’s content team published 97 blog posts, 9 announcement Rashaad Newsome
collaborating with interdisciplinary researchers and builders design of students through his courses on the stories, and 61 videos, accumulating 552,000 pageviews and 169,700 Visiting Artist
scholars from HAI’s Center for models that are both inclusive and online education platform Udacity. views on YouTube. The team increased social media following by
Research on Foundation Models less susceptible to bias. 42% during the academic year and set up a syndication partnership Peter Norvig
(CRFM) to study the negative with VentureBeat. Content highlights from the year included: HAI Distinguished Education Fellow
impact of algorithmic monoculture
Marietje Schaake
on individuals. • A healthcare AI series covering explainability, generalizability, privacy
HAI International Policy Fellow
and fairness concerns, and whether AI for health is even useful
Faye-Marie Vassell
• A fall conference series examining crucial ideas around data
STEM Education, Equity, and
intermediaries, UBI, middleware, and AI audits
Inclusion Fellow
• The People of HAI series, highlighting the personalities and
ambitions of the people affiliated with HAI
• A video series on this year’s Hoffman-Yee Grant recipients and
their research goals
28 29

Research Centers and Partners Corporate Members Program
HAI’s work depends on close collaboration with many labs, centers, and institutes For its community of corporate members, HAI The HAI Corporate Affiliate Program launched a
published two corporate industry briefs on Robotics second program area on Consumer Goods, Retail
across the Stanford campus and beyond.
& AI and Education & AI. The Founding Members & AI. This effort aims to provide an environment
Program leveraged research tokens, Fellow-Mentor- for manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, retail
AI100 Data Analytics for Regulation, Evaluation,
Advisor relationships, and visiting scholars to facilitate chains and consumer goods and retail corporations
What’s Next and Governance Lab
The One Hundred Year Study on
research collaborations and distribute almost $1.5 to engage with Stanford at the nexus of their most
Artificial Intelligence, or AI100, is a Despite incredible recent advances in The Regulation, Evaluation, and million to faculty and programs across the university. fundamental AI challenges. The HAI Corporate
100-year effort to study and anticipate machine learning, building machine Governance Lab (RegLab) partners
Funded projects are addressing foundation models, Program also includes a general program area for
how the effects of artificial intelligence learning applications remains with government agencies to design
AI trust, social computing, conversational AI, and companies with a more horizontal interest in AI.
will ripple through every aspect of how prohibitively time-consuming and and evaluate programs, policies, and
human-computer/human-robot interaction. In
people work, live, and play. expensive for all but the best-trained, technologies that modernize governance.
addition, HAI developed a tailored AI Seminar Series
best-funded engineering organizations.
AI Index Stanford Artificial for corporate members.
Data Analytics for What’s Next, or
The AI Index is an effort to track, DAWN, is a five-year research project to Intelligence Laboratory
collate, distill and visualize data relating democratize AI by making it dramatically
The Stanford Artificial Intelligence
to artificial intelligence. It aspires to be easier to build AI-powered applications.
Laboratory (SAIL) has been a center of
a comprehensive resource of data and
excellence for AI research, teaching, theory,
Digital Economy Lab
analysis for policymakers, researchers,
and practice since its founding in 1962.
executives, journalists, and the general The Stanford Digital Economy Lab at The collaboration with HAI has evolved into deeper HAI continues to be a critical engagement for Wells
public to develop intuitions about the HAI is an interdisciplinary research group Stanford Partners engagement over the course of the past year. Our Fargo’s innovation plans, specifically in the AI/ML
complex field of AI. studying how digital technologies are
Black in AI Research (BlackAIR) researchers interact regularly with faculty and graduate space. Its cross-discipline approach and resulting
transforming work, organizations, and
Center for AI Safety students on research topics of mutual interest, sharing access to deep subject matter expertise approaching
the economy. An engine for research and Center for AI in Medicine & Imaging
research outcomes through joint publications and the problems from different perspectives is the only
The mission of the Stanford Center education, the Lab brings together an (AIMI)
open-source code contributions. This is a natural way we will solve hard problems of explainability
for AI Safety is to develop rigorous unprecedented group of stakeholders to
Center for Comparative Studies in transition into the kind of deep joint collaboration that and bias for what will be an increasingly complex
techniques for building safe and analyze data, run experiments, develop
Race and Ethnicity (CCSRE)
trustworthy AI systems and establishing theories, and provide actionable insights. we envisioned would happen as HAI grew out of the ecosystem of AI.
McCoy Family Center for Ethics in founding stages into steady-state operation.
confidence in their behavior and
Golub Capital Social Society Chintan Mehta, CIO, Head of Digital
robustness, thereby facilitating their
Jeffrey J. Welser, COO, IBM Research, VP Technology and Innovation, Wells Fargo
successful adoption in society. Impact Lab Center for International Security Exploratory Science & University
The Golub Capital Social Impact Lab and Cooperation (CISAC) Collaboration
Center for Research on
uses digital technology and social science Cyber Policy Center
Foundation Models
research to improve the effectiveness of
Digital Civil Society Lab (DCSL)
The Center for Research on Foundation leading social sector organizations. Based
Models (CRFM) is an interdisciplinary out of Stanford GSB, the lab is a research Hoover Institution
initiative born out of Stanford HAI that initiative of affiliated academics and staff, Institute for Diversity in the Arts Google recognizes that HAI’s interdisciplinary
aims to make fundamental advances as well as researchers and students, who perspective is key to shaping an inclusive AI future.
John S. Knight Journalism
in the study, development, and are passionate about conducting research
The HAI Founding Members Program allows for
Fellowships (JSK)
deployment of foundation models. that guides and improves the process of
customizable, project-based collaborations that
innovation. Office of the Vice President
engage participating Googlers with new topics,
Center for the Study of
for the Arts
Language and Information Open Virtual Assistant Lab methods, and people in the domain of human-
Stanford Aging and Ethnogeriatrics centered AI. We look forward to expanding on these
The Center for the Study of Language Open Virtual Assistant Lab, or OVAL, (SAGE) Research Center
initiatives as we continue our work with HAI.
and Information (CSLI) serves Stanford is creating an ecosystem founded on
Stanford Institute for Economic
faculty and students who are engaged open virtual assistant technology that Jeff Dean, Google Senior Fellow and SVP
Policy Research (SIEPR)
in research involving computational, democratizes AI for linguistic user of Google Research
logical, and stochastic modeling of interfaces, creates an open and non- Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute
cognitive functions and processes. proprietary web, and promotes sharing
with individual data ownership. External Partners
30 AI4All 3311

Funding Financials
Sponsored Cloud Credits Facilities
Research (in kind) Upgrade
4% 5% 7%
Community Operations
Endowment
and (HAI, CSLI, DEL)
Payouts
Programs 26%
3%
13%
In FY22, HAI
issued $11.1M
Total Total
in research
$64,910,741
$27,308,730
grants. People
6%
Research
Gifts and 48%
Other Income
88%
Sources of Income1 HAI Research Support Operations
26%
$7,563,459
Gifts and Other Income Cloud Credit Grants $3,172,125
88% People
$56,842,049
6%
Hoffman-Yee Grants $6,000,000 $1,861,892
Endowment Payouts
3% Research
$2,280,196 Seed Grants $1,960,248
48%
$14,001,153
Sponsored Research
Total $11,132,373
4% Community and Programs
$2,616,371
13%
$3,882,226
Cloud Credits (in kind)
5% Facilities Upgrade
$3,172,125
7%
$2,000,000
Total $64,910,741
Total $27,308,730
1 Income does not include increases in endowment principal
32 3333

Advisory Council Support for HAI
The HAI Advisory Council consists of leaders in Stanford HAI is grateful for the generosity of those
science, civil society, and business who provide HAI who provide support to make its work possible. The
with expert advice on issues relevant to the institute’s institute welcomes gifts made online.
mission and programs. Reid Hoffman serves as chair
of the council, along with vice chairs Steve Denning
and Srinija Srinivasan.
Thank You
Thank you for taking the time to learn about Visit us
hai.stanford.edu
our ongoing work across the AI landscape. We
appreciate your support and encourage you to Reach out
contact us with any questions. hai-institute@stanford.edu
Subscribe to our
353 Jane Stanford Way
newsletter
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
Follow us