A policy research organization within Georgetown University’s Walsh
School of Foreign Service, the Center for Security and Emerging
Technology informs high-stakes decisions by providing
decision-makers with rigorous analysis on the security implications of
emerging technologies.
To learn more, visit cset.georgetown.edu.
©2026 Center for Security and Emerging Technology. All Rights Reserved.
This report was designed by Jason Ly and produced by CSET.

Contents

Letter from the Executive Director

CSET in the Media

Highlights of 2025

Research

Donors

Culture Statement

CENTER FOR SECURITY AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY ANNUAL REPORT 2025
Letter from the Executive Director
Helen Toner
Interim Executive Director
Dear Friends of CSET, Our report revealed who showed
up in these tender documents. In 2026, we’ve
When we founded CSET in 2019, it was already published the first in a series on what the
Washington’s first think tank focused entirely on PLA was seeking to purchase. CSET is using the
security and emerging technology, and it quickly PLA’s own contracting records to assess what China
grew to be the largest research organization in is going to do before they do it.
the world working on AI policy. At a time when
many viewed these areas as niche, we saw an In the summer, CSET hosted a closed-door
opportunity to invest in issues that we knew would workshop on the automation of AI R&D, a topic
be enormously consequential for the future. that is increasingly central in conversations among
AI insiders but is largely absent from policy
Central to our approach from the beginning has conversations. Against a backdrop of strong
been building an interdisciplinary team with data disagreement between experts, we identified
skills, foreign-language proficiency, national areas of unexpected consensus, clarified points of
security experience, and deep technical expertise.. true divergence, and mapped what further data is
This has allowed us to be at the cutting edge of needed to fully appreciate the implications of AI
emerging tech issues, from our seminal paper on R&D automation. This foundational work positions
the importance of AI chips, published a year before CSET to provide technical expertise to policymakers
semiconductor supply chain issues hit the front as AI R&D automation efforts grow.
pages during the pandemic, to our first-of-its-kind
look at the future of sophisticated AI agents. Entering 2026, our most recent new initiative is
Project ATLAS. ATLAS addresses the proliferation
CSET continues to look around corners. In 2025, we of scientific research that too often exists only in
published the first in a series of papers drawing on large, messy datasets. Building on our Map of
an in-house dataset that revealed new information Science and led by our data team, ATLAS will make
on how China is modernizing its military. CSET scientific data more practically useful by using new
researchers analyzed thousands of procurement LLM-based methods to extract research metadata,
documents showing the efforts of the People’s organize and describe the global scientific
Liberation Army to purchase AI-related goods landscape, and identify emerging areas of activity.
and services from both its traditional state-owned ATLAS will be a tool for researchers, practitioners,
contractors and newer vendors. and policymakers to find signals of new scientific or
CSET•2025 3

CENTER FOR SECURITY AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY ANNUAL REPORT 2025
technological applications and plan for the future.
These are a few examples of CSET’s work over the
past year. In the following pages, you’ll read more
about our pioneering research and impact.
On a personal note, it has been an honor and
a joy to step into the role of Executive Director
over the past six months. We took the opportunity
of this leadership transition—with Cara LaPointe
also joining as our new Director of Analysis in the
fall—to take time for a strategic review of where
“Central to our
we are and what we want to do next. I’m excited
about the research priorities we’ve identified for the approach from
coming year, where we believe focused investment
the beginning has
will have outsized impact: doubling down on
analyzing the U.S. and Chinese tech ecosystems, been building an
continuing our pioneering work on how the U.S. can
interdisciplinary
responsibly adopt AI for national security missions,
investing in Project ATLAS to draw insights from data
team with data
about scientific progress, and expanding our focus
on the security and governance implications of skills, foreign-
progress at the frontier of AI.
language
Drawing on the experience, expertise, and energy proficiency,
of our dedicated researchers, we will tackle these
national security
big questions and work to inform high-stakes
decisions from D.C. to San Francisco and beyond. experience, and
deep technical
We can’t do it without your support. Thank you for
your help in making CSET’s work possible.
expertise.”
Helen Toner
CSET Interim Executive Director
Sincerely,
Helen
CSET•2025 4

CENTER FOR SECURITY AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY ANNUAL REPORT 2025
CSET in the Media
Cole McFaul
Senior Research Analyst & Andrew W. Marshall Fellow
Foreign Policy
Sam Bresnick
Research Fellow & Andrew W. Marshall Fellow
”Our data leaves little doubt that military-civil fusion is no longer an
aspiration in Beijing—it is a reality. Unless the United States adapts its policies
to that reality, it may find itself facing a PLA that is not only better armed but
also better networked into the engines of civilian innovation.”
Axios Steph Batalis
Research Fellow
“[Collecting better biological data, and running it through AI] might be the difference between managing a
really small disease outbreak and letting it spread and become a much bigger problem.”
Ali Crawford Matthias Oschinski Andrew J. Lohn
National Interest
Senior Research Analyst Senior Fellow Senior Fellow
“Companies that invest in augmenting human work, respect creative rights, and prioritize transparency in AI
deployment will be better positioned to attract top talent and earn long-term trust. In the decade ahead, speed
alone won’t define the AI winners–the edge will go to those who treat human capital as a strategic asset.”
CSET•2025 5

CENTER FOR SECURITY AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY ANNUAL REPORT 2025
CNBC Hanna Dohmen
Senior Research Analyst
“China is working hard to build up its semiconductor fabrication capabilities and capacity; however, it still lags
significantly due to constraints imposed by U.S. and allied export controls on semiconductor manufacturing
equipment.”
The Hill Jessica Ji Vikram Venkatram Mina Narayanan
Senior Research Analyst Research Analyst Research Analyst
“If Congress imposes this moratorium [on states regulating AI], it will effectively shoot itself in the foot
by stifling U.S. AI innovation and even endangering national security. The reality is that AI governance
infrastructure is necessary for both objectives, and states are well-equipped to contribute to infrastructure —
indeed, they are already building it.”
Foreign Affairs Lauren Kahn
Senior Research Analyst
“It could be that these social media accounts posting AI-generated content were nefarious pages that were
trying to build an audience and would later pivot to trying to sell goods or link to ad-laden websites or maybe
even change their topics to something political altogether. But I suspect more likely, many of these pages were
simply creators who realized it was a useful tactic for getting audience engagement.”
BBC News Owen J. Daniels
Associate Director of Analysis and an Andrew W. Marshall Fellow
“There are aspects of the [Trump administration’s AI] Action Plan that many of us see as quite promising in
terms of recommendations that we previously made to the government… The major challenge here is going to
be implementation.”
Wall Street Journal Jacob Feldgoise
Senior Data Research Analyst
“Compute has been more skewed toward training in the past, and in the coming years, it’s going to shift much
more toward inference, as demand for these AI services grows.”
The Diplomat William C. Hannas Huey-Meei Chang
Lead Analyst Senior China S&T Specialist
“[I]t’s fair to say that the DeepSeek surprise opened Western eyes but also closed them. While we now take
Chinese AI seriously, we imagine that large statistical models—DeepSeek being one of them—are the only
Chinese path to AGI, when there are several typologically different approaches seriously pursued there.”
CSET•2025 6

CENTER FOR SECURITY AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY ANNUAL REPORT 2025
Highlights of 2025
FEB
Colin Shea-Blymer (left), Owen Daniels (right), and Mia Hoffman
attended an International Association for Safe and Ethical AI conference
MAR
Sonali Subbu Rathinam (left), Ronnie Kinoshita (right), Adrian Thinnyun,
and Mina Narayanan presented their research at an Association for the
Advancement of Artificial Intelligence workshop
MAR
CSET hosted a workshop, Opportunities in Open Science,
Metascience, and AI, organized by the CSET data team
APR
CSET hosted its inaugural Spring Symposium, How the U.S. Wins the
Global Tech Competition; former Under Secretary of Commerce Alan
Estevez was the keynote speaker
MAY
Mina Narayanan, Cole McFaul, Owen Daniels, and Mia Hoffman
presented their research on global AI governance patterns at the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Conference on AI
MAY
Helen Toner testified on the role of trade secret protection in U.S. AI development
before the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property,
Artificial Intelligence, and the Internet
MAY
Steph Batalis and Vikram Venkatram helped organize a workshop, Violet
Teaming AI-Enabled Biosurveillance, co-hosted by CSET and Texas
A&M’s Biosecurity and Pandemic Policy Center
JUL
William Hannas testified before the Senate Small Business and
Entrepreneurship Committee on the topic of Chinese technology transfer
CSET•2025 7

CENTER FOR SECURITY AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY ANNUAL REPORT 2025
JUL
Ali Crawford delivered the keynote address and participated in a
panel at the 2025 Young Southeast Asian Leaders Initiative Women’s
Leadership Academy
AUG
Kathleen Curlee was featured in a CNBC mini-documentary, How the U.S.
Became So Dependent on SpaceX
SEP
Helen Toner, who helped found CSET, was named Interim Executive Director
OCT
CSET hosted a conference, China’s AI Leap, based in part on a CSET report, Pulling Back the
Curtain on China’s Military-Civil Fusion, which was an exclusive feature in The Wall Street
Journal; Congressman John Moolenaar (pictured with Emmy Probasco) was the keynote speaker
OCT
The CSET Advisory Board was launched with six founding members: the
Honorable Alan Estevez, Joel Meyer, Lauren Bedula, Michael Brown,
Michael Howard, and the Honorable Dr. Sarah Sewall
OCT
Maj. Katherine Carroll presented on AI talent in the U.S. Space Force as
part of the workforce team’s CSET Salon series
DEC
Jessica Ji participated in a panel at the Digital Vulnerabilities in
the Age of AI Summit
DEC
Kyle Miller participated in an Information Technology & Innovation
Foundation panel, The State of Open-Source AI and Why It Matters
CSET•2025 8

CENTER FOR SECURITY AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY ANNUAL REPORT 2025
Research
As AI dominates news headlines day after day, CSET has kept pace by providing rigorous analysis on topics
ranging from the intersection of AI and biotechnology to the future of U.S.–China tech competition. Our
experts are known for the depth and integrity of their research. They regularly provide briefings to decision-
makers at the highest levels and field inquiries from members of the press seeking to better understand what’s
at stake as emerging technologies continue to reshape our world.
Applications
Our Applications team solidified CSET’s standing
as a premier institute examining China’s adoption
of AI. The team published an influential report that
examined nearly 3,000 AI-related defense contract
awards to identify how China’s commercial sector
and People’s Liberation Army are working together
to adopt military AI. The report was featured as an
exclusive in the Wall Street Journal, served as the
lynchpin for a high-profile conference with House
China Committee Chairman John Moolenaar
and other esteemed China experts, and informed
congressional oversight efforts of advanced chip
exports from the U.S. to China.
Additionally, the team established a robust pipeline
of research analyzing timely national security space
challenges and burgeoning trends in international
AI cooperation, all while continuing to regularly
advise military leaders on emerging technology
and directly informing the Pentagon’s policies and
adoption of AI. The next year will yield further
research into Chinese military AI efforts and deep
dives on the hurdles hindering the U.S. military’s
ability to leverage AI.
CSET•2025 9

CENTER FOR SECURITY AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY ANNUAL REPORT 2025
Biotech CyberAI
As biotechnology developments drew attention from The CyberAI team continued its long-standing
policymakers last year, CSET’s biotech team played work of providing technical expertise to inform
a key role in evaluating emerging threats and the most pressing AI policy questions. The team
informing stakeholders on appropriate responses. published analysis on AI’s effect on cybersecurity,
Team members authored two essays for the Bulletin the use of open weight models to spur research
of Atomic Scientists, one for its 80th anniversary and innovation, and the progress that foreign
edition highlighting the promise and peril of new competitors and open-weight model producers
biotechnology tools and another on ways to have made in gaining on the leading U.S. corporate
counter bioterrorism that was named one of the models. This analysis served a crucial role in
Bulletin’s top multimedia stories of 2025. helping tech and policy communities understand
the implications of major AI news events, from
the unveiling of DeepSeek’s R1 model to Chinese
hackers’ use of Anthropic tools to execute the first
reported AI-orchestrated hacking campaign
.
The team published new analysis tracing how
NIH-funded research directly translates into human
health improvements, commented on changes
in public health policy and their implications for
biodefense, and convened top policymakers, Additionally, the team hosted roundtables and
scientists, and industry leaders to identify and published reports that outlined the potential of work-
address the most pressing safety and security based learning for cyber jobs and harmonized AI
challenges in emerging biotechnology. The team’s guidance to support more efficient adoption of AI
findings were briefed to congressional staff, development standards by product developers.
national security agencies, and the National The team will continue to provide expertise to the
Security Commission on Emerging Biotechnology, AI policymaking community in 2026 with analysis
directly informing executive branch policy and on the growing use of distillation to support
final NSCEB recommendations. Our experts also development of smaller models, recommendations
built new inroads with officials from Singapore, for cybersecurity acquisition, and discussions on the
Sweden, South Korea, and Japan, advising them opportunities and limitations of agentic AI.
on how international cooperation can address
challenges related to dual-use and risky biological
research. Future work includes efforts to provide
recommendations for building U.S. biotechnology
leadership in line with the Genesis Mission.
CSET•2025 10

CENTER FOR SECURITY AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY ANNUAL REPORT 2025
Data Governance
The CSET Data Team updated the interactive, The Governance team made major strides in
public data tools on our Emerging Technology advancing CSET’s profile at the intersection of
Observatory, and launched new data resources AI governance and international competition.
to help policymakers identify trends and make The team testified on measures to protect U.S.
evidence-based policy decisions. The team advantages over China in frontier AI before the
completed major updates to our Map of Science House Judiciary Committee. It also presented an
tool, providing more coherently grouped research all-CSET panel comparing U.S., EU., and Chinese
clusters to help users better understand the approaches to AI at the Institute of Electrical and
technological landscape. Additionally, updates Electronic Engineers’ (IEEE) annual AI conference
to the Supply Chain Explorer illustrate where in the Bay Area, as well as attending events at the
China has made progress in developing its own Paris AI Action Summit and producing analysis
semiconductor manufacturing capability and on the competing goals of international actors.
where the U.S. still holds a sizable lead. The team Additionally, the team unveiled the updates to
also hosted a National Science Foundation- CSET’s Supply Chain Explorer to an audience of
supported workshop with more than 30 experts to more than 150 policy experts, providing deeper
discuss open science, metascience, and the role analysis of China’s progress in increasing its own
that AI can play in promoting the two. A report semiconductor production capacity.
on the event provided policymakers, funders, and
researchers with high-priority recommendations
to further advance AI-enabled open science and
metascience.
The team published analysis on newly introduced
AI legislation, mechanisms of AI risk and harm,
and a framework for policymakers to compare and
contrast the approaches of corporate, non-profit,
In partnership with our workforce experts, the data and government frontier governance proposals.
team also launched PATHWISE, a tool to identify Our experts appeared across a wide range of
where cyber and AI talent is being produced and media to discuss the Trump Administration’s AI
is most in demand. In 2026, the Data Team will Action Plan and China’s AI soft power strategy with
launch a new interactive tool to explore global open models like DeepSeek. In 2026, the team will
patents and publish new datasets with detailed provide new insights on national implications of
technical information on over 2,000 advanced state-level AI governance efforts and examine how
semiconductors and jumpstart a new project to build effective governance can strengthen democratic
on our prior work mapping emerging science and competitiveness in AI.
technology trends around the world.
CSET•2025 11

CENTER FOR SECURITY AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY ANNUAL REPORT 2025
Peer Watch Workforce
The Peer Watch team solidified its role as an The Workforce team advanced data-driven analysis
authoritative expert on China’s decades-old on how AI is reshaping labor markets critical to
technology transfer programs, while raising the U.S. competitiveness and security, while expanding
banner about China’s aggressive pursuit of artificial its engagement with policymakers to collectively
general intelligence. The team engaged directly with tackle the most pressing emerging technology
policymakers, including through testimony before workforce challenges. In partnership with the Data
the Senate Small Business Committee for its hearing team, Workforce launched PATHWISE, a data
on how the United States can better protect small tool to understand where cyber and AI talent is
businesses from the threat of Chinese technology being produced, where it is in demand, and how
transfer and espionage. Additionally, the team policymakers, educators, and industry can better
published multiple reports showing that China is bridge the two. The team also launched its CSET
aggressively pursuing artificial general intelligence Salon Series, a recurring forum to bring together
and that they are doing so in a multitude of ways experts across government, industry, academia,
while U.S. companies focus more selectively on and philanthropy to discuss ways to better attract
generative AI. and retain tech talent in government.
As policymakers grew concerned about the The team engaged with policymakers through
narrowing performance gap between U.S. and congressional briefings, a formal response to the
Chinese advanced AI and the latter’s ability to Trump Administration’s Request for Information on
deploy smaller and more efficient models, CSET’s high-skilled immigration, and a workshop on the AI
analysis served as a particularly crucial reminder chip manufacturing workforce. Looking ahead, the
that China’s diversified approach in developing team is excited to produce analysis on the role that
advanced AI could pose a threat to the United workers play in the successful adoption of AI and
States’ AI leadership. The team shared their insights develop an expanded, more granular version of
over the last year in briefings with U.S. and allied PATHWISE.
government agencies, op-eds and media interviews
across a variety of channels. The team looks
forward to continuing their public and government
outreach, while diving deeper into the ways
Chinese leadership is working to align new AI tools
with its political and social preferences.
CSET•2025 12

CENTER FOR SECURITY AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY ANNUAL REPORT 2025
Donors
CSET is grateful for the support of those who made financial gifts in 2025 to sustain our research. We accept
funding from parties who share our interest in security and emerging technology and respect our commitment
to intellectual independence. Learn more about investing in CSET’s work at cset.georgetown.edu/donate.
Thank you to our donors:
$1,000,000+
Craig Falls
Google.org
$100,000 - $999,999
Eric Schmidt
NobleReach Foundation
Smith Richardson Foundation
William and Flora Hewlett Foundation
$15,000 - $99,999
Apple
Forterra
Leidos
$1,000 - $14,999
Bockus Brown Family Foundation
Joel Farquhar
NVIDIA
Richard Danzig
If you or your organization are interested in supporting CSET while engaging more deeply with
our experts and research, please consider joining CSET Forum. The Forum is a curated membership
program including companies, foundations, and other organizations and individuals.
To learn more, visit cset.georgetown.edu/forum.
CSET•2025 13

CENTER FOR SECURITY AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY ANNUAL REPORT 2025
CSET Culture Statement
CSET was formed to examine emerging technology
through an evidence-based, data-driven approach
independent of government, funder or ideological
perspectives.
CSET staff come from a variety of backgrounds
and disciplines, bringing a robust wealth of
perspectives and experiences to inform research
at the intersection of technology and national/
international security.
We are committed to fostering a diverse, equitable,
and inclusive culture rooted in intellectual curiosity
and respect.
At CSET, we:
Challenge assumptions, follow the evidence, understand how data can inform decisions and formulate
policies, and serve as trusted advisors to the national security community.
Are lifelong learners who understand that intellectual humility is essential to ongoing growth. We seek
and absorb feedback and actively work on self and organizational improvement.
Celebrate individuality and encourage all team members to welcome one another to create a sense of
belonging.
Collaborate because we know that problems are best solved as a team.
Are empowered to take agency in the workplace and participate in meaningful decision-making.
Support and encourage open dialogue across all teams.
Know that while our work is important, our individual and familial needs come first. We value our time
outside of work, respect a healthy work/life balance, and support one another in times of need.
Measure our success as a team.
Place acting with integrity and respect above all.
CSET•2025 14

To learn more, visit cset.georgetown.edu.
©2026 Center for Security and Emerging Technology. All Rights Reserved.