THE ISSUE
One of the promises of remotely crewed systems is that they could be a force multiplier for the military, either
allowing it to increase force structure without a proportionate increase in personnel or to reduce personnel without
cutting overall force structure.
As remotely piloted aircraft (RPAs) have been adopted into the military in large numbers for airborne intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance (AISR), they have demonstrated much higher utilization rates and lower personnel
and operating costs on a per-aircraft and a per-flying-hour basis than crewed AISR aircraft.
However, high demand from the combatant commands has prevented overall reductions in personnel and operating
costs or the substitution of RPAs for crewed AISR aircraft.
For remotely crewed systems to become an affordable and scalable alternative to crewed systems across all domains,
the U.S. military will need to rethink how units are staffed, organized, and trained to better leverage automation and
develop new concepts for in-garrison operations.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 1
CSIS
BRIEFS
Rethinking the Role of
Remotely Crewed Systems
in the Future Force
By Todd Harrison
INTRODUCTION 12.7 percent, adjusting for inflation, from FY 2016 through
the high reached in FY 2019. Despite this budget increase
In the wake of the cuts driven by the Budget Control Act
and the Trump administration’s desire for a larger force, the
of 2011 (BCA), many senior military and political leaders
size of the military did not grow in proportion to the budget.
lamented the effects these cuts were having on the U.S.
From FY 2016 to FY 2019, the number of ships in the Navy
military. In a major speech on national security during the
grew by 5.5 percent, the number of active-duty soldiers in
2016 presidential campaign, then-candidate Trump called for
the Army grew by 1.9 percent, the number of Marine Corps
significant increases in the military and promised to “submit
infantry battalions did not change, and the number of
a new budget to rebuild our military.” Specifically, he called for
aircraft in the Air Force inventory fell by 0.1 percent.
a Navy of 350 ships, an active-duty Army of 540,000 soldiers,
In its FY 2021 budget request, the Department of Defense
a Marine Corps of 36 active component infantry battalions,
(DoD) all but abandoned its plans to grow. The Navy
and an Air Force with 1,200 active component fighters.1 The
reversed its plans to extend the life of existing destroyers,
Navy later refined this goal to 355 ships, and the Air Force
which was key to reaching 355 ships by FY 2034; the
broadened its target to 386 squadrons overall.
Marine Corps announced plans to eliminate major parts
With the help of two budget deals that raised the level of the of its force structure; and the Air Force never submitted a
budget caps imposed by the BCA, the defense budget grew by budget aligned to its 386-squadron goal. With a five-year

budget projection that is essentially flat with inflation, the subsurface vessels over the next 30 years, comprising more
DoD is instead looking for efficiency savings and reforms than 25 percent of the total force.6
to free up funds within its budget to accommodate growing
For its part, the Air Force has incorporated remotely piloted
operation and sustainment costs for existing forces and
aircraft (RPAs) into its force structure in recent decades more
lagging modernization needs.
out of operational necessity than strategic planning. While
None of this is new or unexpected, nor is it the result of the Air Force experimented with RPAs as far back as World
any recent changes in policies or priorities within DoD. War II (while still part of the Army Air Corps) and classified
Since the late 1990s, the trend lines for the defense budget drones played prominent roles in conducting missions for
and the size of the force have gradually grown apart—a the Air Force and National Reconnaissance Office throughout
trend that was exacerbated in the budget buildup after the Cold War, RPAs did not become a major component
9/11, as shown in Figures 1–3. The exceptions to this have of the Air Force’s overall force structure until the 2000s.7
been the Marine Corps active and reserve components As noted by former defense secretary Robert Gates in his
and the Air Force guard and reserve components. There memoir, the service was initially slow to embrace the MQ-1
are many reasons larger budgets have not led to a larger Predator and increase the number of aircraft, ground control
active-duty force since the post-9/11 buildup, including stations, and aircrews needed for operations in Iraq and
the increasing sophistication and costs of new weapons Afghanistan.8 But the service has now accepted RPAs as a
needed to keep pace with advancing threats and the permanent part of its force structure, and it is focusing on
growing costs of military personnel and force structure. efforts to team RPAs with crewed aircraft and to develop low-
cost attritable aircraft, such as the XQ-58A Valkyrie.9
Like previous strategies, the 2018 National Defense Strategy
(NDS) continues the focus on modernizing capabilities The combination of budget constraints and an increasing
and the personnel system. It warns of a more “lethal and demand for remotely crewed systems creates an
disruptive battlefield, combined across domains, and opportunity to break the cycle of growing budgets and
conducted at increasing speed and reach” and that “we declining force structure illustrated in Figures 1–3.
cannot expect success fighting tomorrow’s conflicts with However, remotely crewed systems do not directly
yesterday’s weapons or equipment.” It goes on to note translate into lower costs if they are staffed and operated
that modernization also “requires change in the ways we in the same way crewed systems are traditionally staffed
organize and employ forces” and “innovative operational and operated. One of the keys to breaking the cycle of
concepts.” Among the key capabilities it cites as necessary growing budgets and declining force structure is to reduce
to maintain a competitive advantage in the future are personnel requirements and fully leverage the potential
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) of these systems to augment and enhance overall U.S.
systems and advanced autonomous systems.2 military capabilities and force structure.
The NDS and the military services’ subsequent This brief builds on a separate CSIS report that explores
implementation plans make clear that the future warfighting the long-term trends in personnel costs, growth in the
environment requires increased range and persistence— cost per person in the military, and the key drivers behind
capabilities that are well suited for remotely crewed systems.3 this growth. The purpose of this study is to examine ways
The Marine Corps’ Force Design 2030, for example, says that in which remotely crewed systems can help the military
(among other deficiencies) the Marine Corps currently lacks balance the trade-offs that resource constraints require
sufficient “high-endurance, long-range unmanned systems,” among force structure, investment, and readiness. It
and it is divesting traditional elements of its force structure, focuses specifically on experiences to date with RPAs
such as tank battalions, to fund these new systems.4 The as compared to crewed aircraft, including the share of
Navy is also moving toward more remotely operated systems aircraft operating costs attributed to military and civilian
with plans in the FY 2021 budget request to buy a total of personnel and the utilization rates of different platforms.
11 medium and large remotely crewed surface vessels and The report also examines current practices for training,
6 extra-large remotely crewed undersea vessels through FY personnel, and operations for RPAs and how these
2025, although these vessels do not count toward its total practices have evolved over time. Based on these findings,
ship count metric.5 More recently, former secretary of defense the report makes recommendations for how the lessons
Mark Esper announced plans for the Navy to field 140 to learned from RPAs can be applied to remotely crewed
240 remotely crewed and optionally crewed surface and systems in other mission areas and domains going forward.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 2

Figures 1–3: U.S. Military Budget and Force Structure Levels by Department Relative to FY 1985
200%
175%
150%
125%
100%
75%
50%
25%
0%
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 3
leveL
58YF
fo
egatnecreP
58YF 78YF 98YF 19YF 39YF 59YF 79YF 99YF 10YF 30YF 50YF 70YF 90YF 11YF 31YF 51YF 71YF 91YF 12YF
Dept. of Army Budget and Force Structure Trends
Total Army Budget
(constant dollars)
Army Base Budget
(constant dollars)
Army Active End Strength
Army National Guard
Army Reserve
Army Civilian (FTE)
defense budget
Source: Authors’ own compilation based on multiple sources. analysis
125%
100%
75%
50%
25%
0%
leveL
58YF
fo
egatnecreP
58YF 78YF 98YF 19YF 39YF 59YF 79YF 99YF 10YF 30YF 50YF 70YF 90YF 11YF 31YF 51YF 71YF 91YF 12YF
Dept. of Navy Budget and Force Structure Trends
Total Navy Budget
(constant dollars)
Navy Base Budget
(constant dollars)
Navy Shipcount
Navy Active End Strength
Navy Reserve End Strength
USMC Active End Strength
USMC Reserve End Strength
Navy/USMC Civilian (FTE)
defense budget
Source: Authors’ own compilation based on multiple sources. analysis
125%
100%
75%
50%
25%
0%
leveL
58YF
fo
egatnecreP
58YF 78YF 98YF 19YF 39YF 59YF 79YF 99YF 10YF 30YF 50YF 70YF 90YF 11YF 31YF 51YF 71YF 91YF 12YF
Dept. of Air Force Budget and Force Structure Trends
Total UASF Budget
(constant dollars)
UASF Base Budget
(constant dollars)
Air Force Aircraft
Inventory (TAI)
Air Force Active
End Strength
Air Force Reserve
End Strength
Air National Guard
End Strength
Air Force Civlian (FTE)
Source: Author’s own compilation based on multiple sources.
defense budget
Source: Authors’ own compilation based on multiple sources. analysis

COSTS AND UTILIZATION OF Air Force inventory in large numbers, they did not directly
RPAS VERSUS CREWED AIRCRAFT substitute for the hours being flown by crewed AISR aircraft.
For example, the RQ-4 and U-2 are both high-altitude ISR
One of the promises of remotely crewed systems is that they
platforms with many overlapping capabilities. While they
can serve as a force multiplier for the military, either allowing
are not perfect substitutes, one would expect that the
it to increase force structure without a proportionate increase
introduction of the RQ-4 would offset some of the missions
in personnel or to reduce personnel without cutting overall
and hours being flown by the U-2. However, from FY 2010
force structure. In theory, remotely crewed systems can
through FY 2017 the U-2 fleet of just over 30 aircraft held
allow the military to substitute technology for labor—a trade
steady at roughly 16,000 to 17,000 flying hours per year as
that becomes more favorable as labor costs grow larger and
the RQ-4 entered the force in larger numbers. By FY 2015, the
technology costs decline. However, the data over the past two
RQ-4 fleet of 37 aircraft had increased its operational tempo
decades show that as remotely crewed systems have been
to more than 32,000 hours per year without a commensurate
adopted into the military in limited mission areas, there has
decline in U-2 operations, as shown in Figure 4.
not been a concomitant decline in the number of personnel
used for these missions. The adoption of the MQ-1 and later the MQ-9 for medium-
altitude AISR missions shows a similar trend. These systems
Within the U.S. military, remotely crewed systems have
were primarily fielded to address key shortfalls in AISR
made the most inroads in the airborne intelligence,
capabilities and capacity for ongoing operations in Iraq
surveillance, and reconnaissance (AISR) mission area,
and Afghanistan. The annual flying hours for each of these
particularly in the Air Force.10 This section looks at the
platforms, shown in Figure 5, far exceeded the flying hours
Air Force AISR mission area to see what has changed as
for other AISR platforms. This demand was initially driven by
more RPAs have been adopted into the force structure. The
the surge of forces into Iraq and Afghanistan, but it quickly
main RPAs in the Air Force inventory examined in this
became part of steady-state operations for the Air Force. As
analysis are the MQ-1 Reaper, MQ-9 Predator, and RQ-4
the MQ-9 began to replace the MQ-1, the total flying hours
Global Hawk.11 Other classified systems, such as the RQ-
for the combined fleet continued to climb, reaching a total of
170 Sentinel, have been acknowledged, but data for these
385,000 hours in FY 2017—roughly six times as many hours
systems are not available for analysis.12
as all crewed AISR platforms combined.13
COMPARING UTILIZATION One of the reasons RPAs have logged so many more hours
One of the most notable trends in the data is that as than crewed aircraft is their higher utilization rate. The MQ-
remotely crewed AISR platforms were introduced into the 1, for example, peaked at a rate of more than 1,300 hours
35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000

FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13 FY14 FY15 FY16 FY17
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 4
sruoH
gniylF
launnA
U-2 versus RQ-4 Annual Flying Hours
Figure 4: U-2 versus RQ-4 Annual Flying Hours
U-2R/S RQ-4A/B
Source: Air Force Total Ownership Cost Database.
defense budget
Source: Air Force Total Ownership Cost Database. analysis

350,000
300,000
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000

annually per aircraft before the Air Force began replacing it new aircraft have been used to satisfy previously unmet
with the more capable MQ-9, which itself peaked at just short demand that existing crewed aircraft could not surge
of 1,500 hours annually per aircraft. Likewise, the RQ-4 has to meet. Thus, remotely crewed AISR units and their
grown to nearly 1,000 flying hours per aircraft annually. This associated personnel have been additive to force structure
is significantly more than crewed AISR platforms, which have and costs rather substituting or replacing crewed AISR
typically hovered in the range of 400 to 800 annual hours
platforms and personnel.
per aircraft, as shown in Figure 6. The exception for crewed
aircraft is the C/MC-12, which surged to more than 1,500 COMPARING COSTS
hours per aircraft annually for a few years.
The data available on personnel costs and numbers also
The data indicate that remotely piloted AISR aircraft have reveal that while RPAs have been flown at a higher rate
not reduced demand for crewed aircraft. Rather, these (as measured by the number of flying hours per aircraft
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 5
sruoH
gniylF
launnA
00YF 10YF 20YF 30YF 40YF 50YF 60YF 70YF 80YF 90YF 01YF 11YF 21YF 31YF 41YF 51YF 61YF 71YF
M/RQ-1 and MQ-9 Annual Flying Hours
Figure 5: M/RQ-1 and MQ-9 Annual Flying Hours
M/RQ-1 MQ-9
Source: Air Force Total Ownership Cost Database.
defense budget
Source: Air Force Total Ownership Cost Database. analysis

ftarcriA
rep
sruoH
launnA
00YF 10YF 20YF 30YF 40YF 50YF 60YF 70YF 80YF 90YF 01YF 11YF 21YF 31YF 41YF 51YF 61YF 71YF
Annual Hours per Aircraft for AISR Platforms Figure 6: Annual Hours per Aircraft for AISR Platforms
C/MC-12
E-3
E-8
M/RQ-1
MQ-9
RQ-4
U-2
Source: Air Force Total Ownership Cost Database.
defense budget
Source: Air Force Total Ownership Cost Database. analysis

annually), their staffing levels are similar to other types personnel costs than other AISR platforms. On a per plane
of crewed aircraft. In a periodic report on military force basis, RPA personnel costs are roughly in the same range
structure, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates as fighter and mobility platforms. For example, the MQ-
the total number of military personnel associated with 1’s personnel costs are roughly equivalent to an F-16 on
different types of Air Force aircraft, as shown in Figure 7.14 a per-aircraft basis, and the MQ-9’s personnel costs are
To allow for comparisons across aircraft types, the CBO uses similar to an F-22. RPA personnel costs are considerably
a common standard of 12 aircraft per unit, and it includes
lower on a per-flying-hour basis because these aircraft tend
direct, indirect, and overhead personnel associated with
to spend significantly more time in the air, thus increasing
these aircraft.15 The only AISR aircraft included in the CBO
the denominator (flying hours) while personnel costs (the
analysis are the RQ-4 and MQ-9, so direct comparisons
numerator) are largely fixed with respect to flying hours.
of crewed versus remotely crewed AISR aircraft are not
Importantly, both the CBO and AFTOC data do not include
possible. But the data reveal that personnel requirements for
the downstream costs of processing, exploitation, and
the RQ-4 and MQ-9 are in the middle and lower end of the
dissemination (PED) of the ISR data obtained by these
range, respectively, when compared with crewed bombers,
fighters, and mobility aircraft. Notably, the CBO data only aircraft. The larger amount of ISR data collected from
include staffing levels for military personnel and do not RPAs translates into higher PED requirements, but if the
include civilian or contractor support personnel. same sensors were flown the same amount of time for the
same missions using crewed aircraft instead, they would
Additional data on personnel costs can be derived from
generate the same PED requirements. PED personnel
the Air Force Total Ownership Cost (AFTOC) database.
requirements are a function of the mission and volume of
An extraction of this data for the years FY 2010 through
data collected and not the crewed status of the platform
FY 2017 was analyzed to determine the average annual
collecting the data. Thus, PED costs should not factor into
costs of military and civilian personnel per aircraft and
the comparison of personnel requirements for crewed
per flying hour to compare across different aircraft types.
The AFTOC data include both crewed aircraft and RPAs of versus remotely crewed platforms—it is a function of
various types. It reveals that crewed AISR aircraft, namely ISR demand. Separate studies have analyzed how PED
the E-8, E-3, RC-135, and OC-135B, are among the most personnel requirements can be reduced using machine
expensive for personnel on both a per-plane and per- learning and artificial intelligence to augment or replace
flying-hour basis, as shown in Figures 8 and 9. Remotely human labor in the PED process, but this discussion is
piloted AISR aircraft, in contrast, have relatively lower beyond the scope of this brief.16

CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 6
yratiliM
fo
rebmuN
detamitsE
OBC
ftarcriA

rep
lennosreP
2-B B1-B 25-B 01-CK 53-F 5-C 22-F 031-C 531-CK 4-QR 51-F 71-C 61-F 01-A 64-CK 9-QM
CBO Estimates of Military Personnel Requirements for Air Force Aircraft
Figure 7: CBO Estimates of Military Personnel Requirements for Air Force Aircraft
Direct
Indirect
Overhead
Source: Congressional Budget Office, The U.S. Military’s Force Structure: Fiscal Year 2019 Update to Personnel Numbers and Costs, August 15, 2018,

Source: Congressional Budget Office, The U.S. Military’s Force Structure: Fiscal Year 2019 Update to Personnel Numbers and Costs, defense budget
August 15, 2018, https: analysis

$15M
$12M
$9M
$6M
$3M
$0M
The cost and utilization data analyzed for RPAs point to of crewed platforms. But it also makes it tempting for
two key findings. First, remotely crewed systems do not combatant commanders to request a consistently higher
necessarily lead to savings if they are used in missions operational tempo even during peacetime operations.
where there is already a high level of demand for steady- This can ultimately stress platforms and personnel and
state operations. And relatedly, remotely crewed systems undermine potential savings.
have demonstrated an ability to support significantly
higher utilization rates (measured in the annual hours CURRENT PRACTICE FOR TRAINING,
of operation per platform) than crewed systems. But this PERSONNEL, AND OPERATIONS
higher utilization rate can be both a blessing and a curse. It As the former commander of the Air Force’s Air Combat
means that a smaller number of remotely crewed platforms Command, General Herbert “Hawk” Carlisle, noted in
can provide the same effective capacity as a larger number 2016, the combatant commands have generated an
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 7
IAT
rep
stsoC
lennosreP
launnA
egarevA
)srallod
12YF
tnatsnoc
dna
IAT
ni
,7102–0102
YF(
8-E 3-E 531-CR A2-B B531-CO 5-C H25-B B1-B A71-C B/A4-QR J031-C 01-CK 531-CK 2-U A9-QM A22-F E51-F 01-A A53-F D/C51-F D/C61-F B1-QM
Personnel Costs per Aircraft (TAI)
Military Personnel Costs
Civilian Personnel Costs
defense budget
Source: Air Force Total Ownership Cost Database. analysis
$40K
$35K
$30K
$25K
$20K
$15K
$10K
$5K
$0K
A2-B B531-CO H25-B A53-F 3-E 8-E A22-F 5-C 531-CR B1-B D/C51-F E51-F D/C61-F 01-A J031-C 531-CK A71-C 2-U B/A4-QR 01-CK A9-QM B1-QM
Personnel Costs per Flying Hour
Military Personnel Costs
Civilian Personnel Costs
defense budget
Source: Air Force Total Ownership Cost Database. analysis
ruoH
gniylF
rep
stsoC
lennosreP
egarevA
)srallod
12YF
tnatsnoc
dna
IAT
ni
,7102–0102
YF(
Figure 8: Personnel Costs per Aircraft (TAI)
Source: Air Force Total Ownership Cost Database.
Figure 9: Personnel Costs per Flying Hour
Source: Air Force Total Ownership Cost Database.

“insatiable demand” for RPAs.17 In attempting to meet Space operators (13S) and missileers (13N), for example,
this demand and rapidly stand-up new elements of have some of the same challenges trying to maintain a
force structure, the Air Force made a number of policy constant readiness while conducting in-garrison operations.
choices over the past two decades in how it manages
As the demand for AISR grew due to ongoing operations
and organizes the training and operations of RPAs. This
in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Syria, this meant that units were
chapter examines current policies and processes used for
expected to maintain a near-constant level of readiness
training, personnel development, and operations and how
without regular periods for recovery, training, and leave.
they have evolved over time.
For MQ-1 and MQ-9 crews, this relentless pressure led
to training issues. The focus of units and personnel was
TRAINING
persistently on meeting combat mission demands, leaving
As the Air Force began fielding remotely piloted AISR
little time for mission qualification training, upgrade
platforms in significant numbers, it copied many of its
training, professional military education, and leave.
training and personnel models from crewed aircraft units.
In response, the Air Force approved in a
The initial approach used for producing pilots for RPAs
combat-to-dwell policy for RPA units that allows time to
was to transfer experienced pilots from crewed aircraft
focus on training while not simultaneously conducting
squadrons. This allowed for a relatively short three-month
combat operations.22
initial qualification training period, and it gave leaders
more confidence in putting these newly retrained pilots PERSONNEL
directly into a “near-solo combat environment” without The Air Force has consistently experienced difficulties
a more experienced flight lead accompanying them on recruiting and retaining aircrews, including RPA pilots
missions. However, this approach proved to be insufficient and sensor operators. As the Government Accountability
to meet the rapid growth in the number of MQ-1 combat Office (GAO) noted in a recent report, from 2015 through
lines and the resulting demand for RPA pilots.18 2019 the Air Force only met 95 percent of its accession
In 2010, the Air Force changed course and created a target for RPA pilots and 88 percent for sensor operators.23
dedicated career field for RPA pilots, known as Air Force As of , 20 percent of the authorized RPA
Specialty Code 18X, and a separate training pipeline pilot positions were unfilled, and 28 percent of the sensor
for these pilots. One of the motivators for this change operator positions were unfilled.24
was to reduce costs. By some estimates, the RPA pilot The Air Force has restricted pilot positions to officers since
training pipeline costs 95 percent less per pilot than 1948, and this restriction extends to Group 4/5 RPAs, such
the traditional pilot training used for crewed aircraft.19 as the MQ-1, MQ-9, and RQ-4.25 The Army, however, has a
RPA pilots now begin with an initial flight training long history of using enlisted personnel, specifically warrant
class tailored for remote systems and then progress to officers, as pilots. As the Army fielded its own fleet of MQ-
a separate undergraduate pilot training course before 1s, it began using enlisted “operators” to pilot these aircraft.
transitioning to platform-specific training and mission Despite operating similar equipment, the difference in Army
qualification training.20 While this training process allows and Air Force pilot requirements has been justified more
for the development of a cadre of dedicated RPA pilots, it by the scope and complexity of the mission sets they each
largely mirrors the traditional pilot training process in the perform than the aircraft they fly. For example, the Army
Air Force (albeit with simulators). Moreover, it requires tends to fly its MQ-1s for more tactically focused missions in
RPA pilots to be officers, just as the Air Force only allows regionally isolated operations, whereas the Air Force tends to
officers to pilot crewed aircraft. Sensor operators for RPAs operate its aircraft over wider regions that can include passing
in the Air Force have a similar four-step training process, through uncontrolled airspace.26 The Army’s MQ-1C Gray
but these positions are filled by enlisted personnel.21 Eagle fleet also includes a higher degree of autonomy, using
point and click control instead of stick and throttle and an
One of the distinctive attributes of RPAs is that units
automatic takeoff and landing system.27
routinely conduct in-garrison combat operations. Crews in
the Mission Control Element engage in combat operations Congress forced the issue of using enlisted Air Force pilots
from their home station, rotating in and out of duty during for RPAs in the FY 2017 National Defense Authorization
the week and returning to their home and families after Act. In this legislation, Congress mandated that the Air
each shift. In-garrison operations are not unique to RPAs. Force transition to “an organizational model for all Air Force
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 8

remotely piloted aircraft that uses a significant number of and sensor operator in control of each platform at all
enlisted personnel as operators of such aircraft rather than times. Because of the time latency involved in satellite
officers only.”28 The Air Force opened training opportunities communications signals, manual takeoff and landing of
for RQ-4 pilots to enlisted servicemembers, and it began RPAs at forward locations cannot be conducted by pilots
training its first cohort of enlisted pilots in 2017.29 However, in the mission control element. For these reasons, an
the Air Force has not yet announced plans to open MQ-9 pilot additional three pilots and three sensor operators are
opportunities to enlisted personnel, which comprise the vast needed in the launch and recovery element for each combat
majority of positions that remain unfilled. line for line-of-sight control during takeoff and landing,
making the total crew ratio 13 to 1. The RQ-4 uses a similar
OPERATIONS structure, with split operations between a mission control
In a 2009 publication, the Air Force stated that “similar element in the United States and a forward-deployed launch
personnel models used for manned platforms with regard and recovery element.32 However, the RQ-4 reportedly uses
to duty day and levels of supervision are applicable to UAS a crew ratio of 15 to 1 at the mission control element.33
[Unmanned Aircraft System].” This acknowledges that the Air
For a typical remotely piloted AISR mission, the aircraft
Force built its RPA career field and squadrons assuming they
may stay airborne for 16 hours or more. During this time,
would operate essentially the same way traditional crewed
the pilot, sensor operators, and mission coordinators at
aircraft squadrons operate. The same publication went on
the mission control element would transfer control of the
to note that, “the USAF used these models to determine
aircraft across multiple shifts. Simultaneously, the launch
the manpower required to achieve their goals.”30 Again, the
and recovery element would maintain one pilot and one
crewed aircraft operations mindset is reflected in how the Air
sensor operator on standby rotation throughout the duration
Force organizes and staffs its RPA squadrons today.
of the mission in case the aircraft needs to land early or a
A typical MQ-1 or MQ-9 combat line (previously known fresh aircraft needs to be launched. Consolidating remote
as a combat air patrol, or CAP) consists of four aircraft and operations in the mission control element means that
requires some 49 people in the mission control element fewer personnel need to be deployed overseas to support
and 59 people in the forward-deployed launch and recovery operations. But split operations also means that at any
element, as shown in Table 1. These direct unit personnel given moment in a mission, at least two pilots and sensor
are sufficient to support 24/7 operations with at least one operators are on duty to maintain just one aircraft on station.
aircraft over a target area at all times on a sustainable basis.31
The experiences gained from the use of RPAs for AISR
Current staffing levels for active-duty units require an missions can be instructive for how remotely crewed
effective crew ratio of 10 to 1 in the mission control systems can be expanded to other domains and mission
element, meaning 10 pilots and 10 sensor operators are areas. Important lessons can be learned from the
needed to keep a single MQ-1/MQ-9 combat line in the air evolution in RPA pilot training, how the RPA career field
24/7. This is due to time limitations and rest requirements and personnel are managed, and the way RPA units are
for the crew and the desire to maintain at least one pilot structured and operated. Each of these areas provides
Table 1: Staffing for a Typical MQ-1 or MQ-9 Combat Line
Mission Control Element Launch and Recovery Element Total
Pilots 10 3 13
Sensor Operators 10 3 13
Maintenance 8 53 61
Mission Coordinators 5 5
Leadership 2 2
Administrative 14 14
Total 49 59 108
Source: Menthe et al., The Future of Air Force Motion Imagery Exploitation, 5.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 9

valuable insights into what works, what has not worked, defense. In the ground domain, the Army has experimented
and pitfalls that should be avoided in the future. with uncrewed ground vehicles using various levels of
autonomy for missions ranging from logistics and resupply
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE FUTURE FORCE to scouting and fires. In the maritime domain, the Navy is
developing remotely crewed ships and submarines as a more
BENDING THE IRON TRIANGLE
cost-effective way to expand its missile strike capacity and to
One of the fundamental roles of peacetime defense
enable more dispersed operations. The steady-state demand
strategy is to help guide trade-off decisions among force
for operations may not be as high in some of these areas as it
structure, readiness, and investment—what Deputy
has been for AISR, which could create opportunities to realize
Secretary of Defense Kath Hicks has termed the “iron
the cost benefits of remotely crewed systems.
triangle of painful tradeoffs.”34 While an unconstrained,
“more of everything” approach may sound appealing, in RECOMMENDATIONS
practice one can never have unlimited amounts in all three Given the long-term trends of rising costs and shrinking
areas. As Bernard Brodie wrote in the late 1950s, “we can force structure, the U.S. military should explore ways
never be rich enough to afford all the equipment we could to use remotely crewed systems to augment—and in
legitimately use for our security, and we must therefore some cases replace—traditionally crewed units and force
make painful choices in which the major consideration is structure across domains. However, for remotely crewed
to get the most security for the dollar.”35 systems to become an affordable and scalable alternative
Remotely crewed systems hold the promise of easing— to crewed systems, several issues must be addressed. The
but not eliminating—these painful strategic trade-offs recommendations below are drawn from the data analyzed
as part of this study and the best practices and lessons
in two main ways. They can substitute technology for
learned from the buildup of RPA units, personnel, and
labor to reduce overall personnel requirements, and they
operations over the past two decades.
can extend force structure (capacity) without extending
peacetime operating costs. If these advantages can be
Create Separate Training Pipelines
realized, remotely crewed systems could help bend, if not
for Remotely Crewed Systems
break, the cycle of growing budgets and declining force
One of the early lessons learned from the Air Force’s
structure described in the opening of this brief.
experience in expanding the fleet of MQ-1s is that merely
However, the previous chapters have shown that remotely transferring pilots from crewed aircraft to RPAs is both
piloted AISR aircraft have not demonstrated significant cost inefficient and difficult to scale. The Air Force could
reductions in overall personnel or operating costs. not transition pilots fast enough to meet RPA demands
Experiences to date indicate that this is due to the high without creating even greater shortfalls in pilots for crewed
level of preexisting unmet demand for the missions RPAs aircraft. A separate training pipeline for RPAs proved to be
currently support. The data show that as overall AISR capacity much less expensive and more scalable to accommodate
has grown with the addition of RPAs in large numbers, this the surge in demand for RPA pilots.
additional capacity has been immediately and continuously
As remotely crewed systems enter the force in larger
consumed—taxing both the platforms and the people
numbers in other areas, the services should heed this
that operate them. Moreover, the additional capabilities
lesson and begin developing separate training curricula
provided by RPAs, such as the ability to conduct 24/7 wide-
and processes tailored to remotely crewed systems. This is
area surveillance, has generated even more demand for the
especially important for the Navy, where the most recent
intelligence products they provide. Instead of substituting for
long-range plan projects that more than a quarter of the
crewed AISR aircraft or providing latent surge capacity, the
fleet will be remotely operated ships within the next
MQ-1, MQ-9, and RQ-4 have been used to assuage insatiable
30 years. While remote operators can certainly benefit
demand for ISR among the combatant commands.
from the wisdom and experience of crewed operators,
The same may not be true for other mission areas or in the training provided to remote operators does not need
other domains where the use of remotely crewed systems to mirror traditional training. Moreover, the tactics,
is likely to expand. The military services are exploring the techniques, and procedures used for crewed operations
use of remotely crewed aircraft for a wide range of missions, should not constrain the development of new concepts of
including aerial refueling, airlift, air superiority, and missile operations for remotely crewed systems.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 10

Create Separate Career Fields for Remote Operators entirely using simulators, which reduces costs and the
In conjunction with creating a separate training pipeline, wear on platforms. Some platforms could even (in theory)
the Air Force also ended up creating a separate career field be stored and only taken out when necessary for testing
designation for RPA pilots. This proved necessary because and maintenance—much like war reserve matériel. With
pilots progressing through RPA training did not attain the limited day-to-day operations and extensive simulator-
same skills as traditional crewed pilots, and thus the two based training, these types of platforms may be well suited
were not interchangeable. Creating a distinct career field for placement in the guard or reserve rather than the active
for RPA pilots had the added benefit of making it possible component, which can further reduce peacetime costs.
for the Air Force to begin developing a dedicated cadre
However, many remotely crewed systems will be needed to
of remote operators, which creates more opportunities
support day-to-day peacetime activities, such as presence
for professional development and advancement within
missions to reassure allies and partners, demonstrations of
the field. As remotely crewed systems become a larger
capabilities to bolster deterrence, and routine intelligence
component of the military, the services should use the
collection. They may also need to occasionally conduct
creation of a separate career field for remote operators as
real-world training exercises with crewed units to practice
a way to allow these personnel to deepen their domain
interoperability and teaming. The anticipated level of
expertise and begin to explore new concepts of operation
steady-state peacetime demand for operations should
and doctrine specific to remotely crewed systems.
therefore be a driving factor in developing new models for
in-garrison operations and training and the division of units
Reconsider the Officer-Enlisted Divide
among the active and reserve components.
Differences in how the Army and Air Force assign pilots
and sensor operators for RPAs raise questions about how The Air Force’s experience with in-garrison operations for
the officer-enlisted divide should be applied to remotely RPAs is instructive but incomplete. One of the lessons
crewed systems more generally. Each of the services have learned is that for high-demand assets, such as AISR aircraft,
their own cultural traditions for which responsibilities and the operational tempo (OPTEMPO) may not easily afford
authorities are assigned to officers, warrant officers, senior opportunities for upgrade training and career development.
non-commissioned officers, and junior enlisted. By default, Balancing real-world mission demands with the personal
these traditions are likely to carry over to remotely crewed and professional needs of servicemembers can be especially
systems and the personnel that support them. difficult for high OPTEMPO in-garrison operations. The
services may be able to adapt operating models from other
The rising costs of military personnel, the increasing levels
types of units that have a longer history of in-garrison
of automation in modern weapon systems, and the use
operations, such as space operators and missileers. However,
of more remotely crewed systems create a compelling
opportunity to reconsider the officer-enlisted divide within there remain significant gaps in knowledge for remotely
each of the services. As more remotely crewed systems crewed systems where the platforms are not in high demand
are fielded and new career fields are created to support for steady-state peacetime operations. As these types of
them, the services should study alternatives for how these remotely crewed systems begin to emerge, the services should
systems can be most effectively and efficiently staffed. The conduct controlled experiments to iteratively develop new
functions and skills needed for various positions in crewed models for training and operations, including how these units
platforms—including operators, maintainers, and other can be optimally staffed, structured, and sustained.
unit personnel—may not always translate into similar
Explore the Use of Automation
functions and skills for remotely crewed platforms. The
and Artificial Intelligence for Maintenance
services should carefully evaluate and match job functions,
Maintenance is a personnel-intensive activity for both
skill levels, and responsibilities according to what is
crewed and remotely crewed systems. As previously
optimal for remotely crewed systems and not automatically
shown in Table 1, more than half of the personnel in
default to service traditions and culture.
a typical MQ-1/MQ-9 combat line are maintainers.
Explore New Models for In-Garrison Because maintenance of a platform must be conducted
Operations and Training where the platform is based rather than where it is
A potential advantage of remotely crewed systems is controlled, remotely crewed systems will continue to
that routine operator training can be conducted almost need a deployable launch and recovery element for
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 11

Leverage Automation When a
Human-in-the-Loop Is Not Needed
Increasing levels of automation are
being incorporated into both crewed
and remotely crewed systems across
the military. For remotely crewed
systems, automation can be an
important tool for mission tasks
where a human-in-the-loop is not
needed or may be a disadvantage.
The Army has significant experience
using automatic takeoff and landing
for its fleet of MQ-1s, but the Air
Force has been slower to embrace
this technology. If the Air Force
fully adopted automatic takeoff and
landing systems and remote taxi
operations, it could eliminate the
Airmen assigned to the 319th Aircraft Maintenance Squadron work together to perform regular
need for pilots and sensor operators
preflight maintenance for an RQ-4 Global Hawk on Grand Forks Air Force Base, N.D.
in the launch and recovery element.
Source: U.S. Air Force photo by Senior Airman Elora J. McCutcheon.
Increasing levels of automation can
maintenance. It is possible that some remotely crewed
help reduce the workload on pilots
systems can be operated with lower margins of safety if a
and sensor operators throughout all phases of flight. For
malfunction does not pose a serious risk to loss of life or
example, point-and-click controls (rather than stick and
property. For example, a low-cost remotely crewed ground
throttle controls) can allow the pilot and sensor operator
vehicle whose engine stalls while on a mission may be
roles to be combined. Moreover, increasing levels of
of low consequence. But this is likely to be the exception
automation can allow one operator to control multiple
rather than the rule because many of the remotely
aircraft simultaneously. But the current operational
crewed systems being developed or considered are just as
model for AISR aircraft mandates a one-to-one ratio of
mission critical as their crewed counterparts and must be
pilots and sensor operators to aircraft. This model does
maintained to similar safety standards.
not take full advantage of the force multiplier effects
Predictive analytics and artificial intelligence can be used remotely crewed systems can bring to the military. The
to better optimize maintenance schedules to reduce services should be more forward leaning and adopt a
overall maintenance requirements. Robotic servicing could one-to-many approach for operations where possible. This
potentially be used to conduct some routine maintenance would enable better utilization of the most expensive and
activities (and reduce staffing levels), but platforms may scale-limiting component of labor in remotely crewed
need to be designed with robotic servicing in mind. The systems: the operators.
services should explore options to reduce the amount of
touch labor required in maintaining systems, including Explore Lower Latency Communications
system designs and architectures that are optimized for When a Human-in-the-Loop Is Needed
easy maintenance. Particular emphasis should be placed While automation can help with many tasks where
on using the large volumes of telemetry and system a human is not needed, many functions for remotely
performance data generated by remotely crewed systems crewed systems will still require a human-in-the loop for
to better predict when components may fail. While much the foreseeable future. For these types of operations, the
attention is paid to the potential of artificial intelligence to communications link between the operator and platform
improve the operation of weapon systems, a more near- is critical. A typical link to an RPA involves traveling by
term and fruitful application of this technology may be to fiber from the mission control element to a satellite ground
optimize the maintenance of these weapon systems. station near the region in which the aircraft is being flown.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 12

The signal then travels up to a satellite in geostationary example, the Army organizes itself around brigade combat
orbit 22,000 miles above the Earth and back down to the teams and the Navy around carrier strike groups. Despite
aircraft in flight. The time for a signal traveling at the this organizational structure, units are often requested on
speed of light to get up to a satellite in geostationary orbit an “à la carte” basis by the combatant commands according
and be retransmitted back down to an aircraft flying in to operational constraints and external limits on the
the same region is roughly 270ms. This means that the numbers of forces in-theater. This often means deploying
roundtrip time for a signal to travel from a satellite ground only a certain type of battalion from a brigade combat team
station to an aircraft and back is 540ms—not including or only a few ships out of a carrier strike group.
the terrestrial fiber component of the link between the
Recognizing this tendency toward the ad hoc employment
satellite ground station and the mission control element
of units, the services should examine the potential benefits
where the operator resides. This latency is one of the main of creating separate organizational structures for remotely
reasons that operators are needed locally in the launch crewed systems. The Air Force has largely interspersed
and recovery element to land aircraft manually because it its MQ-1, MQ-9, and RQ-4 squadrons among wings and
allows them to use direct line-of-sight communications Numbered Air Forces that also house crewed aircraft
with very little latency. squadrons. For example, the 432nd Wing—the first wing in
New satellite constellations being deployed in low the Air Force composed entirely of RPA—is part of the 15th
Earth orbit (LEO) have much lower latency because Air Force, which also includes F-22, F-15E, E-8C JSTARS,
they are physically closer to the Earth. Systems such as and E-3 AWACS squadrons.37 The risk in this approach is
SpaceX’s Starlink constellation are advertising roundtrip that the organizational dispersion of RPA units can inhibit
transmission times of as low as 20ms.36 Equipping the flow of best practices among squadrons, create barriers
to building a coherent community of operators within the
remotely crewed platforms with communication systems
career field, and ultimately stifle career progression for
capable of using these emerging LEO constellations could
remote operators if they are forced to compete with crewed
reduce latency by roughly a half second roundtrip. To
system operators for higher levels of command.
further reduce latency in the terrestrial fiber component
of the communications pathway, the military could The Air Force should consider combining RPA squadrons
position mission control elements in regional bases under dedicated wings and Numbered Air Forces and
around the global, such as Germany or Australia, that are eventually creating a Major Command for RPAs. While
near or adjacent to satellite ground stations. Reducing the other services do not yet have as many remotely
communications latency could allow more human-in-the- crewed units as the Air Force, they may want to begin
loop operations to be conducted from the mission control experimenting with organizational structures to help
element and reduce the requirement for operators in the alleviate some of the cultural challenges these systems may
launch and recovery element. experience when integrated into the force in larger numbers.
Explore Alternative Organizations FINAL THOUGHTS
for Remotely Crewed Systems Current defense strategy calls for forces that are longer
Since the National Security Act of 1947 and the DoD range, have greater persistence, and are better suited to
Reorganization Act of 1958, the U.S. military has been an operating environment that can rapidly vary from
structured as a matrix-managed organization under the permissive to highly contested in all domains. This strategy
military services and the combatant commands. The requires a force that is larger than current budgets can
services organize, train, and equip military forces in their sustain, and it needs a military that is more agile in
respective domains, while the combatant commands how it organizes and employs forces to face challenges
integrate and employ these forces in operations. Given this ranging from gray zone competition to high-end conflict.
division of responsibilities, the services have wide latitude While strategy should drive budget decisions, resource
to organize internally in ways that enhance their ability to constraints ultimately drive the need for strategy and the
recruit, train, and innovate the forces and capabilities they innovative technologies and concepts of operation that can
provide to the combatant commands. bring strategy and budgets into alignment.
The military services tend to cluster units into groups Remotely crewed systems have the potential to help
according to how they are intended to be deployed. For provide the capabilities and capacity the U.S. military
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 13

needs to execute the strategy in a budget constrained
environment. But this potential cannot be achieved if
remotely crewed systems are staffed and operated in the
image of their crewed counterparts. Different approaches
are needed for setting personnel requirements, conducting
training and in-garrison operations, leveraging automation,
and organizing units for success. Unlocking the full potential
of remotely crewed systems is more a matter of policy
innovation than technological innovation.
Todd Harrison is the director of Defense Budget Analysis and
director of the Aerospace Security Project at the Center for
Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C.
This brief is made possible by project support from General
Atomics and general support to CSIS.
CSIS BRIEFS are produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a private, tax-exempt institution
focusing on international public policy issues. Its research is nonpartisan and nonproprietary. CSIS does not take specific
policy positions. Accordingly, all views, positions, and conclusions expressed in this publication should be understood to
be solely those of the author(s). © 2021 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
Cover Photo: U.S. Air Force photo by Staff Sgt. Omari Bernard
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 14

ENDNOTES
1 “Transcript of Donald Trump’s speech on national security 15 The direct personnel category is defined by CBO to include
in Philadelphia,” The Hill, September 6, 2016, the military personnel associated with a major combat unit;
com/blogs/pundits-blog/campaign/294817-transcript-of- indirect includes the military personnel in units that support
donald-trumps-speech-on-national-security-in. the major combat unit; and overhead includes the major
2 Jim Mattis, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy combat unit’s share of administrative or overhead military
(Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD), 2018), 3, 6, personnel.
7, 16 See Lance Menthe et al., The Future of Air Force Motion Imagery
National-Defense-Strategy-Summary.pdf. Exploitation (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2012),
3 The term “remotely crewed” is used throughout this brief 
as a gender-neutral term synonymous with “unmanned reports/2012/RAND_TR1133.pdf; and Robert O. Work,
systems,” “remotely operated systems,” or “drones.” It is “Establishment of an Algorithmic Warfare Cross-Functional
not intended to be used synonymously with autonomous Team (Project Maven),” Department of Defense, April 26,
systems because remotely crewed systems can have different 2017, 
degrees of autonomy, ranging from systems that must have a Project%20Maven%20DSD%20Memo%2020170425.pdf
continuous operator in the loop to those that can operate for 17 Herbert J. Carlisle, “Remotely Piloted Aircraft Enterprise,”
extended periods without operator intervention. Written Statement for the Senate Armed Services
4 Department of the Navy, Force Design 2030 (Washington, DC: Committee, Subcommittee on Airland, March 16,
DoD, ), 2, 2016, 2, 
document-marine-corps-force-design-2030. Documents/2016/March%202016/031616Carlisle.pdf.
5 Department of the Navy, Highlights of the Department of the 18 U.S. Air Force, Unmanned Aircraft Systems Flight Plan 2009-
Navy FY 2021 Budget (Washington, DC: DoD, 2020), 5-4, 2047 (Washington, DC: ), 28, 
 program/collect/uas_2009.pdf.
Highlights_book.pdf.
19 Travis L. Norton, Staffing for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS)
6 Davide B. Larter and Aaron Mehta, “With DoD’s fleet of Operations (Alexandria, VA: Institute for Defense Analyses,
2045, the US military’s chief signals he’s all-in on sea power,” ), 29, 
Defense News, October 6, 2020, Documents/MRA_Docs/TFM/Reports/F2108340_TFMR-
com/naval/2020/10/06/with-its-fleet-of-2045-the-us- Staffing%20for%20Unmanned%20Aircraft%20Systems%20
militarys-chief-signals-hes-all-in-on-sea-power/. (UAS)%20Operations-ForPIIWork-DM.pdf.
7 For a detailed discussion of the history of uncrewed aircraft 20 Government Accountability Office, Unmanned Aerial Systems:
in the Air Force, see: Thomas P. Ehrhard, Air Force UAVs: Air Force Should Take Additional Steps to Improve Aircrew
The Secret History (Arlington, VA: Mitchell Institute, 2010), Staffing and Support (Washington, DC: ), 12–13,
 
8 Robert M. Gates, Duty: Memoirs of a Secretary at War (New
21 Ibid., 13.
York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2014).
22 Ibid., 2.
9 “XQ-58A Valkyrie,” Air Force Research Lab, https://
23 Ibid., 15.
afresearchlab.com/technology/successstories/xq-58a-
valkyrie/. 24 Ibid., 18.
10 Arguably, the space domain is the most “uncrewed” of the 25 Bruce D. Callander, “Enlisted Pilots,” Air Force Magazine,
physical military domains since military space systems have , 101, 
been entirely uncrewed since the beginning of the space age. PDF/MagazineArchive/Documents/1989/June%20
1989/0689enlisted.pdf.
11 For simplicity, this paper refers to all variants of the M/RQ-1
Reaper as the MQ-1 unless otherwise noted in the text. 26 Norton, Staffing for Unmanned Systems, 62.
12 “RQ-170 Sentinel,” U.S. Air Force, December 10, 2009, 27 “Gray Eagle,” General Atomics, 
 remotely-piloted-aircraft/gray-eagle.
article/104547/rq-170-sentinel/. 28 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017, Public
13 Crewed AISR platforms in this figure include the U-2, E-8, Law 114–328, Sec. 1052, December 23, 2016, 
E-3, E-9, MC-12, RC-135, WC-135, and OC-135. congress.gov/114/plaws/publ328/PLAW-114publ328.pdf.
14 “The U.S. Military’s Force Structure: Fiscal Year 2019 29 Oriana Pawlyk, “Air Force May Select First Enlisted Drone
Update to Personnel Numbers and Costs,” Congressional Pilots This Month,” Military.com, February 13, 2017, https://
Budget Office, August 15, 2018, 
publication/54136. first-enlisted-drone-pilots-this-month.html.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 15

30 U.S. Air Force, Unmanned Aircraft Systems Flight Plan 2009-
2047, 28.
31 Menthe et al., The Future of Air Force Motion Imagery
Exploitation, 5.
32 “RQ-4 Global Hawk,” U.S. Air Force, October 27, 2014,

Article/104516/rq-4-global-hawk/.
33 Norton, Staffing for Unmanned Systems, 29.
34 Kathleen Hicks, “Defense Strategy and the Iron Triangle of
Painfull Tradeoffs,” Defense 360, CSIS, June 21, 2017, https://
defense360.csis.org/defense-strategy-and-the-iron-triangle-
of-painful-tradeoffs/.
35 Bernard Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age (Santa Monica,
CA: RAND Corporation, 1959), x, 
commercial_books/CB137-1.html.
36 Elon Musk (@elonmusk), “Speed will double to ~300Mb/s
& latency will drop to ~20ms later this year,” Twitter,
February 22, 2021, 
status/1363763858121256963?s=20.
37 “432nd Wind, 432nd Air Expeditionary Wing,” Creech Air
Force Base, May 16, 2013, 
Us/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/449126/432nd-wing-432nd-
air-expeditionary-wing/.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 16