Expert Insights
PERSPECTIVE ON A TIMELY POLICY ISSUE
OWEN J. DANIELS, HANNA DOHMEN
Open Models, Soft Power, and
the Spectrum of U.S.-China
Artificial Intelligence Competition
T
he competition between the United States and China in artificial intelli-
gence (AI) is entering a new phase and is increasingly focused on influenc-
ing the global AI ecosystem, and open models are emerging as a critical
aspect of soft power. Soft power refers to the ability to exert influence and
shape other actors’ behaviors and preferences through factors other than military
strength, such as shared ideology, commercial opportunities, or cultural attractive-
ness. Our analysis informs the United States’ open-source AI strategy by first exam-
ining the diverging frameworks of the United States’ and China’s AI action plans.
We evaluate how AI developers in both countries are approaching open models to
gain influence. We also offer recommendations for U.S. policymakers to ensure that
the United States maintains its technological leadership. We argue that a strategy
that emphasizes stronger support for an open-model ecosystem in the United States,
a recalibration of export controls, and the creation of incentives for firms to adopt
permissive licensing practices is needed to counter the influence that China hopes
to gain through diffusing its technology and tech infrastructure. Beyond the pos-

Open models refer to AI systems whose weights (the
parameters that determine the model’s outputs for a given
The open-model
input), are freely available to users to download and adapt
ecosystem appears to be for specific use cases.1 A model’s level of openness can also
vary depending on certain factors, such as the licensing
an increasingly important restrictions governing the model’s use.
The U.S. plan, Winning the Race: America’s AI Action
playing field for soft-power Plan, is postured as a domestic policy document to guide
the federal government’s execution of AI policy and recom-
competition between the
mends (1) ensuring access to large-scale computing power
for researchers and start-ups, (2) creating public-private
United States and China.
partnerships to increase widespread access to private-
sector computing and other resources, and (3) encourag-
ing small and medium-sized businesses to adopt open
sibility that China might be seen as the primary champion models.2 The document cites the importance of creating
of sharing AI’s benefits globally, particularly in the devel- open models “to ensure America has leading open models
oping world, the broad adoption of Chinese open models founded on American values” and because open models’
might collectively lead to AI developers and researchers potential to become global standards in commercial and
being locked into using China’s technology. academic research lends them “geostrategic value.”3 The
plan notes that, “While the decision of whether and how
to release an open or closed model is fundamentally up
The United States’ and the People’s
to the developer, the Federal government should create a
Republic of China’s Artificial
supportive environment for open models.”4 The plan is the
Intelligence Action Plans strongest indicator of the administration’s stance on open-
source models, but it should be read as part of a broader
As the releases of the United States’ and China’s new
policy framework that promotes the exportation of the
AI plans in 2025 suggest, market drivers and a battle
U.S. technology stack—the AI hardware, models, software,
for influence, in addition to national security concerns,
applications, and standards. National security concerns
appear to be central to the competition. National secu-
and economic influence, the latter of which is executed by
rity is an important consideration in the U.S.-China AI
U.S. firms, both play significant roles in the plan.
rivalry, but it represents only one dimension of a broader
China’s “Global AI Governance Action Plan” also
and nuanced competition. The two action plans illustrate
embraces the open-model environment’s geostrategic
this point through their calls to develop open AI models,
value, although the document couches the framing in
although they do so in differing ways and levels of detail.

more globally beneficial terms because China’s plan is DeepSeek and Moonshot AI released the R1 and Kimi
primarily an instrument of global diplomacy.5 Although K2 models, respectively, in 2025, thus introducing highly
the U.S. plan and China’s plan have international scopes customizable and performant Chinese models onto the
and policy implications, China’s plan appears—at least in market. Both models were capable of competing with lead-
its framing—to focus more on establishing collaborations ing U.S. closed and open models alike. Moreover, because
with other nations, particularly in the developing world. As of the generally open-source nature of China’s leading AI
the document states, China aims to “build transnational models, the entire innovation ecosystem benefits from
open-source communities and secure, reliable open-source cross-pollination. Open-model developers can use their
platforms . . . promote the open sharing of basic resources, peer’s model architectures, libraries, and mechanisms to
lower the barriers to technological innovation and appli- build and improve their own models, which results in a
cation, avoid duplication of investment and waste of stronger innovative ecosystem.
resources, and promote the inclusiveness and accessibility Global researchers and businesses seek to reap the
of AI technology services.”6 The plan identifies support- societal benefits of AI, as vaunted by model developers
ing countries in the Global South in developing, engaging and technologists, in such areas as the economy, health
with, and applying AI as critical steps to achieving more care, and education—particularly in the developing world,
equitable and inclusive technology development. How- where polling suggests optimism about AI’s transforma-
ever, reading between the lines, we note that China’s plan tive potential is high.10 However, China might have an
also appears set on entrenching its national technology advantage embedding its technology in AI stacks if the
in global stacks—note the language on avoiding wasteful U.S. market does not produce viable alternatives. OpenAI
“duplication of investment.”7 Still, language throughout the released its gpt-oss-120b open model in early ,
plan focuses on cooperating in international fora (such as the company’s first open release since 2019, which is a
the United Nations) to boost global AI development, create seeming acknowledgment of open ecosystems’ increasing
shared international standards and governance mecha- influence in attracting AI users.11
nisms, and, ultimately, “adhere to the spirit of openness Open models are not without downside risks com-
and sharing.”8 pared with their closed counterparts, particularly from
In short, the open-model ecosystem appears to be a security perspective.12 Open models can be adapted to
an increasingly important playing field for soft-power exploit model vulnerabilities, remove safety features, and
competition between the United States and China regard- misuse or maliciously deploy models. Furthermore, China
ing AI. China arguably has a head start in developing its has openly acknowledged that open models are a pathway
strategy. Since releasing its Next Generation Artificial Intel- to military-civil integration that promotes the adoption of
ligence Development Plan in 2017,9 China has called for the civilian technologies for military ends.13
development of open AI models as a pathway to harness- However, in the broader context of the U.S.-China
ing innovation in AI across sectors and domains. China’s rivalry, including the competition for global political and

economic influence and collaboration with other nations this way, developers can compete globally while taking
to uncover AI’s full potential, open models will likely be an advantage of the United States’ leadership position in
important tool in the countries’ soft-power tool kits. As of computing power.15 Ways to strengthen the open-model
early 2026, competition for the best open models is highly ecosystem could include exploring policy mechanisms
dynamic. Rankings on leaderboards that capture which that encourage researchers and companies to use U.S.
models are most frequently downloaded and used are open models in exchange for access to greater comput-
fluid, and many researchers gravitate toward using the best ing resources, which would draw on the strength of the
models available rather than orienting toward U.S. or United States’ cutting-edge AI infrastructure.16 Such incen-
Chinese models in particular. Data are limited and the tives could increase the likelihood that researchers and
market dynamics that drive researchers and businesses would-be commercial adopters of open models turn to U.S.
to adopt one model over another are not clear, espe- developers and help create a flourishing open research and
cially because models’ practical use cases remain largely commercial environment in the United States. There is an
nascent. However, perception that a powerful, adaptable important distinction between releasing powerful open
model could be used to solve problems is clearly reso- models that can proliferate and having a vibrant research
nant: Researchers at the U.S. Center for AI Standards and ecosystem that is best positioned to capitalize on such
Innovation found that downloads of DeepSeek models on models. China has achieved some significant successes in
model-sharing platforms increased nearly 1,000 percent the former, but the United States should strive for success in
since the release of DeepSeek’s R1 model in .14 the latter. Maintaining the U.S. lead in the closed ecosystem
Although China’s flashy releases of models—such as those frontier should continue to be a top priority, particularly
from DeepSeek or Moonshot AI—grab attention, Chinese for national security uses of AI, but the United States needs
dominance in the space is by no means preordained. That to complement its efforts by fostering a more-robust open-
said, the United States needs to remain a key player in model ecosystem to meet China’s soft-power challenge.
the open-model ecosystem, such as by providing funding
for research and creating the conditions for companies to
Open Models and Soft Power
combat the possibility that researchers and commercial
developers become locked in to using Chinese models over
To more fully understand the relationship between open
the long term. The U.S. government needs to closely moni-
models and soft-power influence, it is useful to understand
tor the dynamics and trends of the open-model ecosystem
the specific characteristics that differentiate open models
by collecting data that can inform future policies and
from proprietary, closed models.
exploring what incentives might lead more U.S. companies
to make their model weights open access.
U.S. strategy should be geared toward facilitating a
stronger U.S. ecosystem for open models in the long term;

Benefits of Open Models
The benefits of open
The benefits of open models lie in the models’ capac-
ity to allow a greater variety of actors to participate in AI
models lie in the models’
research and development, including academic and com-
mercial researchers who might not otherwise have access to
capacity to allow a
the compute to pretrain their own models. Broadly speak-
ing, the common users of open models can be split into
greater variety of actors to
two nonexclusive camps of researchers and commercial
developers. Researchers are interested in accessing models participate in AI research
for a variety of purposes, such as evaluating model perfor-
mance and finding new use cases that are well suited to AI and development.
solutions by fine-tuning models. These researchers can visit
open-model repositories (such as Hugging Face),17 browse
for models that could be used for specific tasks (such as
to develop market applications of open models using their
multimodal content generation models, natural language–
work, and they might favor the models that they used for
processing models, and computer vision models); download
research purposes when developing applications. Both
a model, then adapt or fine-tune the model to perform opti-
researchers and commercial developers are likely to prize
mally with the researcher’s data or in a specific application’s
a powerful, low-latency model that suits their research
context. Open models offer flexibility and performance
or business tasks. Nonetheless, the research-commercial
with lower barriers to entry. Commercial developers—some
distinction highlights the varying uses of open models
of whom might be researchers seeking to profit from their
and how different actors might prize a particular model’s
academic work—might try to capitalize on open models
unique characteristics.
for a less costly, less compute-intensive, and more adapt-
Broadly speaking, researchers are often interested
able way to build AI business applications.18 Open-source
in accessing suites of the best available models and the
models arguably also benefit from a broader user base’s
original model’s weights to test for factors (such as output
increased capacity to identify security issues, vulnerabili-
replicability) in order to prod at models’ limitations or
ties, or other failure modalities within the models.
to compare and rank the different models’ performance.
Thinking about open models’ usefulness to research-
This type of research can help advance AI progress more
ers and commercial developers is helpful for framing
broadly, occasionally without immediately obvious eco-
policy approaches to the challenges and opportunities
nomic upsides.
these models present. There certainly is not an iron curtain
Commercial developers—whether they are AI com-
between research and commercial approaches to open-
panies or other (non-AI) companies seeking to harness AI
model development; researchers might be well positioned

Licensing of Open Models
Releasing powerful open
There are varying degrees of openness, which are partly
determined by the licensing rules under which a model is
models could help China
released. For example, users might be able to download a
model and modify its weights or fine-tune it for a specific
position itself as the main
purpose, but users cannot access the model’s source code
or distribute the derivative model or its outputs—this
diffuser of AI capabilities,
would make the model open weight, but the model would
particularly to the not meet open-source criteria.19
Generally speaking, more Chinese developers have
developing world. released models under more-permissive licenses than U.S.
developers. For instance, Meta’s Llama models are distrib-
uted under a community license agreement,20 which allows
users to download the model weights and code but imposes
for a specific product—might be more interested in access-
limitations on distribution, including for businesses that
ing a powerful model that is well suited to a particular
provide AI services to more than 700 million monthly
application. Developers can build products that are viable
active users. Developers must attribute credit to Meta for
on the marketplace using an open model at a lower cost-
models that are Llama offshoots. Google’s Gemma models
to-performance ratio than using a proprietary model, thus
are also released under a proprietary license21—as opposed
achieving powerful performance at lower costs with open
to an industry-standard license—which reserves the
models that have near-frontier capabilities. Using a model
right to restrict use of Gemma services that the company
to rapidly build prototypes, easily incorporate products
believes are in violation of its prohibited use policy. These
into existing workflows, and attract the attention of finan-
proprietary restrictions have led some proponents of open
cial backers or venture capitalists might be of paramount
models to claim that Llama and Gemma models are not
importance. Commercially speaking, a model’s adaptabil-
truly open source because the companies create obstacles
ity might be more significant for users than the ability to
for businesses to incorporate the models into products.22
research a model’s capabilities, so accessing the data that a
Many of the latest and most-advanced open models
model was trained on or its original weights might be less
released by Chinese developers adhere to standard indus-
of a priority.
try licenses and are less restrictive to use.23 DeepSeek’s R1
was released under an MIT License, which allows anyone
to use, modify, and distribute derivatives of the model and
requires users only to include a copyright notice in dis-
tributions.24 Kimi K2 models are released under a similar

but modified MIT license that maintains the permissive OpenAI chief executive officer Sam Altman noted shortly
standard while requiring that commercial products with after DeepSeek’s R1 release, OpenAI’s lack of an open-
more than 100 million monthly active users or more than model strategy as of put it “on the wrong side
$20 million in monthly revenue must prominently display of history.”28 This idea links directly to the notion of soft-
“Kimi K2” on their interfaces.25 In a move that seemingly power influence with AI, and specifically in the context of
follows Chinese developers’ more-permissive licensing the U.S.-China rivalry. Academic and commercial actors
approaches, OpenAI released its first open-source model, with constrained resources—in terms of either compute or
gpt-oss, under the Apache 2.0 License.26 The Apache 2.0 financial resources—might prize a model’s level of open-
License imposes no commercial-use limitations, instead ness if its capabilities are equal to or comparable with a
allowing developers to release derivatives without having to less-open competitor’s model. The existing open-model
adhere to company use policies. space is fluid and competitive, and the degree to which a
A model’s licensing details matter significantly for model is open could be a favorably differentiating factor.
commercial developers. For commercial uses, permissive Models that can offer the right balance of performance and
licenses (such as the MIT and Apache 2.0 licenses, under favorable licensing might be especially attractive to users,
which the R1, Kimi K2, and gpt-oss models were released) and the prominent marketing pushes of such companies
encourage models’ adoption by reducing the risk of legal as DeepSeek and Moonshot AI appear geared toward users
uncertainty, regulatory burdens, and the possibility of seeking these qualities.
model adopters profiting from technological applications
or bearing responsibility for model misuses. Licensing
New Models, Same Strategy
agreements with use restrictions or distribution require-
ments often use ambiguous terms, which could lead to the
Although the releases of powerful open models and the
commercial developer facing legal action from the model
support for open ecosystems in the U.S. and Chinese AI
provider.27 This is especially critical for start-ups with
action plans are notable, adopting an open strategy for
small teams and limited financial and legal resources.
emerging technology development is not new for China.
For researchers, however, the level of openness that such
Since the 2010s, China’s AI technology developers and
licenses provide does not guarantee replicability. Even the
planners have advocated using open technology devel-
most permissively licensed models do not provide access
opment as a strategic policy tool—including in the 2017
to training data.
AI plan, the 2021 14th Five-Year Plan, and various other
The choices that AI developers make in licensing their
policy documents.29 There appear to be several motiva-
models—whether open sourcing models at all, using pro-
tions for this focus. First, China hopes to broaden its influ-
prietary licenses, or using permissive licenses—are not only
ence abroad in global AI stacks, which is in line with other
technical and legal decisions; they are also important fac-
steps the country has taken to become a world-leading
tors in shaping commercial AI adoption and research. As
digital infrastructure provider in telecommunications,30

surveillance technologies,31 and data center development.32 tectures (e.g., DeepSeek’s Multi-Head Latent Attention)
Second, China aims to depend less on Western compo- within such industry frameworks as vLLM helps ensure
nents of the AI supply chain, particularly for computing that these models become developer defaults.37 This locks
resources. This aim is especially salient as China contends users and developers into using China’s architecture and
with U.S. export controls restricting its ability to import can solidify China’s diffusion of the AI ecosystem.
most leading-edge semiconductors and to access other However, although Chinese open models (such as
Western compute needed to develop leading AI models.33 DeepSeek’s R1) have fewer licensing restrictions, they
Third, as part of its well-established military-civil fusion might be restricted in other important ways. Researchers
efforts, China appears eager to harness advances in open have raised concerns that R1 might effectively censor infor-
models to seek advantages in its military rivalry with the mation about topics that are considered politically sensitive
United States.34 in China. Some research indicates that publicly released,
Releasing powerful open models could help China fine-tuned versions of DeepSeek’s models deflect or refuse
position itself as the main diffuser of AI capabilities, par- to answer questions about certain topics, such as the
ticularly to the developing world, which could have market Tiananmen Square massacre, and this censorship remained
and infrastructure implications. As mentioned previously, even in the models’ distilled versions.38 In ,
publics in developing countries appear more sanguine on researchers at cybersecurity firm CrowdStrike suggested
AI’s ability to provide benefits than those in their devel- that DeepSeek was providing unhelpful answers or com-
oped counterparts. For instance, Google and Ipsos polling puter code with security flaws in response to user queries
found that more than 70 percent of people surveyed in from groups that the Chinese government opposes;39
emerging markets—such as Brazil, Mexico, South Africa, whether intentional or not, the finding provides anecdotal
and the United Arab Emirates—said that AI would bring support of the possibility that Chinese models might prove
positive societal benefits across a variety of areas; for com- unreliable to China’s political opponents.
parison, only half of U.S. respondents noted the same.35 There are several implications for the United States’
Through its willingness to export powerful open models, and China’s soft-power competition. Barring other alter-
as well as its vocal and persistent advocacy for the Global natives, researchers and companies around the globe
South in conversations involving international AI gover- might seek to use powerful open Chinese models (such as
nance at the United Nations and in its own multilateral DeepSeek’s R1) that have fewer potential hurdles to make
global AI governance initiative,36 China appears to be new findings or achieve profitability, respectively. The
making a push to be seen as the primary exporter of AI’s ability to fully manipulate models to meet localized needs
benefits to the non-Western world. might be especially attractive in the developing world,
This influence extends beyond the models themselves benefitting Chinese model developers’ reputations and
and includes the broader open-model ecosystem’s infra- potentially making it more difficult for U.S. companies to
structure. For example, support for Chinese model archi- break into emerging markets. For example, it is not dif-

ficult to imagine the good will—not to mention the poten-
tial lock-in effects—that could result from a researcher in
To compete effectively,
a country other than the United States or China using a
Chinese open model to help solve a national disease out- the United States should
break, which could beget broader use of Chinese models
compared with U.S. ones. focus on promoting
This kind of outcome is in line with the objectives
detailed in the Chinese AI action plan, which are explicitly multiple pathways to AI
aimed at cultivating cooperation in AI with the Global
progress.
South. The tone of the document also contrasts markedly
with the U.S. plan, which emphasizes the goal of achiev-
ing U.S. global dominance in AI. In addition, the uptake
of Chinese open models might propagate censorship or sized this point on social media when he stated, “A year
disinformation that aligns with PRC objectives, including ago, policymakers in DC were debating a ban on open
the censorship of Chinese history and information about weight models . . . from day one, the Trump administra-
China’s troubling human rights practices. Yet the pos- tion changed course and made clear America needs to offer
sibility that Chinese models could be considered unsafe the best open models for innovators to build on and for
or unreliable for use by certain actors and groups adds yet America to export.”41
another nuance. These developments represent a potential inflection
point for the global open-source AI ecosystem in which the
U.S. public and private sectors have recognized the impor-
Formulating an Open-Model
tance of competing with China by using open models. How-
Strategy for the United States
ever, whether this truly is an inflection point will depend
on how the U.S. government implements policies to support
As the U.S.-Chinese AI competition evolves to incorporate
the open AI ecosystem for both academic researchers and
a greater focus on open models, diffusion, and technology
commercial developers, as well as how and whether Meta,
adoption, there are several considerations for developing
OpenAI, and their competitors adapt their approaches.
a new U.S. AI strategy. The United States’ 2025 AI action
As the Trump administration begins to implement its AI
plan represents an evolution of the U.S. position on open
action plan, it should focus on the following areas.
models and specifically advocates encouraging open-model
development because the administration recognizes open-
source AI’s value for spurring innovation and the broader
adoption of AI.40 Michael Kratsios, director of the White
House’s Office of Science and Technology Policy, empha-

develop viable alternatives to Chinese models in terms of
capacity and openness.
Export controls could slow
Model performance alone is unlikely to be sufficient
the spread of Chinese in securing global adoption of U.S. open models. Costs,
licensing, and levels of model access all play roles. Com-
models in global AI stacks, mercial developers and researchers consider costs, reliabil-
ity, transparency, and legal requirements.44 According to
while an invigorated U.S. a 2025 survey of developers across 41 countries conducted
by McKinsey & Company, the Mozilla Foundation, and the
open ecosystem could
Patrick J. McGovern Foundation, 63 percent of respondents
prefer open-source AI because of lower costs.45 Moreover,
counter China’s strategy.
developers also indicated that their preference was attribut-
able to the full visibility into model weights, which allows
them to adapt models to specific use cases. Markets might
Promoting Open-Source Artificial provide firms with incentives to provide less-restrictive
Intelligence Development licensing requirements in the push to gain users.
To facilitate the growth of the U.S. open-source
To compete effectively, the United States should focus on
model ecosystem for academic research that could be
promoting multiple pathways to AI progress, including
beneficial for the globe, the administration and Con-
both open-model ecosystem growth and closed model
gress could also consider strengthening support for the
development. Open models offer distinctive benefits for
National AI Research Resource,46 an important pilot
commercial developers and researchers alike. In the private
program providing computational resources and develop-
sector, the U.S. government should encourage leading firms
ment infrastructure to under-resourced organizations.47
to shift toward open-source models. Some U.S. companies
Congress can codify and fully fund the program to bol-
have already been pursuing open-model strategies; Meta
ster its compute resources and strengthen the U.S. open-
has been the leading U.S. open-model player, but others
source model ecosystem.48
exist, such as the Allen Institute for AI’s Tulu models,
Apart from the academic community, the U.S. gov-
Microsoft’s Phi models, and NVIDIA’s GR00T N1 model.
ernment could also encourage open-model adoption by
OpenAI’s release of gpt-oss is the latest and most notable
partnering with major cloud service providers, such as
indicator of this emerging trend.42 As the Trump admin-
Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, or Google Cloud
istration pursues closer ties to AI firms,43 it should explore
Platform. Cloud service providers already offer compute
incentives it could use to encourage these companies to
credits for start-ups.49 Similarly, the administration could
partner with these providers to offer subsidized or free

compute credits that are designated for open-model devel- shifted toward test-time inference scaling, which allows
opment and adoption. The U.S. government could also the models to allocate additional computational resources
consider differentiating between trusted and nontrusted during the deployment phase to improve the model’s per-
open models, rewarding developers and adopters who align formance and output. A primary method within test-time
with certain criteria of openness. Federal funding could be inference scaling is multistep reasoning, often imple-
conditioned on meeting licensing, transparency, and repro- mented through chain-of-thought structures in which the
ducibility standards. model “thinks” before it provides an output to the user’s
Taken together, these efforts could help align adop- query. This shift has notable implications for the compu-
tion incentives with the U.S. government’s strategic objec- tational demands for both training and deploying state-of-
tives. In the long term, the efforts could create conditions the-art models.
in which researchers and commercial users alike develop As reasoning-capable models grow in prominence
preferences for U.S. models, thus increasing the likelihood and are used more widely, inference compute becomes
that the United States remains globally competitive in open more critical both for capability uplift and widespread
models even amid Chinese companies’ flashy new model deployment. For instance, DeepSeek’s R1 allegedly used
releases. The potential efforts offer positive incentives for far less compute for training using the company’s develop-
researchers and firms that could pay future dividends in ment techniques,50 but it relied more heavily on inference
soft-power competition. to “reason” by decomposing a problem into component
parts and effectively showing its work to users. This trend
underscores the demand for hardware that is optimized for
Rightsizing Export Controls for the
inference workloads rather than training alone. Although
Inference Paradigm
many AI chips can be used in both the training and infer-
Complementary to positive policy incentives, the United ence stages of AI development, certain qualities of AI
States needs to calibrate its export control strategy to new hardware—such as high memory capacity51—make some
developments in the field. Put simply, most computing chips more suitable for inference than for training.
power in advanced AI models is devoted to two processes: Previously, U.S. export control policy regarding AI
training, which is used to teach and tune a model before primarily focused on inhibiting China’s ability to train AI
its deployment, and inference, which enables a model to models,52 seemingly imposing prohibitive entry costs to
respond to user needs once deployed. Chinese open-source Chinese companies looking to develop frontier models from
AI developers, such as DeepSeek, are capitalizing on an scratch. However, as demonstrated by R1, Kimi K2, and
emerging paradigm shift in AI computing resources from many other Chinese models that have been released recently
training to inference capabilities. Traditionally, AI models (as of ), export controls may not substantially
were optimized to provide immediate responses to user slow China’s model development. DeepSeek’s success dem-
queries. However, the existing trend in AI development has onstrates that algorithmic optimizations and more-efficient

Although we acknowledge that lifting some U.S. export
restrictions can provide a commercial benefit for U.S.
The U.S. government
companies, the combination of right-sized controls and
needs to help present shifting global compute demands could hamper a key ele-
ment of China’s AI diffusion strategy and present a narrow
emerging U.S. open window of opportunity for the United States to expand its
AI soft power.
models as attractive
Countering China’s Narratives While
alternatives to Chinese
Protecting U.S. Interests
competitors.
Promoting open-model development and using calibrated
export restrictions might appear to be contradictory policy
levers. However, they are both needed to effectively export
harnessing of the performance of larger models to improve U.S. AI, protect U.S. advantages at the technological fron-
smaller models can reduce export controls’ effectiveness on tier, and compete for AI soft power using open models.
limiting training compute. The AI paradigm shift toward Export controls could slow the spread of Chinese models in
an increasing demand for inference-optimized compute global AI stacks, while an invigorated U.S. open ecosystem
suggests that export controls that target such compute could (one that offers alternatives to such models as R1, Kimi
constrain Chinese companies’ abilities to achieve capabil- K2, and Alibaba’s Qwen) could counter China’s strategy to
ity uplift by focusing on inference and deploying models at establish itself as the main diffuser of AI’s benefits. But to
scale for users both inside China and abroad. avoid being branded globally as the world’s policeman of
If the U.S. government’s objectives remain focused AI diffusion, the U.S. market needs to produce viable alter-
on slowing China’s ability to develop and deploy frontier natives that users perceive to be as open as China’s models.
AI models in service of U.S. national security and foreign By offering performant and accessible open models, U.S.
policy interests, export controls could remain a criti- companies give AI developers across the globe reliable
cal policy lever for limiting China’s inference capacity in alternatives that reduce the risk that they and researchers
China and abroad as part of an overarching AI strategy. become entrenched in the Chinese AI technology stack.
A risk of allowing PRC firms to access AI chips for both For commercial developers in particular, when an applica-
training and inference is that Chinese compute infrastruc- tion is built on one specific model and optimized for that
ture providers can scale some of their services, including model’s unique behavior, it could become burdensome and
services for users in other countries who hope to access costly to switch models if the product is not developed with
and tailor powerful Chinese open models for their needs. interoperability in mind.

Over the long term, the U.S. government will need China for inference could yet further incentivize Chinese
to understand the incentive structures that motivate the chipmakers’ pursuit of leading-edge capabilities and drive
leading U.S. AI firms to adopt permissive licenses for their global capital toward China to fund the pursuit of alterna-
open models. OpenAI’s recent choice to use a permissive tives to U.S. hardware.
license—potentially driven by DeepSeek’s success—stands Soft power in AI is as much about carrots as it is about
out among actions that leading labs have taken, and the sticks, and the U.S. government needs to help present
greater proclivity of Chinese firms to use less restrictive emerging U.S. open models as attractive alternatives to
licenses is notable. To some extent, this is a soft-power Chinese competitors. The United States should embrace
problem because it involves differing elements of perception the benefits that open models can provide to many coun-
and practicality: Llama’s licensing restrictions for busi- tries while highlighting the continuing importance of
nesses providing services to more than 700 million monthly export controls for national security, especially given con-
active users is a measure that few companies might actually cerns about China’s development and deployment of AI.
expect to reach, and developers gladly used Llama when it Embracing the development of a stronger U.S. open-model
was considered to be the premier open model available to ecosystem can provide allies and partners in more- and
users. But, coupled with Llama’s restrictions on certain uses less-developed countries with attractive alternatives to
and the improved performance of alternative models, com- China’s models, foster global collaboration and AI innova-
mercial developers might opt to use models in which navi- tion, and promote technological influence abroad while
gating licensing restrictions is most seamless. The United bolstering innovation at home. Combined with attractive
States might need more large firms to loosen their licensing U.S. alternatives to Chinese open models, export controls
restrictions so that the firms can compete reputationally to limit China’s compute capacity both inside and outside
with Chinese open-model companies over time. China could hinder China’s ability to develop and diffuse
Beyond licensing, encouraging and incentivizing the technology that might propagate narratives and disinfor-
further use of U.S. compute infrastructure globally should mation that run counter to U.S. interests.
also play a key role in the U.S. government’s strategy. When More broadly, it is worth remembering that technol-
global developers train and deploy a model—even if the ogy is but one variable in the more complex formula that
model is a derivative of a Chinese open model—it is ben- makes up a country’s soft power. Being seen as a willing
eficial for the United States to encourage the use of U.S. diffuser of AI’s benefits could certainly benefit the United
hardware. Overly limiting access to U.S. compute outside States’ global image, but AI policy will also interact with
other political, economic, and security factors in the larger
equation, many of which could lessen allies’ and partners’
willingness to embrace a U.S. vision for AI.

Notes 20 Meta, “Llama 4 Community License Agreement.”
1 Daniels and Hanna, “China’s Overlooked AI Strategy.” 21 Google AI for Developers, “Gemma Terms of Use.”
2 White House, Winning the Race: America’s AI Action Plan. 22 Wiggers, “‘Open’ AI Model Licenses Often Carry Concerning
Restrictions.”
3 White House, Winning the Race: America’s AI Action Plan, p. 4.
23 Soos, “Apache vs. MIT License.”
4 White House, Winning the Race: America’s AI Action Plan, p. 4.
24 DeepSeek-AI, “MIT License.”
5 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, “Global
25 Moonshot AI, “Kimi K2.”
AI Governance Action Plan.”
6 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, “Global 26 OpenAI, “Introducing gpt-oss.”
AI Governance Action Plan.” 27 Wiggers, “‘Open’ AI Model Licenses Often Carry Concerning
7 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, “Global Restrictions.”
AI Governance Action Plan.” 28 Wiggers, “Sam Altman: OpenAI Has Been on the ‘Wrong Side of His-
8 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, “Global tory’ Concerning Open Source.”
AI Governance Action Plan.” 29 Arcesati and Meinhardt, China’s Open-Source Tech Development:
9 Webster et al., “DigiChina: China’s ‘New Generation Artificial Intel- Insights into a Growing Ecosystem.
ligence Development Plan’ (2017).” 30 Lee, “Navigating the US-China 5G Competition.”
10 Edelman Trust Institute, 2025 Edelman Trust Barometer. 31 Beraja et al., “Exporting the Surveillance State via Trade in AI.”
11 OpenAI, “gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b Model Card”; Miller, 32 Shilov, “China Is Developing Nation-Spanning Network to Sell Sur-
“Open Foundation Models: Implications of Contemporary Artificial plus Data Center Compute Power—Latency, Disparate Hardware Are
Intelligence.” Key Hurdles.”
12 Miller, “Open Foundation Models: Implications of Contemporary 33 Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of Commerce, “Imple-
Artificial Intelligence.” mentation of Additional Export Controls: Certain Advanced Comput-
13 China’s State Council, A Next Generation Artificial Intelligence Devel- ing Items; Supercomputer and Semiconductor End Use; Updates and
Corrections.”
opment Plan.
14 Center for AI Standards and Innovation, Evaluation of DeepSeek AI 34 Pomfret and Pang, “Exclusive: Chinese Researchers Develop AI
Model for Military Use on Back of Meta’s Llama.”
Models.
15 McGuire, China’s AI Chip Deficit: Why Huawei Can’t Catch Nvidia 35 Google and Ipsos, Our Life with AI: The Reality of Today and the
Promise of Tomorrow.
and U.S. Export Controls Should Remain.
16 Synergy Research Group, “Cloud Market Share Trends—Big Three 36 Daniels, Narayanan, and McFaul, “Analyzing the Global AI Gover-
nance Ecosystem.”
Together Hold 63% While Oracle and the Neoclouds Inch Higher.”
17 Hugging Face, homepage. 37 vLLM, “vLLM Large Scale Serving: DeepSeek @ 2.2k tok/s/H200 with
Wide-EP.”
18 Miller, Hoffmann, and Gelles, The Use of Open Models in Research.
38 Rannaberg, “Deep Dive into Censorship of DeepSeek R1 Based
19 Open Source Initiative, “The Open Source Definition (Annotated).” Models.”

39 Menn, “AI Firm DeepSeek Writes Less-Secure Code for Groups China 47 Miller and Gelles, “The NAIRR Pilot: Estimating Compute.”
Disfavors.”
48 Hourihan, Eight Ways Congress Can Help U.S. Researchers Drive AI-
40 White House, Winning the Race: America’s AI Action Plan. Powered Scientific Breakthroughs.
41 Kratsios, “A year ago, policymakers in DC were debating a ban on 49 Google Cloud, “The Next Generation of Startups Are Building on
open weight models. From day one, the Trump administration changed Google Cloud”; AWS Startups, “Apply for Activate Credits.”
course and made clear America needs to offer the best open models for
50 DeepSeek-AI, DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in
innovators to build on and for America to export. Today, our companies
LLMs Via Reinforcement Learning.
are leading.”
42 OpenAI, “Introducing gpt-oss.” 51 Somala, “Ban the H20: Competing in the Inference Age.”
43 Schiffer and Knight, “OpenAI Announces Massive US Government 52 Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of Commerce,” Imple-
mentation of Additional Export Controls: Certain Advanced Comput-
Partnership.”
ing and Semiconductor Manufacturing Items; Supercomputer and
44 Bisht et al., “Open Source in the Age of AI.” Semiconductor End Use; Entity List Modification”; Bureau of Industry
and Security, Department of Commerce, “Implementation of Additional
45 Bisht et al., “Open Source in the Age of AI.”
Export Controls: Certain Advanced Computing Items; Supercomputer
46 National Artificial Intelligence Research Resource Pilot, homepage. and Semiconductor End Use; Updates and Corrections.”

References Edelman Trust Institute, 2025 Edelman Trust Barometer: Trust and the
Crisis of Grievance with Insights for the Technology Sector, undated.
Arcesati, Rebecca, and Caroline Meinhardt, China’s Open-Source Tech
Google, Ipsos, Our Life with AI: The Reality of Today and the Promise of
Development: Insights into a Growing Ecosystem, Mercator Institute for
Tomorrow, .
China Studies, .
Google AI for Developers, “Gemma Terms of Use,” webpage, last
AWS Startups, “Apply for Activate Credits,” webpage, undated. As of
updated March 24, 2025. As of November 5, 2025:
November 6, 2025:

Google Cloud, “The Next Generation of Startups Are Building on
Beraja, Martin, Andrew Kao, David Y. Yang, and Noam Yuchtman,
Google Cloud,” webpage, undated. As of November 6, 2025:
“Exporting the Surveillance State via Trade in AI,” National Bureau of

Economic Research, Working Paper 31676, .
Hourihan, Matt, Eight Ways Congress Can Help U.S. Researchers
Bisht, Ankit, Roger Roberts, Brittany Presten, and Katherine Ottenbreit,
Drive AI-Powered Scientific Breakthroughs, Association of American
“Open Source in the Age of AI,” McKinsey & Company, February 11,
Universities, July 11, 2025.
2025.
Hugging Face, homepage, undated. As of November 5, 2025:
Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of Commerce,

“Implementation of Additional Export Controls: Certain Advanced
Computing and Semiconductor Manufacturing Items; Supercomputer Kratsios, Michael [@mkratsios47], “A year ago, policymakers in DC
and Semiconductor End Use; Entity List Modification,” Federal Register, were debating a ban on open weight models. From day one, the Trump
Vol. 87, No. 197, October 13, 2022. administration changed course and made clear America needs to offer
the best open models for innovators to build on and for America to
Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of Commerce,
export. Today, our companies are leading,” X post, August 5, 2025. As of
“Implementation of Additional Export Controls: Certain Advanced
November 6, 2025:
Computing Items; Supercomputer and Semiconductor End Use; Updates

and Corrections,” Federal Register, Vol. 88, No. 205, October 25, 2023.
Lee, Nicol Turner, “Navigating the US-China 5G Competition,”
Center for AI Standards and Innovation, Evaluation of DeepSeek AI
Brookings Institution, .
Models, National Institute of Standards and Technology, September 30,
2025. McGuire, Chris, China’s AI Chip Deficit: Why Huawei Can’t Catch
Nvidia and U.S. Export Controls Should Remain, Council on Foreign
China’s State Council, A Next Generation Artificial Intelligence
Relations, December 15, 2025.
Development Plan, trans. by Rogier Creemers, Graham Webster, Paul
Triolo, and Elsa Kania, New America, July 20, 2017. Menn, Joseph, “AI Firm DeepSeek Writes Less-Secure Code for Groups
China Disfavors,” Washington Post, September 16, 2025.
Daniels, Owen J., and Hanna Dohmen, “China’s Overlooked AI
Strategy,” Foreign Affairs, July 25, 2025. Meta, “Llama 4 Community License Agreement,” webpage, April 5,
2025. As of November 5, 2025:
Daniels, Owen J., Mina Narayanan, and Cole McFaul, “Analyzing the

Global AI Governance Ecosystem,” 2025 IEEE Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, . Miller, Kyle, “Open Foundation Models: Implications of Contemporary
Artificial Intelligence,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology,
DeepSeek-AI, DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs
March 12, 2024.
Via Reinforcement Learning, arXiv, arXiv:2501.12948v1, January 20,
2025. Miller, Kyle, and Rebecca Gelles, “The NAIRR Pilot: Estimating
Compute,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, May 8, 2024.
DeepSeek-AI, “MIT License,” software license, HuggingFace,
January 20, 2025. As of November 5, 2025: Miller, Kyle, Mia Hoffmann, and Rebecca Gelles, The Use of Open
 Models in Research, Center for Security and Emerging Technology,
.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, “Global Somala, Venkat, “Ban the H20: Competing in the Inference Age: How
AI Governance Action Plan,” July 26, 2025. As of November 5, 2025: Inference Scaling Should Change US AI Strategy,” ChinaTalk, March 7,
 2025. As of November 6, 2025:

Moonshot AI, “Kimi K2,” webpage, . As of November 5, 2025:
inference

Soos, “Apache vs. MIT License,” February 16, 2022.
National Artificial Intelligence Research Resource Pilot, homepage,
undated. As of November 6, 2025: Synergy Research Group, “Cloud Market Share Trends—Big Three
 Together Hold 63% While Oracle and the Neoclouds Inch Higher,”
November 19, 2025.
OpenAI, “gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b Model Card,” August 5, 2025.
vLLM, “vLLM Large Scale Serving: DeepSeek @ 2.2k tok/s/H200 with
OpenAI, “Introducing gpt-oss,” August 5, 2025.
Wide-EP,” blog post, December 17, 2025. As of February 20, 2026:
Open Source Initiative, “The Open Source Definition (Annotated),” 
webpage, last updated February 16, 2024. As of November 5, 2025:
Webster, Graham, Rogier Creemers, Elsa Kania, and Paul Triolo,

“DigiChina: China’s ‘New Generation Artificial Intelligence
Pomfret, James, and Jessie Pang, “Exclusive: Chinese Researchers Development Plan’ (2017),” webpage, August 1, 2017. As of November 5,
Develop AI Model for Military Use on Back of Meta’s Llama,” Reuters, 2025:
November 1, 2024. 
generation-artificial-intelligence-development-plan-2017/
Rannaberg, Carl, “Deep Dive into Censorship of DeepSeek R1 Based
Models,” Medium, March 24, 2025. White House, Winning the Race: America’s AI Action Plan, .
Schiffer, Zoë, and Will Knight, “OpenAI Announces Massive US Wiggers, Kyle, “‘Open’ AI Model Licenses Often Carry Concerning
Government Partnership,” Wired, August 6, 2025. Restrictions,” TechCrunch, March 14, 2025.
Shilov, Anton, “China Is Developing Nation-Spanning Network to Sell Wiggers, Kyle, “Sam Altman: OpenAI Has Been on the ‘Wrong Side of
Surplus Data Center Compute Power—Latency, Disparate Hardware History’ Concerning Open Source,” TechCrunch, January 31, 2025.
Are Key Hurdles,” Tom’s Hardware, July 24, 2025.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Michael J. Mazarr, Anca Agachi, Helen Toner, Igor Mikolic-
Torreira, Kyle Miller, and Mia Hoffmann for their feedback and assistance. We also
thank our reviewers, William Marcellino and Jennifer Staats.

About the Authors
Owen J. Daniels is the associate director of analysis and Andrew W. Marshall Fellow
at Georgetown University’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology and a
Nonresident Senior Fellow at the Atlantic Council. His research focuses on the gov-
ernance of AI and the integration of AI into militaries, among other topics. He holds
a B.A. in International Politics with minors in Arabic language and near eastern
studies from Princeton University.
Hanna Dohmen is a senior research analyst at Georgetown University’s Center for
Security and Emerging Technology and a Nonresident Fellow at the Atlantic Coun-
cil. Her research focuses on U.S. competitiveness in emerging technologies, eco-
nomic statecraft, and U.S. innovation policy, among other topics. She holds a B.S. in
regional and comparative studies of Europe and Asia.

About This Paper stand, anticipate, and prepare to navigate the national security and
geopolitical implications of AGI. The center convenes leading technolo-
In this paper, we aim to inform the United States’ open-source artificial
gists, strategists, economists, political scientists, and outside experts
intelligence (AI) strategy and make recommendations to advance U.S.
to consider the feasibility and effectiveness of prospective AGI-enabled
competitiveness in the context of competition with China. We analyze
capabilities; the domestic and international implications of their use;
the United States’ and China’s respective AI action plans, how AI com-
and the strategies and policies that governments, businesses, and civil
panies in both countries approach open-source AI models, and the
society could adopt to respond to new realities. For more information,
implications for U.S. soft power. We conclude by recommending that
visit 
U.S. policymakers show stronger support for U.S. open-source eco-
systems, recalibrate export controls that account for inference demand,
Funding
and incentivize firms to adopt more permissive licensing practices.
This effort was independently initiated and conducted within the Center
Center for the Geopolitics of AGI for the Geopolitics of Artificial General Intelligence using income from
operations and gifts from RAND supporters, including philanthropic
RAND Global and Emerging Risks is a division of RAND that delivers
gifts made or recommended by DALHAP Investments Ltd., Ergo
rigorous and objective public policy research on the most consequential
Impact, Founders Pledge, Charlottes och Fredriks Stiftelse, Good
challenges to civilization and global security. This work was commis-
Ventures, Longview, and Coefficient Giving. RAND donors and grantors
sioned by the division’s Center for the Geopolitics of Artificial General
have no influence over research findings or recommendations.
Intelligence (AGI), which is committed to helping decisionmakers under-
RAND is a research organization that develops solutions to public policy challenges to help make communities throughout the world safer and
more secure, healthier and more prosperous. RAND is nonprofit, nonpartisan, and committed to the public interest.
Research Integrity
Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality and
objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level of integrity and ethical behavior. To help ensure our research and analysis
are rigorous, objective, and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance process; avoid
both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory
disclosure; and pursue transparency in our research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings
and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more
information, visit 
RAND’s publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors. is a registered trademark.
Limited Print and Electronic Distribution Rights
This publication and trademark(s) contained herein are protected by law. This representation of RAND intellectual property is provided for
noncommercial use only. Unauthorized posting of this publication online is prohibited; linking directly to its webpage on rand.org is encouraged.
Permission is required from RAND to reproduce, or reuse in another form, any of its research products for commercial purposes. For
information on reprint and reuse permissions, please visit 
For more information on this publication, visit 

© 2026 RAND Corporation
PE-A4686-1