Will the One Ring
Hold?
Defense AI in South Korea
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Youngwook Park
DAIO Study 24|21

About the Defense AI Observatory
The Defense AI Observatory (DAIO) at the Helmut Schmidt University in Hamburg
monitors and analyzes the use of artificial intelligence by armed forces. DAIO comprises
three interrelated work streams:
Culture, concept development, and organizational transformation in the context of
military innovation
Current and future conflict pictures, conflict dynamics, and operational experience,
especially related to the use of emerging technologies
Defense industrial dynamics with a particular focus on the impact of emerging
technologies on the nature and character of techno-industrial ecosystems
DAIO is an integral element of GhostPlay, a capability and technology development
project for concept-driven and AI-enhanced defense decision-making in support of fast-
paced defense operations. GhostPlay is funded by the Center for Digital and Technology
Research of the German Bundeswehr (dtec.bw). dtec.bw is funded by the European Union
– NextGenerationEU.
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von

Will the One
Ring Hold?
Defense AI in South Korea
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Youngwook Park
DAIO Study 24|21

About the Author
Youngwook Park is a defense policy expert and chairperson of the Korea Institute of
Defense Technology (KIDET), a private defense think-tank. She conducts research and
consultancy, especially commissioned research for various government agencies, including
the Ministry of National Defense. She is also currently an adjunct professor at the Graduate
School. In particular, she conducted preliminary studies for the MND’s Defense AI Strat-
egy and strategic planning to establish an AI Center and leads an AI education project
for military officers commissioned by the MND. Youngwook Park received her bachelor’s
degree from Seoul National University, where she also received her master’s and doctoral
degrees in European and American history of science and technology. She has worked in
the legislative field as a senior staff member of the Committee of National Defense and
as a director at the Defense Acquisition Program Administration (DAPA). In addition to her
public career, she has lectured at several universities on the history of science and technolo-
gy and defense policy.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Se-Yong Kim, AI Policy Office, MND, Hanyung Jang, and
Heiko Borchert for valuable comments and suggestions on earlier drafts of the paper.
Design
Almasy Information Design Thinking
Imprint
Youngwook Park, Will the One Ring Hold? Defense AI in South Korea. DAIO Study 24/21
(Hamburg: Defense AI Observatory, 2024).
An adapted version of this paper will appear in: Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, and Joseph
Verbovszky (eds.) The Very Long Game. 25 Case Studies on the Global State of Defense AI
(Cham: Springer Nature, forthcoming).
Defense AI Observatory | Chair of Political Theory | Helmut Schmidt University
Holstenhofweg 85 | 22043 Hamburg | T +49 40 6541 2776
 | contact@defenseai.eu | @Defense_AIO
ISSN (online): 2749-5337
ISSN (print): 2749-5345
4 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

Content
1 Summary ..................................................................................................................... 6
2 Thinking About Defense AI ....................................................................................... 8
2.1 South Korea’s National AI Strategy and Policy ..............................................................9
2.2 Defense AI Understanding and Strategy.....................................................................11
3 Developing Defense AI. ........................................................................................... 14
3.1 Evolution of South Korea’s Defense AI Strategy ..........................................................15
3.2 South Korea’s Defense AI Ethics Policy .......................................................................18
4 Organizing Defense AI ............................................................................................. 19
4.1 ROK MND, Military Services, and Adjacent Agencies .................................................20
4.2 Defense Industry ......................................................................................................26
5 Funding Defense AI ................................................................................................. 28
5.1 Korea’s National R&D Budget for AI ...........................................................................29
5.2 South Korea’s Defense Budget and Budget Trends in Defense AI................................30
6 Fielding and Operating Defense AI. ....................................................................... 32
7 Training for Defense AI ............................................................................................ 35
7.1 Defense AI Talent Training Program of the MND ........................................................36
7.2 Defense AI and Simulation-Based Training .................................................................37
8 Conclusion. ................................................................................................................ 39
Literature ...................................................................................................................... 41
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 5

1 Summary
In South Korea, artificial intelligence (AI) stands as a pivotal instrument and a guid-
ing philosophy within the national vision and strategy aimed at spurring economic
revitalization and enhancing competitiveness. The nation’s historical inclination
towards robust state-led initiatives in science, technology, and industrial policies,
coupled with a socio-cultural landscape underpinned by a sophisticated infor-
mation infrastructure, has cultivated widespread public endorsement of AI and
digitalization. This societal embrace significantly bolsters the pursuit of national AI
policies.
Since the launch of the first national AI strategy in 2019, the government strives to
transform the country into an “AI powerhouse,” characterized by AI-driven digital
services of the state and powerful digital companies. This strategic orientation
considers AI as the “One Ring,” from The Lord of the Rings saga, and symbolizes
the government’s endeavor to construct a state-led technological utopia. South
Korean Ministry of National Defense (MND) and its armed forces follow through on
this vision. Therefore, defense AI plays a pivotal role to prepare the armed forces
for the future. Cultivating technologically advanced armed forces that integrate AI
is among the government’s key priorities for defense modernization. This drive by
the government is strengthened by the public’s general acceptance of defense AI
without any doubts regarding its morality or ethics.
The Ministry’s defense AI approach emphasizes a gradual approach that starts
with recognition intelligence, followed by judgment intelligence to culminate with
decision intelligence. In addition, the MND also aims at establishing a new Na-
tional Defense AI Center in 2024 in parallel to strengthening ministry-wide govern-
ance to coordinate all relevant stakeholders and research and development (R&D)
initiatives. Integral to this strategy is the fostering of a collaborative defense AI
ecosystem meant to provide novel impulses to reinvigorate a sclerotic traditional
defense industrial system that suffers from a bifurcated procurement apparatus, a
traditional preference for hardware over software, and limited indigenous defense
AI capacities. There is, however, growing consensus among the country’s civil and
military leadership, that this system needs to be broken up to seize the benefits
of defense AI, leverage informatization and digitalization for the armed forces,
and bring in top-tier civilian talents working on information and communications
technology (ICT).
South Korea’s government backs up its ambition with robust spending on AI
development. The country’s defense R&D budget stood at around KRW5.15tn
(USD3.9bn) in 2023, with 56% devoted to technology development. From 2017
6 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

to 2021, the MND spent around KRW190bn (USD145M) on AI-related technology
development. This amount is set to increase significantly with the MND expect-
ed to spend around KRW100bn (USD77M) alone in 2023. Given the fact that
other ministries also co-fund defense AI development projects, the total amount
is around KRW30bn (USD23M) per year higher than what the defense budget
indicates.
Right now, the MND looks at gradually integrating defense AI into surveillance
and reconnaissance systems, combat systems as well as command and control
(C2) systems. These lines of effort are meant to lead to the development of
complex-manned-unmanned combat system (MUM-CS) and creating a Joint
All-Domain Command and Control System akin to current US initiatives. In addi-
tion, South Korea is exploring the use of defense AI for different tasks like facility
perimeter security, coastal surveillance, the use of unmanned systems, as well as
multi-source image fusion.
In parallel to technology development and insertion, south Korea is placing signifi-
cant emphasis on education aimed at nurturing talent in defense AI and enhancing
the digital proficiency of defense personnel. The MND is engaging in collabora-
tive efforts with academic institutions to cultivate AI specialists and has initiated
a range of AI and software education programs, tailored to various participant
groups. To provide a sustainable framework to advance defense AI, the MND also
cooperates with the Ministry of Science and ICT, which is keen in educating an
AI literate South Korean military. Moreover, the military services have designated
several military pilot units to advance human expertise in using defense AI.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 7

2 Thinking
About
Defense AI
8 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

The foreign policy of President Yoon Seok-yeol, who came into office in 2022, de-
viates from his predecessor by underscoring the significance of a robust U.S.-Re-
public of Korea (ROK) alliance, positioning it as a cornerstone of the nation’s for-
eign and security policy. Additionally, the Yoon administration has pivoted towards
policies that emphasize nuclear energy and industrial rejuvenation, marking a
departure from the preceding government’s focus on green energy initiatives, such
as solar and wind power, and its commitment to de-nuclearization.
Despite these notable shifts on foreign policy, President Yoon continues pursuing
two policy priorities established by previous governments. First, the Yoon ad-
ministration continues to prioritize information and communication technology
(ICT), including AI, as a central pillar of the nation’s strategic vision. In addition,
the overarching strategy of augmenting defense capabilities through AI-driven
scientific and technological advancements largely aligns with the previous govern-
ment’s approach, despite minor differences in emphasis and specific implementa-
tion plans. This continuity in AI-oriented policies reflects a broader historical trend,
where successive South Korean governments have consistently emphasized state-
led science and technology (S&T) and industrial policies as integral components of
their national vision.
While attributing South Korea’s rapid economic growth solely to state-driven
policies may be an oversimplification, it is evident that an active role of the gov-
ernment is considered important for the country’s prosperity. This also explains
why the country’s government, unlike other nations discussed in this volume, puts
more emphasis on actively engaging different ministries in advancing AI to imple-
ment the national vision of economic revitalization, national competitiveness, and
technologically well-equipped armed forces.
2.1 South Korea’s National AI Strategy and Policy
In the early 2000s, the South Korean government embarked on a strategic initi-
ative to harness the potential of IT and digital technologies as catalysts for the
nation’s economic and industrial resurgence. This period marked a concerted
effort by the state to capitalize on the rapid advancements in the digital domain.
The conducive socio-cultural landscape, characterized by a relatively advanced
information infrastructure, and a public attitude favoring the adoption of sophisti-
cated ICT, including AI, facilitated the effective implementation of these state-led
policies.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 9

Shortly after assuming office, the Moon Jae-in administration, in ,
established the 4th Industrial Revolution Committee (4IRC),1 a body designed to
report directly to the President. This committee, integrating ministers from the
Ministry of Science and ICT (MSIT) and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy,
along with private sector experts, was envisioned as a symbolic yet pivotal strate-
gic entity for steering the nation’s S&T policy. The Moon administration identified
the data-network-AI nexus as one of the three primary innovative industries and
launched the country’s first national AI strategy in 2019. Led by the MSIT, this strat-
egy marked the government’s inaugural top-level AI policy guideline and action
plan.2
Under the guiding vision of “Transitioning from an IT to an AI Powerhouse,” the
administration set ambitious targets. These included generating up to KRW455tn
(USD346bn) in economic impact through AI by 2030 and elevating South Korea
to rank among the top ten nations globally in terms of quality of life.3 This strat-
egy also encapsulated the government’s understanding of AI as technology that
replicates human intellectual capabilities in computers, encompassing the ability
to recognize situations, make rational and logical judgments and actions, and exe-
cute emotional and creative functions. Furthermore, in a significant move towards
implementing human-centered AI, the government unveiled ethical standards for
AI.
The new Yoon government replaced the 4IRC with the new Digital Platform
Government Committee to “synergize governmental data with the services of
the private sector, thereby leveraging state-of-the art technologies in AI, cloud
computing, information processing, and networking”.4 The Digital Platform
Government serves as a “control tower,” envisioned to foster collaboration among
citizens, businesses, and the government to address societal challenges and
create new value with the help of a unified digital platform. In , the gov-
ernment unveiled the Implementation Plan for the Digital Platform Government.
This initiative, galvanized by the emergence of hyper-scale AI technologies such as
ChatGPT, aims to digitize the national administrative system and foster industrial
1 In2016,theWorldEconomicForumcoinedtheterm4thIndustrialRevolutionandreferstotechnologicalinnovationinsevenkey
areas:bigdataanalytics,AI,robotics,theInternetofThings,driverlesstransportation(drones,driverlesscars),three-dimension-
alprinting,andnanotechnology.
2 “AnnouncingtheNationalAIStrategy.”MSITwastheleadministry.All18governmentministriesandcommittees,includingthe
MinistryofTrade,IndustryandEnergyandtheMinistryofDefense,participatedindefiningthestrategytogetherwithprivate
expertsfromacademiaandindustry.
3 Atthe2023WorldEconomicForuminDavos,PresidentYoonsaidwithregardtoSouthKorea’sdigitalambition:“TheRepublicof
Koreaisadvancingavisionforadigitalplatformgovernment,aninitiativethatsynergizesgovernmentaldatawiththeservices
offeredbytheprivatesector.Thisendeavordrawsupontheingenuityoftheprivatesectorandleveragesstate-of-the-art
technologiesinAI,cloudcomputing,informationprocessing,andnetworking.Theaimistosubstantiallyenhancethecaliberof
administrativeservicesandestablishacomprehensivesocialsafetynet,allthroughtheimplementationofpioneeringadminis-
trativesolutions.”See:Yoon,“Koreawillbeakeypartneringlobalsupplychains.”
4 Yoon,“Koreawillbeakeypartneringlobalsupplychain.”
10 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

and economic growth by actively leveraging and applying AI technology, thereby
making its benefits tangible for the population.
2.2 Defense AI Understanding and Strategy
In line with the government’s One Ring imaginary, the defense establishment
considers AI an indispensable asset in fortifying military capabilities and readiness
for future conflicts. This positions AI as a central pillar in strategic planning and
operational preparedness, underscoring its significance in shaping a resilient and
responsive military force.
Defense AI plays a key role amid a complex threat picture consisting of the military
challenges posed by North Korea, raising tensions between the United States
and China, pressing geoeconomic concerns related to technological dependence
and insecurity of supply as well as maritime instability that threatens the stability
of the sea lanes of communication across Asia-Pacific that are vital for South
Korea. Therefore, the MND is actively advocating for the integration of AI across
all defense domains as a pivotal component of its national defense strategy. This
strategic direction emphasizes a robust investment in AI-related technologies,
identifying them as potential game changers in shaping the future battlegrounds.
The Ministry is committed to building intelligent defense solutions to enable
highly efficient military operations.
While these AI motives align with those of the United States and other leading
global powers, South Korea’s situation is distinct as the country’s conscript forces
grapple with a declining birth rate amid complex security dynamics. Thus, the
country’s military emphasizes the role of AI in advancing the technology savviness
of its armed forces while at the same time compensating for shrinking personnel.
As this dual approach is broadly accepted by South Korea’s society, the country
benefits from broad political and societal support in advancing defense AI.
In the most recent iteration of the National Defense Science and Technology Basic
Plan (2023-2027), the MND has delineated its strategic framework for defense
R&D investment. This comprehensive plan identifies thirty critical defense strate-
gic technologies across ten key fields, including AI, human-computer interaction,
cyber and network communications, quantum technologies, and space. These
technologies have been prioritized based on criteria like strategic significance, po-
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 11

tential for innovation, urgency, and the possibility of acquiring these technologies.5
The plan divides the main AI technologies into four areas:
Intelligent battlefield situational awareness and understanding refers to AI
technology based on models and analyses that fuses, learns, generates
information, and makes interferences based on data and information collected
from diverse battlefield assets.
Intelligent unified command and control refers to technology that enables
decision-driven warfare by suggesting optimal measures based on battlefield
situation analysis and judgment results with AI for effective command deci-
sions in tomorrow’s complex battlefield environment.
Logistical support for smart military power includes technology that is used to
support scientific and efficient combat sustainment by intelligently processing
vast amounts of data generated from various logistic support activities such
as advanced weapon system operation, supplies, ammunition, transportation
support, personnel, administration, and medical care through AI.
Finally, there are technologies related to developing and preparing future
defense AI solutions (e.g., data management, high-performance computing).
These support technologies have been identified as a critical area of govern-
ment investment.
The MND perceives defense AI as a dynamic and evolving concept and thus
proposes to develop the respective capability in three stages.6 Cognitive intelli-
gence constitutes the first stage with AI for surveillance, reconnaissance, and early
warning systems. While these systems are considered “initially autonomous,” AI
solutions at the second stage advance to “partially autonomous” capabilities.
At the third and final stage AI solutions transition to “judgmental intelligence,”
which entails the use of AI for complex manned-unmanned combat systems. Most
mature technologies would pave the ground for “fully autonomous” systems that
encapsulate perception, judgement, and decision intelligence. Right now, how-
ever, South Korea’s defense AI capabilities and capacities are nascent and mainly
focus on the first stage. While it is challenging to predict the time needed to reach
and operationalize the final stage effectively, R&D investments are concurrently
being channeled towards the development of both the second-stage judgmental
intelligence systems and the third-stage decisional intelligence systems.
In advancing this ambitious three-stage agenda, the South Korean MND faces a
particular challenge that stems from the country’s regulatory framework for data
and information security, that is excessively rigid for historical reasons. Consensus
is growing that overzealous secrecy practices and regulatory measures by the
5 NationalDefenseScienceandTechnologyFrameworkPlan,p.31.
6 MNDWorkReport2022,p.6.
12 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

military and government agencies are currently impeding the efficient manage-
ment, sharing, and use of military data. This, in turn, could potentially constrain
the defense application and expansion of AI, which relies on data. The lack of a
well-structured and integrated military data management system has been consist-
ently highlighted, particularly in terms of data visibility and accessibility, which are
critical for effective data utilization.
The MND has initiated projects to address current problems, yet challenges
persist as responsibility for data management and data sharing remain scattered
across the ministry. The absence of a responsible organization for this task and
the underfunding of the respective projects have raised concerns and skepticism
regarding the feasibility of establishing a robust data and AI infrastructure. A key
step toward ameliorating the situation was taken in 2022 with the setup of the new
Defense Data Management Committee aimed at forging consensus on the need
for defining a future defense data policy and advancing data-driven defense inno-
vation. To this purpose efforts are underway to establish a data collection, sharing,
and management system, as well as data quality management, by appointing data
officers for each agency.7
7 “1stDefenseDataManagementCommitteeheld.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 13

3 Developing
Defense AI
14 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

3.1 Evolution of South Korea’s Defense AI Strategy
Since 2019, the South Korean government has embarked on the formulation of a
comprehensive national AI strategy, specifically focusing on its application in the
defense sector. The strategy sets out the following goals:8
Enable efficient and reliable national security and defense by intelligentizing
and advancing core defense mission and tasks based on AI and data.
Build an intelligent platform to develop and support AI services common to
the entire military services; rapidly analyze and process large-scale defense
data; develop and support common services such as medical, military, and
administrative enterprise.
Establish an intelligent data center for the standardization, accumulation, and
sharing of defense data and accelerate the development of intelligent tech-
nologies that support the command and control (C2) system with respect to
collaboration and determination.
South Korea’s defense AI strategy development process emerged bottom-up
with the ROK Army as the main driver. In 2019, the ROK Army stood up the AI
Research and Development Center within the Training and Doctrine Command
to plan for the use of AI across C4I, intelligence, firepower, maneuver, protection,
and operational sustainment.9 One year later the Army unveiled the 2022-2033
Army AI Development Promotion Strategy and established an AI governance
system. In parallel, the ROK Army also introduced the Army TIGER 4.0 vision to
transform ground forces by using AI and digital technologies as well as pushing for
experiments with a focus on manned-unmanned cooperation to create hyper-in-
telligent, hyper-connected, and hyper-converged ground forces.10 Bold ambitions,
however, were difficult to implement, among other things, because of frequent
changes at the Army Chief of Staff that somewhat dampened the momentum. But
despite these challenges, the Army has historically been at the forefront in leading
major defense and military policies given the size of its personnel and the service’s
resource power.
In 2021, based on preliminary studies by the Korea Institute of Defense Technolo-
gy (KIDET),11 the ROK Army’s initial impulse was backed up by the first formalized
AI strategy and plan of the MND. In anticipation of troop reductions and to revo-
lutionize the future battlefield, the MND formulated a strategy for the systematic
8 ROKNationalStrategyforArtificialIntelligence,pp.34-35.
9 Gook,“ArtificialIntelligenceTechnologyandApplicationCasesbyIndustry,”p.22.
10 “AI-basedFutureCombatSystemArmyTIGER4.0;”“’ArmyTIGER,’agroundcombatsystemimplementingadvancetechnology,
roarsasthefutureArmy’s4thgenerationcombatpower.”
11 Parketal.,ResearchonDefenseAIDevelopmentPlan.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 15

application of AI across the defense sector. This strategy embraces innovation, the
sharing and collective use of data, and collaboration via a public-private ecosys-
tem as its three core values and lists several implementation tasks (Table 1).12 With
this strategy, the MND put a key emphasis on developing and operating a data
platform to collect and share usable data, thereby overcoming barriers stemming
from disjunct data management systems and regulations. To this purpose, the
strategy foresaw a comprehensive revision of existing regulations to focus on the
use of data, dismantling inter-agency silos, fostering a culture of data sharing,
progressively establishing platforms including data portals, and enhancing the
Defense Data Commission to establish defense data governance.
Table 1: Korean MND Defense AI Strategy and Implementation Tasks
Core Value Execution Strategy Implementation Tasks
1. Innovation BuilddefenseAIexecution • OrganizeDefenseAICouncil
(Transformtheway system(establishmentofa • EstablishdedicatedAIde-
thatdriveAIacross dedicatedAIdepartment) partmentandestablishment
theboard) ofrolesforeachagency
2.Sharing Discover&SuggestUsers • Discoverlarge-scalemilitary
(Createanewpara- Requirement and turn into needsforcomprehensiveAI
digmforsharingand developmentprogramsforfull- utilization
utilizingdata) scaleAIutilization(createeco • Strategiccommercialization
systemandpromotecoreand aroundcoreandleading
3.Collaboration pioneeringprojects) businesses
(BuildaDefenseAI • CreateadefenseAIecosys-
innovationecosys- temtoactivelyutilizecivilian
temwithcivilianand technologies
militarypartners)
EstablishanInnovative • Establishcustomized
AcquisitionSystemforRapid acquisitionsystemforrapid
AdoptionofAI(RapidAcquisi- adoptionofAI
tionSystemImprovement) • Improvethecurrentacquisi-
tionandoperationsystem
Source:StrategicPlanforDefenseArtificialIntelligence,p.6.
12 StrategicPlanforDefenseArtificialIntelligence.
16 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

Since its inception in 2022, the current government has championed the goal of
fostering robust armed forces with the help of Defense Innovation 4.0 and AI.13 To
further expand the use of defense AI, the MND has presented a phased approach,
which encompasses the step-by-step intelligentization of surveillance and recon-
naissance systems, combat systems, and C2 systems, taking into consideration
current levels of AI maturity. In this regard, the MND has formulated a comprehen-
sive defense AI governance roadmap, which includes appointing a Chief Defense
AI Officer to oversee and coordinate AI tasks across all services, the Defense
Acquisition Program Administration (DAPA), and the respective defense research
organizations. Furthermore, the MND wants to establish a National Defense AI
Center by 2024 to facilitate a robust top-down defense AI development approach.
At the same time, the MND also puts significant emphasis on fostering an open
and collaborative public-private defense AI ecosystem to help address the de-
fense ecosystem’s most pressing shortfalls that will be discussed below.
In view of advancing South Korea’s AI-enabled military forces, MUM-CS play a
pivotal role. To build these systems, the three-stage process discussed above
provides the general framework.14 In the first phase, the MND’s roadmap proposes
implementing a system centered on remote control, followed by demonstrating
an autonomous system in the second phase, and expanding the deployment of
systems with semi-autonomous capability, eventually transitioning to fully autono-
mous systems in the third phase. Moreover, the second phase aims at implement-
ing perceptual intelligence capabilities involving the promotion of an unmanned
surveillance system through pilot projects, creating an AI-enabled intelligent
surveillance perimeter system using drones and robots. In the final phase, the
goal is to execute the Joint All-Domain Command and Control System (JADC2),
based on mature judgmental intelligence. This includes establishing an AI-based
C2 system that can optimally implement joint all-domain operations on the future
battlefield, integral to the third phase of Defense Innovation 4.0. This approach
shall be implemented via a step-by-step plan to operate pilot units for each mili-
tary service, identify the needs of future target systems, and spread AI systems to
all units through evaluation, supplementation, and verification.
In sum it can be said that the current government has significantly advanced
its commitment to defense AI by translating abstract propositions into specific
implementation goals and frameworks. The ambition is bold and more concrete
than in the past. However, developing and deploying the envisioned MUM-CS will
remain challenging given current levels of maturity of defense AI available in South
Korea and the need to further refine adjacent technologies for unmanned opera-
13 MNDWorkReport2022,pp.6-7.
14 MND.Undated.DefenseInnovation4.0,FosteringRobustArmedForcesofAIS&T.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 17

tions, autonomy, robust communication network infrastructures, and more general
advancements in comprehensive battlefield digitization.
3.2 South Korea’s Defense AI Ethics Policy
In , the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Korea (MFA), in collaboration
with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, hosted the inaugural
Responsible AI in the Military Domain Summit (REAIM) 2023 in The Hague. The
Summit’s final Call to Action15 (REAIM 2023) emphasized the need for responsible
AI in the defense context but also raised concerns that undue emphasis on addi-
tional regulations might hinder technological progress and pose risks to advancing
AI-enabled defense capabilities. This summit, initially proposed by the Nether-
lands during the 2022 South Korea-Netherlands Summit, marked the first interna-
tional conference dedicated to the responsible use of AI in military operations and
provided a platform for Park Jin, Korea’s Minister of Foreign Affairs, to underline
the country’s ambition in shaping the international defense AI ethics agenda.
Despite South Korea’s international engagement in defense AI ethics, the current
government’s domestic digital platform policy appears insufficient to address
the ethical and regulatory challenges posed by AI. The implementation strategy
largely focuses on regulatory technologies and services centered on privacy and
personal data protection, seemingly neglecting the fundamental ethical questions
raised by hyper-scale AI. This approach indicates a potential dilution of ethical
considerations compared to the previous government’s AI policy. Furthermore,
South Korea’s “Bill on Fostering the AI Industry and Creating a Foundation for
Trust,” which is poised for enactment,16 adopts a permissive and post-regulatory
approach rather than setting clear standards and robust oversight. This has failed
to alleviate concerns among some progressive intellectuals and civil society
organizations.
Inter-ministerial collaboration also presents challenges. While the MFA plays a
central role in AI ethics, the lack of cohesive cooperation with the MSIT, responsi-
ble for AI technology and service promotion, and the MND, the principal defense
AI entity, is apparent. Additionally, there seems to be a disconnect between
academic and expert groups concerning the promotion, regulation, and ethics of
AI, indicating weaknesses in South Korea’s national governance concerning the
accountability and regulation of defense AI.
15 “REAIM2023CalltoAction.”
16 “BillonFosteringtheAIIndustryandCreatingaFoundationforTrustProposaldate1July2021.”
18 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

4 Organizing
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 19

4.1 ROK MND, Military Services,
and Adjacent Agencies
ROK MND
Based on the MND’s AI strategy, the ministry plays a key role in developing the
implementation plans needed to synchronize the defense AI activities of the
military services and other MND agencies. Within the Office of the Minister and
its affiliated organizations, the Intelligent Information Policy Bureau, the Military
Force Policy Bureau, and the recently established Advanced Forces Planning
Bureau are engaged in defense AI activities, but a central organization responsible
for defense AI is missing:
The Intelligent Information Policy Bureau, tasked with overseeing intelligent
information policy, is theoretically positioned to assume a central role in imple-
menting defense AI-related policies as the designated authority on data and
software policies, AI infrastructure of intelligentization platforms, and cloud
solutions. However, its structural detachment from the weapon system acquisi-
tion sector poses significant challenges, undermining its potential to function
as a control tower capable of coordinating and supervising all AI tasks and
organizations, including the budgeting of program of records for intelligent
weapon systems.
The Military Force Policy Bureau, responsible for overseeing Defense Force
Policy, including Armed Forces Augmentation for which DAPA is accountable,
does not directly intersect with the work scope of the Intelligent Information
Policy Bureau of MND.
Moreover, the recently established Advanced Forces Planning Bureau, respon-
sible for overseeing the “AI and manned & unmanned combat system project”
operates independently from the other two offices.
The MND’s leadership acknowledges the shortfalls of the current governance
structure, but the flexibility needed for reorganization is constrained by relevant
laws. Nonetheless, the MND is preparing to establish a new National Defense AI
Center (NDAIC) in 2024. Based on the suggestions of KIDET, a private think tank,
the center would be modeled after the US Department of Defense’s Chief Digital
and Artificial Intelligence Office (CDAO) and the UK Defense AI Center (DAIC).17
Expected to streamline existing organizations and improving better coordination
17 Parketal.,ResearchonHowtoEstablishandOperateaDefenseAICenter.
20 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

among different defense stakeholders, critical voices have put forward fundamen-
tal questions regarding the identity and organizational structure of the NDAIC and
its roles and responsibilities.
ROK Army
As outlined above, the ROK Army has been the frontrunner on defense AI. The
Army’s leadership role in Korea’s AI strategy is intrinsically linked to its historical
prominence as the central force in the nation’s governance. This has contributed to
the Army’s substantial size and its influential position within the defense command
system.18 The Army’s proactive stance led to the establishment of a dedicated
unit focused on studying the incorporation of AI and big data, pivotal technolo-
gies of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. These studies culminated in the launch
of the Army TIGER 4.0 initiatives.19 In 2020, marking a significant milestone, the
ROK Army pioneered the development of an AI promotion strategy, derived from
the Army TIGER 4.0 initiative, which is a component of the broader i-Army 2030’
vision.20
The action plan for Army TIGER 4.0 envisioned the creation of an army that is
hyper-intelligent, hyper-connected, and hyper-converged. The initial phase of this
plan advocated for combat trials and the deployment of unmanned and manned
operations involving critical combat vehicles, including drones and unmanned
aerial vehicles. The strategy entailed a gradual implementation and augmentation
of AI-driven unmanned and manned systems across various military divisions and
brigades. Many of the ROK Army’s plans, particularly those focusing on unmanned
and manned systems, are now integral to the MND’s primary AI-related advance-
ment initiatives.
In 2021, the Army Training and Doctrine Command released its comprehensive AI
Integration Roadmap 2022-2033 in 2021.21 The roadmap established incremental
objectives for the Army’s intelligence evolution, aligned AI concepts with the Joint
Staff’s long-term armament system evolution trajectory, delineated requirements
18 Whilethebalanceandjointnessorientationamongthearmedforceslargelyalignwiththemilitarystrategiesofdeveloped
nations,effortsatthegovernmentlevelhavebeendirectedtowardsreducingtheratioandproportionoftheArmy’sforcesize
andnumberofcommandersaspartofdefensereforminitiatives.Nevertheless,thisleadershiproleisalsoanaturaloutcome,
giventhecurrentstateoftheROKarmedforces,whereotherservices,includingtheJointChiefsofStaff,arestillinthenas -
centstagesofsecuringdedicatedpersonnelandestablishingneworganizationsforfuture-orientedtasks.
19 ArmyTIGER:TransformativeInnovationofGroundforcesEnhancedbythe4thindustryRevolutiontechnology,ROKArmy
20 ArmyArtificialIntelligenceDevelopmentPromotionStrategy.i-Army2030istheArmy’s“brandname”formilitaryAI,avision
foradvancingAIcapabilitiestobuildaHyper-Intelligent,Hyper-Connected,andHyper-ConvergentArmy.Hyperintelligencere-
ferstoAIthatcanthink,learn,develop,andcomputebetterthanhumanintelligencecan.Hyperconnectivityreferstodifferent
typesofdevicessuchassensors,computers,communicationdevices,androbotsareconnectedthroughcommunication.
HyperconvergenceencompassesactivitiessuchasbuildingatechnologyecosystemtoconvergeadvancedAItechnologies
fromindustry,academia,andresearchintomilitarycapabilities.Byrealizingi-Army2020,mechanicaltasksareentrustedtoAI,
humansperformmorehumantasks,andtheArmywillbemore“human-centric.”
21 AIIntegrationRoadmap2022-2033.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 21

for intelligence systems, and outlined a comprehensive plan for AI platforms, AI
human resources, and data.22
The establishment of the AI Research and Development Center within the Train-
ing & Doctrine Command in 2019 marked a pivotal moment for the Army. This
center, which has been folded into the AI and Drone-bot Combat Development
Center, was instrumental in identifying future AI-enabled system requirements,
forging collaborative relationships with private industry and research institute, and
establishing the AI Policy Division under the Policy Division to develop medium
and long-term defense AI policies. Although the impact of these endeavors has
not yet been objectively evaluated, it is evident that the ROK Army’s strategic
commitment to using AI as a key means for force transformation remains steadfast
and unimpeded. As of the first half of 2023, the Army boasts a robust cadre of
50 specialized AI personnel working at the Headquarters and Training & Doctrine
Command.23
ROK Air Force
In parallel with the MND, the ROK Air Force has formulated its Air Force AI De-
velopment Plan for 2021.24 Two years earlier, the Air Force Innovation Promotion
Plan laid the groundwork by envisioning the Smart Air Force Power concept25 to
leverage emerging technologies. The service’s defense AI plan is geared towards
creating a mission environment that aligns with the Air Force’s vision of future
warfare by identifying and implementing defense AI across all Air Force activities,
comprehensively embracing the management of mission data as a robust AI
foundation and providing guidelines for effective human recourses development
in support of defense AI.26
In line with the MND’s AI strategy, the ROK Air Force is mainly interested in using
defense AI in combination with space-based surveillance and reconnaissance
systems, big data-driven intelligent command, and decision support systems as
well as uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAVs).27 Given the fact that many of the ROK Air
Force’s flying platforms are procured from overseas, predictive maintenance of
aerial assets constitutes an additional priority, which is, at least for the moment,
more pronounced than integrating AI into developing aerospace platforms. Fur-
22 FutureNationalDefense2030TechnologyStrategy,pp.13-15;“’ArmyTIGER,’agroundcombatsystemimplementingadvance
technology,roarsasthefutureArmy’s4thgenerationcombatpower.”
23 Interview,10March2023.
24 AirForceArtificialIntelligenceDevelopmentPlan.
25 TheAirForceInnovationPromotionPlan;“AirForcecompleteshigh-techmilitarywithsmartinnovationinthe4thIndustrial
Revolution;“TheAirForceInnovationPromotionPlan.”
26 Ko,“Inanerawherewarfarecannotbeconductedwithoutspace…wemustsecureourownreconnaissanceandsurveillance
capabilities.”
27 AirForceArtificialIntelligenceDevelopmentPlan;Park,“AirForcebuildskillwebcombiningAI,drones.”
22 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

thermore, the Air Force has historically managed data in the logistics domain with
a high degree of systematization, leading to a more systematic and rapid adoption
of AI in this area compared to other branches of the military.
While the Air Force’s plans for defense AI seem clear, its organizational setup
remains complex due to overlapping responsibilities among various departments:
The Future Planning Center, functioning under the Policy Office, engages in
foundational research on concepts and strategies. In parallel, the New Tech-
nology Policy Division is tasked with the development of pertinent policies and
strategies, while the Intelligent Information Technology Division is charged with
crafting data-related policies and systems. The Planning and Management Gen-
eral Staff plays a crucial role in pinpointing and commercializing applications for
AI across the entire spectrum of the Air Force, laying the groundwork for AI, and
steering the course for AI-focused human resource development and structural
improvements.
Looking ahead, the Air Force envisions establishing the Air Force AI Center by
2025. Currently, the number of personnel engaged in AI-related tasks is estimated
to be around 30, with a focus on software policy for technological applications,
primarily centered at the headquarters. This envisaged expansion and structuring
signify a concerted effort to consolidate and enhance the Air Force’s capabilities in
the realm of artificial intelligence.
ROK Navy and Marine Corps
The Navy Vision 2045, published in 2021, presents a demanding vision for the
intelligentization of the naval forces and the Marine Corps, which is part of the
Navy.28 In line with the sister services, the strategy emphasizes the goal of a
SMART Navy that leverages emerging technologies. The vision identified five
core AI capabilities alongside plans to establish a foundational infrastructure for
defense AI, including expert training and data management.29 SMART Navy un-
derlines the ambition to enhance naval weapon systems, inter alia, by integrating
manned-unmanned combat capabilities, using emerging technologies to operate
under a shrinking number of seamen, and advancing the operation of a cost-ef-
fective naval force. The Navy envisions defense AI to play a key role across these
three goals.30
On the way to become a SMART Navy, the service established the Future Innova-
tion Research Center in 2020, dedicated to exploring the development and ap-
28 DirectionofIntelligentizationofNavalBattlefieldFunctions.
29 Ahn,“Implementationof‘NavyVision2045’and‘DefenseReform2.ONavyPromotionPlan’.”
30 Park,ResearchonDefenseAIDevelopmentPlan,pp.7-8.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 23

plication of new technologies, including AI. In 2023, the Navy expanded its focus
by establishing a specialized AI division within the Navy Headquarters’ Intelligent
Information Technology Department. Concurrently, the Marine Corps formed
the Intelligence and Information Technology Division at its headquarters, tasked
with developing AI policy and managing related operations. Among the military
services, the Navy currently maintains the smallest AI workforce. Additionally, it is
poised to establish a dedicated data organization to centralize and manage naval
data, integrating existing software technology and data-related entities such as
the Information System Management Corps and the Ship and Aircraft Software
Support Center.
ROK Joint Chief of Staff
As of today, the Joint Chief of Staff (JCS) lacks a department exclusively dedicated
to AI, but two departments deal with AI-related tasks. The High-Tech Power Di-
vision outlines future warfare requirements based on advanced technologies and
thus also identifies future defense AI needs. The Advanced Technology Force Test
and Evaluation Division tests and evaluates technologies relevant for intelligenti-
zation and thus also looks at defense AI. As outlined above, defense AI strategy
development has traditionally followed a bottom-up logic in South Korea. This
contrasts with a top-down methodology promoted by the MND or the JCS. This
existing dynamic continues to pose challenges to the establishment of compre-
hensive defense AI governance and a centralized control tower system.
Defense Acquisition Program Administration (DAPA)
Under the overarching supervision of the MND, DAPA operates as an independ-
ent government ministry, as delineated by the Defense Acquisition Program Act.
DAPA bears responsibility for the acquisition of weapons systems, R&D program-
ming and budgeting, acquisition project management, and defense industrial
policy. Consequently, the successful execution of the defense AI strategy is contin-
gent upon DAPA’s proactive engagement and commitment to developing AI-ap-
plied intelligentization systems within the defense R&D and acquisition process.
In 2021, DAPA unveiled its own AI strategy, designed to innovatively enhance in-
telligence capabilities by integrating AI technology into weapon systems.31 Efforts
are underway to prioritize budget allocation for AI technology development and
the R&D of intelligent systems. DAPA’s AI strategy is aligned with the MND AI
policy direction.
31 StrategyforApplicationofArtificialIntelligenceinWeaponSystems.
24 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

Given DAPA’s independence, the military services are not directly involved in
weapon system acquisition programs, which poses a specific challenge for the
MND’s intelligentization ambition. Should DAPA not act swiftly on allocating budg-
ets and ensuring an adequate project management framework for each weapon
system, the MND’s ambitious intelligentization plans and its defense AI agenda
will remain elusive. In addition, the current division of responsibilities foresees
DAPA overseeing development and acquisition and the MND, together with
Defense Logistics, managing acquisition policy including commercial products
relevant for intelligentization. This bifurcated system hinders the full adoption of
AI, that blurs the lines between traditional hardware-centric weapon systems and
new software-based modifications and upgrades. Consensus is growing that this
split needs to be addressed, yet specific measures and roadmaps to alleviate the
situation remain to be adopted.
Agency for Defense Development (ADD)
The ADD, a government-funded research entity operating under the aegis of
DAPA, has historically managed R&D projects pertaining to weapon system
development and technology. Although the ADD has demonstrated leadership in
conventional military technology fields, its competitiveness in AI and ICT, predom-
inantly developed in the private sector, has been perceived as relatively limited.
Noteworthy improvements have been undertaken since 2021 with the foundation
of the AI Autonomy Center. The center’s primary mission is to research AI core
technologies essential for the development of intelligent weapon systems. This
includes conducting R&D on core technologies integral to intelligent weapon
systems, such as AI common architecture, situation recognition, judgment intel-
ligence, collaborative intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance intelligence,
and the development of multi-source image fusion systems. In 2023, the scope of
the center was broadened to include autonomy technology.
Research Institutes
In 2023, the Korea Institute for Defense Analysis (KIDA), a government-funded
research institute under the auspices of the MND, inaugurated the Defense Data
Analysis Center to advance defense data analysis and support. In addition, the
center conducts policy research on defense data, data construction management
support, data quality management, and utilization support.
Outside the MND several government-funded research institutes contribute to
defense AI. For instance, the Electronics & Telecommunications Research Institute
(ETRI), an ICT technology research entity, is engaged in AI technology develop-
ment and utilization projects. Similarly, the National Information Society Agency
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 25

(NIA), primarily responsible for digital and intelligentization projects in the public
sector, is involved in AI development projects and infrastructure construction in
the defense domain.
Despite playing an important role in South Korea’s civil-military AI ecosystem,
many civil research institutes lack a comprehensive understanding of the defense
sector and the armed forces long-term needs. In addition, top-tier academic
research institutes and experts that provide world-leading ICT expertise are
reluctant to engage on defense. In their view, the defense market is unattractive
because it is limited in size and intellectual property rights cannot be used freely.
Overcoming these problems will be essential for civil research institutes to assume
a broader role in future defense AI projects and policies.
4.2 Defense Industry
South Korean defense R&D predominantly operates within an insular framework,
principally involving the ADD and select defense institutions. The current system is
considered excessively insular, inefficient, and unappealing due to its low prof-
itability. Consequently, there is growing consensus that the ecosystem needs to
be adapted for the country’s armed forces to acquire innovative technologies for
future capabilities. This prompts the need to open the existing ecosystem towards
fostering synergies with non-traditional partners in the private sector.
In South Korea, dominant AI technology and industry players like Naver,32 Kakao,33
Samsung,34 LG,35 and SK36 show limited interest in defense projects. This, coupled
with the fact that new companies and startups are still maturing, results in a rela-
tively small pool of private AI industry groups available for participation in defense
projects. Moreover, the military and ADD’s requirements for defense domain
expertise and system integration capabilities further narrow the field of eligible
private new technology companies, constraining extensive collaboration between
defense and private sectors.
Despite these challenges and although defense companies generally prefer to
manage projects involving AI and autonomous technologies in-house, the en-
gagement of private actors is on the rise. Currently, projects involving AI integra-
tion in South Korean weapons system are typically undertaken as Core Technology
32 Formoreinformation,see:
33 Formoreinformation,see:
34 Formoreinformation,see:
35 Formoreinformation,see:
36 Formoreinformation,see:
26 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

Development or Dual-Use Technology Development projects, rather than focusing
on System Integration Development Steps. To participate in these projects, AI
ventures, startups, and private new technology companies are primarily contrib-
uting as lower-tier suppliers or contract research organizations to development
projects initiated by the ADD or defense system companies. For example,37
DeepX38 has recently been selected as the prime to design and prototype AI
semiconductors intended for use in future battlefield surveillance drones.
SELVAS AI39 is developing an AI-based military medical system.
Human ICT40 and Davio focus on computer vision for surveillance and
reconnaissance.
CTI Lab41 is an important player in the cybersecurity sector.
WiseNut42 offers solutions for decision-making support along with SaltLux,43
42Maru,44 and Konan Technology,45 which engage in developing large lan-
guage models (LLM).
Although numerous defense R&D stakeholders hope for a significant transforma-
tion of South Korea’s closed defense industrial ecosystem in favor of closer pub-
lic-private cooperation and easier access to defense projects by innovative com-
panies, change will hardly materialize soon. Nevertheless, the government’s firm
policy intention as well as the growing interest of innovative companies to engage
on defense are signs of hope for gradual change in the medium to long-term.
37 Overviewbasedon:Interview,28November2023.
38 Formoreinformation,see:
39 Formoreinformation,see:
40 Formoreinformation,see:
41 Formoreinformation,see:
42 Formoreinformation,see:
43 Formoreinformation,see:
44 Formoreinformation,see:
45 Formoreinformation,see:
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 27

5 Funding
Defense AI
28 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

5.1 Korea’s National R&D Budget for AI
As highlighted above, state-led science, technology, and industry policies play
a key role in South Korea. The MSIT is responsible for policy formulation in S&T
and plays a pivotal role in shaping and implementing the nation’s comprehensive
R&D budget. Moreover, the government’s industrial strategies, orchestrated by
the Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy, exert considerable influence on the
market and the industry landscape. Consequently, it is not surprising that govern-
ment-funded research institutes play a pivotal role in the national S&T system. This
encompasses over forty state-funded research institutes in S&T and engineering
fields, including entities such as ADD, in addition to thirty institutes focused on
humanities and social sciences. These institutes operate predominantly on national
R&D funding and fall under the oversight and supervision of relevant government
ministries, chiefly the MSIT, in alignment with their respective research domains.
In 2023, the South Korean government invested a total of KRW30.7tn (USD23.5bn)
in state-run research institutes and various science and technology fields.46 As part
of this budget, around KRW1.43tn (USD1bn) has been earmarked for R&D on ICT,
with around 50% directed at AI initiatives. Furthermore, investments in cybersecu-
rity (KRW165.3bn or USD126M) and other digital technologies such as AI-centric
semiconductors, quantum technology, metaverse, 5G, and 6G are on par with
the funding allocated to AI.47 Defense R&D accounted for 16.6% of the KRW5.1tn
(USD3.9bn) in total government R&D, ranking third after the MSIT and the Ministry
of Trade, Industry & Energy.
Recently, the efficiency and competitiveness of these government-funded research
institutes has been criticized. Thus, the government, for the first time, decided to
bring down the 2024 R&D budget by 14% to KRW21.5tn (USD16.5bn). While the
ICT budget will be cut by 21% to KRW1.1tn (USD844M), the budget on R&D for AI
will be increased by 4.5% to KRW37.1bn (USD565M).
46 KeyFeaturesofthe2023NationalR&DBudget,p.3.
47 ICTR&DProgram:2023KoreanGovernmentR&DProgram,p.5;“TotalinvestmentofKRW1.429trillioninICTR&Din2023.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 29

5.2 South Korea’s Defense Budget and Budget
Trends in Defense AI
After several years of continued growth, South Korea’s defense spending culmi-
nated at KRW57.1tn (USD43.4bn) in 2023.48 The MND spends around 40% of the
budget on personnel, 30% on force maintenance, and 30% on force moderniza-
tion (MND 2023a: 4). Last year, defense R&D accounted for 9.1% of the budget
or KRW5.1tn (USD3.9bn). 56% were spend to defense technology development
and 21% or KRW1.4tn (USD1bn) has been earmarked for weapon systems
development.
South Korea’s defense R&D budget delineates priority investments across ten
domains, encompassing thirty defense strategic technologies, which include AI,
MUM-CS, and space. Like many other nations, the MND does not disclose an
aggregate defense AI budget as spending on defense AI is part of many differ-
ent program and budget lines. Scrutinizing the defense R&D budget yields the
following results:
The MND allotted KRW734.7bn (USD558M) to the defense informatization
budget in 2023. This also includes unspecified spending on data handling and
cloud AI infrastructure.49
From 2017 to 2021 the MND has spent round KRW190bn (USD145M) on
AI-related technology development.50 This budget was set to increase with
spending in 2023 alone reaching KRW100bn (USD77M).51
As of 2022, around KRW61bn (USD47M) was invested in ten strategic defense
technologies including AI as part of the defense technology development
program. Of this amount, amount, around KRW30bn (USD23M) was directed
towards AI technology projects.52
In parallel the MND is committed to increase investments in AI and unmanned
systems technology. To this purpose, the ministry has formulated a plan to
increase the current level of R&D funding on these technologies to KRW350bn
(USD268M) per year until 2025 and to KRW1tn (USD767M) per year until 2030,
albeit without specifying the budget share of defense AI.53
48 OverviewoftheFiscalYear2023MNDBudgetandFundingPlan:3.ROKMND,p.3
49 Ibid.,p.9.
50 DefenseAIStrategyReport,p.3.
51 OverviewoftheFiscalYear2023MNDBudgetandFundingPlan:3.ROKMND,p.9.
52 NationalDefenseScienceandTechnologyFrameworkPlan2023-2027,pp.50-51.
53 Chung,“AI,thegame-changerofthefuturebattlefield,”p.12.
30 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

Overall, these sums seem modest given the defense AI ambitions discussed
above. But caution is at place as other ministries, primarily the MSIT, support the
MND in co-funding defense AI. To this purpose, both ministries signed a memo-
randum of understanding in 2021 and have since engaged in funding cooperation
projects. Since 2020, MSIT has allocated around KRW200-300bn (USD154-230M)
per year towards the Munition and Military Supplies Acquisition Program, which
focuses on non-weapon systems, namely force support systems. In addition, MSIT
has contributed KRW17bn (USD13M) in 2023 for the AI-enhanced Intelligent
Coastal Surveillance System and a cumulative total of KRW33bn (USD26M) to
develop AI for X-ray image analysis to support doctors in remote precision diagno-
sis.54 Given financial contributions by MSIT and other ministries, it can be assumed
that the annual budget on defense AI is around KRW30bn (USD23M) higher than
the amounts extracted from the defense budget.
54 DNA-basedSmartDefenseStrategy,pp.3-6.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 31

6 Fielding and
Operating
Defense AI
32 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

South Korea’s armed forces are using AI for enterprise functions like human
resources management, security clearance services or logistics. Technical complex-
ities of using AI in weapon systems, likely consequences of the failure of AI on the
battlefield and ethical concerns have so far limited the core military use of defense
AI.
Among the military services, the ROK Army has been frontrunner in fielding
defense AI applications, thereby using small-scale tests and experiments to use
AI in combination with manned and unmanned systems. The Army’s plans for
manned-unmanned teaming strive for synergies with the strategies of the Navy
and the Air Force to intelligentize their primary platforms. Against this back-
ground, the MND’s strategies foresees an evolutionary path to building up de-
fense AI capabilities in three stages:55
Stage 1: Recognition Intelligence
At this stage the focus is on developing surveillance and reconnaissance
systems. With the Critical Facility Perimeter System, for example, the MND
wants to develop intelligent access system for key military installations such as
munition depots and airfields until 2026. As indicated, the MND and the MSIT
joined forces in 2020 to develop the Intelligence Coastal Surveillance System
to autonomously identifying ships and targets by leveraging data from military
coastal surveillance apparatus. The Multi-Source Image Fusion System will
work on the real-time integration of data from satellites and reconnaissance
aircraft in real-time. The three-year project started in 2019. Lastly, the Medical
Image Diagnostic Reading System, which automatically analyzes chest X-ray
images of soldiers to assist doctors in diagnostic processes.
Stage 2: Judgment Intelligence
At this stage the MND strives for partial autonomy with projects including
intelligent tanks, ships, and fighters, as well as MUM-CS, drone swarms and
robots, and intelligent military logistics systems. Projects falling under this
second phase are either in the preliminary stages or just starting.
Stage 3: Determined Intelligence
The final phase signifies the maturity of technologies and systems capable of
achieving full autonomy. This stage envisions the full deployment of AI military
medical personnel and counselors, AI combat staff, intelligent command and
control systems, and autonomous combat systems. Accomplishing these tasks
will be a long-time endeavor.
55 MNDWorkReport2022,p.6.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 33

To overcome existing gaps, the military services have embarked upon strategic
commitments to foster new capabilities by designating military pilot units to
advance human expertise in tandem with novel AI-enhanced solutions:56
The Army will designate the Army TIGER Brigade, 70th Brigade Combat Team,
25th Division, as the pilot unit. This unit will undertake trials to assess the
offensive capabilities and survivability of an integrated control system encom-
passing unmanned combat vehicles, attack helicopters, and drones.
The Navy will utilize the Fifth Fleet as its pilot unit, conducting experiments to
evaluate the efficacy of combined manned-unmanned demining operations,
which will integrate small naval vessels and autonomous mine detection systems.
In parallel, the Air Force has selected the 20th Fighter Wing as its pilot unit.
This wing will be responsible for verifying the practicality of manned and
unmanned squadron operations, integrating fighter jets with low-pitched
unmanned aerial vehicles.
Lastly, the Marine Corps will engage the 1st Marine Division as its pilot unit
to validate amphibious operations capabilities, focusing on the integration of
amphibious assault vehicles and obstacle-clearing robots.
While the ROK military’s ultimate objective is to implement AI into complex
weapon systems, the services often fail to clearly articulate their requirements.
Consequently, financial resources tend to be predominantly directed towards the
Technology Development Program, which focuses on technology maturation,
rather than the System Integration Program aimed at developing intelligent sys-
tems. A case in point is the ongoing Command Decision Support System project,
categorized as an AI core technology development initiative rather than a weapon
system procurement endeavor.
Within the next four to five years, the MND and the armed forces want to explore
how to identify the AI-relevant requirements to intelligentize existing and future
systems. To this purpose, the development of intelligentization systems is expect-
ed to take shape via a newly initiated rapid acquisition process, diverging from the
traditional, protracted weapon system procurement protocols. Overall, however,
it remains difficult to assess if the public-private cooperation is effectively advanc-
ing the military use of AI. Despite the MND’s continuous declarations advocating
for the integration of civilian AI technology within the defense sector and the
establishment of a comprehensive ecosystem, many experts posit that substantial
reforms in force system acquisition and defense-related R&D are indispensable
prerequisites for fostering and developing a defense AI ecosystem that delivers
the defense AI capabilities South Korea is looking for.
56 DefenseWhitePaper,p.112;112;RealizingPeacethroughStrength.MNDMajorWorkPlan2023:9.ROK,p.9.
34 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

7 Training for
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 35

South Korea is placing significant emphasis on nurturing defense-specific AI
expertise and bolstering the digital proficiency of its defense workforce. To foster
a robust pool of experts and establish a sustainable foundation for defense AI
advancement, the MND has unveiled initiatives to partner with universities to train
1,000 AI professionals who will spearhead AI integration in the military over the
next five years and roll out AI and software education programs across various mil-
itary training platforms for soldiers and officers, that shall be gradually expanded.
But the general difficulties hampering the local defense sector described above
and the current lack of the South Korean armed forces to properly understand and
convey their AI requirements make it difficult for the MND to satisfy the growing
demand for AI expertise.
7.1 Defense AI Talent Training Program of the MND
Given South Korea’s priorities to establish a digital platform government with AI
at its core, numerous government ministries and public institutions are engaged
in general AI initiatives. The MND and the MSIT jointly drive Korea’s defense AI
education and training. Recognizing that most soldiers enter service during their
college years and often perceive this period as a disconnect from academic and
social pursuits, AI education for military personnel is envisioned not just as a
means to enhance military capabilities through digitization and intelligence, but
also as an essential bridge facilitating soldiers’ transitioning back to academia or
professional careers after discharge.
Therefore, both ministries formalized cooperation with a memorandum of under-
standing in 2021. According to the MND’s strategy, the aim is to develop 50,000
military AI and software personnel by 2026. Right now, commissioned education
for officers and mid- to short-term military-specific AI education programs is in
progress. Overall, the MND acknowledges that transforming officers’ perceptions
of digital transformation is crucial and a prerequisite for the broader adoption
and implementation of defense AI. A significant initiative involves collaboration
with a private AI graduate school, entailing an investment of KRW36bn (USD27M)
over five years to train approximately 1,000 specialists in AI and software and to
enhance educational facilities.57
While it may be premature to assess the actual impact and efficacy of these AI
education and talent development projects for the military, it is evident that policy
emphasis and efforts in AI education will persist, complementing the dedication
57 DefenseWhitePaper,p.119;MNDWorkReport2022,p.6.
36 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

to implement the national defense AI policy. Despite criticisms that the military’s
AI curriculum may be overly focused on the utilization of AI technology, insuffi-
ciently incorporating AI ethics, and prioritizing quantitative achievements over the
cultivation of qualitative human resources, there is broad consensus and minimal
contention regarding the national initiative’s direction. The prevailing view is that
the success of defense AI critically hinges on the development and education of
human resources.
7.2 Defense AI and Simulation-Based Training
Like other leading military nations, the ROK military has long incorporated war-
games based on modelling and simulation (M&S) and combat experiments into its
core operational conceptualization and training methodologies. With the advent
and integration of technologies like Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality
(AR), collectively known as Metabus, there is a shift towards developing more
sophisticated simulation-based training systems.
In 2022, the MND created and allocated a new budget within it of KRW43bn
(USD33M) for enhancing practical scientific training. This included KRW22.1bn
(USD17M) for AR-VR equipment, such as VR setups for special forces parachute
training, VR education and training centers, and VR simulated firing systems for
reservists. Additionally, KRW13.3bn (USD10M) was designated for constructing
four new practical scientific training centers capable of data-driven scientific
training, supplementing the existing science training center at KCTC. Furthermore,
KRW7.5bn (USD5.7M) was directed towards a new management system for the
scientific training of reservists and trainees.58
The South Korean military has been actively considering the development of a
training system akin to the Synthetic Training Environment utilized by the U.S. mil-
itary. The need for such a system in the South Korean forces has been increasingly
recognized. However, to date, there has not been a specific instance of a simula-
tion-based training system project incorporating AI, nor has there been a desig-
nated budget for such an initiative. This situation stems partly from a fundamental
issue within the national acquisition system: training systems are categorized as
Force Support System rather than Weapons System, complicating the allocation
of R&D budgets typically reserved for weapons systems. Additionally, the lack of
cloud infrastructure, practical data-driven culture and AI-related foundation within
the South Korean military also contributes to this challenge.
58 Kim,“MND’sDefenseMetaverseUtilizationandDevelopment,”p.15;“Militaryactivelyutilizesmetaverse.KRW42.9billionto
strengthensafetytraining.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 37

However, there has been recent development projects in South Korea focusing
on incorporating AI into simulators for individual weapons system operational
training. Examples include the K2 tank simulator, the Short Distance Surface to Air
Missile, and the Air Force’s fighter jet simulator development project. This trend
is driven not only by the necessity of these projects themselves, but also by the
fact that AI-based simulators are often classified as weapons system acquisition
projects in the South Korean defense context. This classification facilitates the al-
location of R&D budgets for these initiatives. The current state of training systems
reflects the broader challenges and complexities associated with implementing
and realizing full-scale AI in South Korea’s defense sector.
38 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

8 Conclusion
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 39

South Korea’s current government strives to establish a digital platform govern-
ment, amalgamating government data with private sector services. This initiative
is driven by the dual goals of fostering national unity and revitalizing a stagnant
economy. AI is being leveraged as a key tool in this endeavor, akin to the meta-
phorical One Ring from The Lord of the Rings, symbolizing a crucial instrument
for crafting a state-led technological utopia. Consequently, the MND and the
armed forces consider AI instrumental in constructing a robust military, equipped
to navigate the challenges of future warfare. Confronted with a demographic
crisis marked by a precipitous decline in troop numbers and escalating regional
security tensions, the South Korean military identifies AI as a critical catalyst for
augmenting its military capabilities. Consequently, the government has prioritized
the development of a “formidable, AI-enhanced military, strategically positioned
to spearhead advancements on future battlefields.”59
Despite a strong commitment, South Korea’s journey towards integrating defense
AI faces many challenges. These include fragmented defense AI governance
inside the MND, the structural disconnect between DAPA’s responsibility for
weapon system acquisition and the MND’s overall responsibility to acquire military
force support systems, a predominantly hardware-centric defense industry, a yet
underdeveloped defense-specific AI infrastructure, restrictive data sharing re-
gimes, and an overall low appeal of the defense sector among top civilian talents.
Cognizant of the existing shortfalls, South Korea’s military decision-makers are
increasingly recognizing the pivotal role of clearly and effectively identifying and
addressing challenges in AI deployment as a foundational step towards establish-
ing an AI-enhanced military force. This growing awareness is fostering optimism
about the potential acceleration in the adoption and proliferation of AI technolo-
gies within the military sphere. In addition, the public’s broadly supportive stance
towards the government’s steadfast commitment to boosting AI and ICT invest-
ment, aligned with the national objective of nurturing a robust AI-centric science
and technology sector, adds to the positive dynamics favoring the successful
implementation of defense AI initiatives.
59 NationalDefenseScienceandTechnologyFrameworkPlan2023-2027,p.3.
40 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

Literature
“‘ArmyTIGER,’agroundcombatsystemimplement- com/20190313000067(lastaccessed30January
ingadvancedtechnology,roarsasthefutureArmy’s4th 2024).
generationcombatpower,”MNDPressRelease,Korea
PolicyBriefing,16April2021, “TotalinvestmentofKRW1.429trillioninICTR&Din
briefing/pressReleaseView.do?newsId=156447348(last 2023,”IndustrialDaily,3November2022,
accessed30January2024). kidd.co.kr/news/229966.Accessed30January2024
“1stDefenseDataManagementCommitteeheld,” Ahn,Seunghee,“Implementationof‘NavyVision2045’
MNDBlogDefenseNews,10January2023, and‘DefenseReform2.0NavyPromotionPlan’:Standing
blog.naver.com/mnd9090/222980181954(lastac- tallasan‘OceanNavy’in2045,the100thanniversary
cessed30January2024). ofitsfounding,”NationalDefenseJournal,no.547,
July2019,pp.17-23.
“AIbasedFutureCombatSystemArmyTIGER4.0,” newspaper/JournalMng/journalData/2019/07/BBSM-
MNDBlogM-Friends,19June2020, STR_000000010110.pdf(lastaccessed30January2024).
naver.com/mnd9090/222005709209(lastaccessed30
January2024). AIIntegrationRoadmap2022-2033(Seoul:ROKArmy
2021).
“AirForcecompleteshigh-techmilitarywithsmart
innovationinthe4thIndustrialRevolution,”News AirForceArtificialIntelligenceDevelopmentPlan
Aerospace,14March2019. (Seoul:ROKAirForce,2021).
viewer/postView.nhn?volumeNo=18291804&member-
No=44742705#(lastaccessed30January2024). ArmyArtificialIntelligenceDevelopmentPromotion
Strategy(Seoul:ROKArmy,2020).
“AnnouncingtheNationalAIStrategy,”MSIT
PressRelease,KoreaPolicyBriefing,17.December Chung,A.Raam,“AI,thegame-changerofthefuture
2019, battlefield,”DAPANewslettervol.109,June2021,p.12.
do?newsId=156366736(lastaccessed30January 
2024). Book/vol109/pdf/vol109.pdf(lastaccessed30January
2024).
“BillonFosteringtheAIIndustryandCreatinga
FoundationforTrustProposaldated1July2021,”ROK DefenseAIStrategyReport.ROKMND.Internal
NationalAssembly,undated, resources(Seoul:ROKMND,2021).
go.kr/bill/billDetail.do?billId=PRC_Y2B1M0R6G2I2P1B-
0V2X9H4Z0X3M3J2(lastaccessed30January2024). DefenseWhitePaper(Seoul:ROKMND,2022),

“Militaryactivelyutilizesmetaverse.KRW42.9 PBLICTNEBOOK_202303070948276600.pdf(last
billiontostrengthensafetytraining,”YTNScience,15 accessed30January2024).
November2021,
view.php?mcd=0082&key=202111151144174692(last DirectionforIntelligentizationofNavalBattlefield
accessed30January2024). Functions(Seoul:ROKNavy,2021).
“REAIM2023CalltoAction,”REAIMSummit,16 FutureNationalDefense2030TechnologyStrategy
February2023, AI(Summary).KoreaResearchInstituteforDefense
tries/ministry-of-foreign-affairs/documents/publi- TechnologyPlanningandAdvancement(Seoul:KRIT,
cations/2023/02/16/reaim-2023-call-to-action(last 2021),
accessed30January2024). sId=gbby&article_category=&nttId=4443&page=1&-
searchCnd=0&searchWrd=%EA%B8%B0%EC%88%A
“TheAirForceInnovationPromotionPlan,” 0%EC%A0%84%EB%9E%B5&startd=&endd=&menu_
Etnews,13March2019, no=03090300(lastaccessed30January2024).
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 41

Gook,Kyungwan,“ArtificialIntelligenceTech- OverviewoftheFiscalYear2023MNDBudgetand
nologyandApplicationCasesbyIndustry,”Weekly FundingPlan:3.ROKMND(Seoul:ROKMND,2023),
TechnologyTrends,vol.1888,19March2019p. 
22, load/2023_budget(1).pdf(lastaccessed30January
file7427846398059309389-1888(2019.3.20)-10.pdf(last 2024).
accessed30January2024).
Park,Daero,“AirForcebuildskillwebcombiningAI,
ICTR&DProgram:2023KoreanGovernmentR&DPro- drones,”FinancialNews,27May2022,
gram(Seoul:JointMinistryBriefing,2023); news.com/news/202205270501246455(lastaccessed
kistep.re.kr/flexer/view.jsp?FileDir=/mjbs/2023/&Sys- 30January2024).
temFileName=202301091050152441.pdf&ftype=pdf&-
FileName=202301091050152441.pdf(lastaccessed30 Park,Dongsun,“‘SMARTNavy’GrandVoyagePlan
January2024). BasedonAdvancedTechnologyoftheFourthIndustrial
Revolution,”JournaloftheKoreanSocietyofShipbuild-
KeyFeaturesofthe2023NationalR&DBudget. ers,57:1(Month2020),pp.7-10.
2023KoreanGovernmentR&DProgram(Seoul:Joint kr/article/JAKO202010163509993.pdf(lastaccessed
MinistryBriefing,2023), 30January2024).
flexer/view.jsp?FileDir=/mjbs/2023/&SystemFile-
Name=202302211050379201.pdf&ftype=pdf&File- Park,Youngwooketal.ResearchonDefenseAI
Name=202302211050379201.pdf(lastaccessed30 DevelopmentPlan.ROKMNDPolicyReport(Seoul:KI-
January2024). DET,2020),
researchDetail.do?researchId=1290000-202000076&me
Kim,Saeyong,“MND’sDefenseMetaverseUtilization nuNo=I0000002(lastaccessed30January2024).
andDevelopment,”DefenseXRConvergenceConfer-
ence,Seoul,13October2022. Park,Youngwooketal.,ResearchonHowtoEstab-
lishandOperateaDefenseAICenter.MNDPolicyReport
Ko,Kwangbon,“Inanerawherewarfarecannotbe (Seoul:KIDET,2023).
conductedwithoutspace...wemustsecureourown
reconnaissanceandsurveillancecapabilities,”Sedaily,5 RealizingPeacethroughStrength.MNDMajorWork
July2023, Plan2023:9.(Seoul:ROKMND,2023),
JK2SG(lastaccessed30January2024). mnd.go.kr/mbshome/mbs/plan/download/2023_report.
pdf(lastaccessed30January2024).
MNDWorkReport2022(Seoul:MinistryofNational
Defence,2022), ROKNationalStrategyforArtificialIntelli-
skin/doc.html?fn=196871822&rs=/docViewer/re- gence(Seoul:JointMinistry,2019),
sult/2022.07/22/196871822(lastaccessed30January korea.kr/docViewer/skin/doc.html?fn=e1b3919a-
2024). 9faf3e30720e22eec1d2c81e&rs=/docViewer/re-
sult/2020.03/12/e1b3919a9faf3e30720e22eec1d2c81e
MND.Undated.DefenseInnovation4.0,Fostering (lastaccessed30January2024).
RobustArmedForcesofAIS&T.
mbshome/mbs/mnd/subview.jsp?id=mnd_011903030000 StrategicPlanforDefenseArtificialIntelligence
(lastaccessed30January2024). (Seoul:ROKMND,2021).
MSIT&MND.2022.DNA-basedSmartDefenseStrat- StrategyforApplicationofArtificialIntelligencein
egy(Seoul:MinistryofScienceandICTandMinistryof WeaponSystems(Seoul:DAPA,2021).
Defense,2022),
Server/viewer/doc.html?key=7186f31cf9bd4c87a- TheAirForceInnovationPromotionPlan(Seoul:ROK
1914812304fafff&convType=html&convLocale=ko_KR&- AirForce,2019).
contextPath=/SynapDocViewServer/(lastaccessed30
January2024). Yoon,Seok-yul,“Koreawillbeakeypartneringlobal
supplychain.SpecialAddressatthe2023WorldEco-
NationalDefenseScienceandTechnologyFrame- nomicForumAnnualMeeting”,Davos19January2023,
workPlan2023-2027(Seoul:PresidentialAdvisory 
CouncilonScienceandTechnology.2023),https:// vnvEAC/sessions/special-address-by-yoon-suk-yeol-
online.fliphtml5.com/lukuo/myik/#p=65(lastaccessed president-of-the-republic-of-korea/(lastaccessed30
30January2024). January2024).
42 WILL THE ONE RING HOLD?

Defense AI Observatory Studies
24|21 Youngwook Park, Will the One Ring Hold? Defense AI in South Korea
23|20 Tomas Jermalivičius, Caught Between Today and Tomorrow. Defence AI in Estonia
23|19 Nikolaos Karampekios, Konstantinos Sakalis, and Iraklis Oikonomou, Harnessing the
Potential. Defense AI in Greece
23|18 Andreas Graae, Servers Before Tanks? Defence AI in Denmark
23|17 Kévin Martin and Lucie Liversain, A Winding Road Before Scaling-Up? Defense AI in
France
23|16 Sami O. Järvinen, Cautious Data-Driven Evolution. Defence AI in Finland
23|15 Inbar Dolinko and Liran Antebi, Embracing the Organized Mess. Defense AI in Israel
23|14 Alastair Finlan, A Fertile Soil for AI? Defense AI in Sweden
23|13 John Lee, “Overtaking on the Curve?” Defense AI in China
23|12 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, and Joseph Verbovszky, Master and Servant. Defense
AI in Germany
23|11 Katarzyna Zysk, High Hopes Amid Hard Realities. Defense AI in Russia
23|10 Yvonne Hofstetter and Joseph Verbovzsky, How AI Learns the Bundeswehr’s
“Innere Führung.” Value-Based Engineering with IEEE7000™-2021
23|09 Robert C Engen, When the Teeth Eat the Tail: A Review of Canada’s Defence Artificial
Intelligence
23|08 Çağlar Kurç, Enabling Technology of Future Warfare. Defense AI in Turkey
23|07 Lauren A. Kahn, Risky Incrementalism. Defense AI in the United States
22|06 Yvonne Hofstetter, Wie KI Innere Führung lernt. Wertbasierte Technik mit
IEEE7000™-2021
22|05 Andrea Gilli, Mauro Gilli, and Ivan Zaccagnini, Exploring the Benefits of a New Force
Enabler: Defense AI in Italy
22|04 Kenneth Payne, Bright Prospects – Big Challenges. Defense AI in the United
Kingdom
22|03 Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber, Armin Brandstetter, and Gary S. Schaal, Free
Jazz on the Battlefield. How GhostPlay’s AI Approach Enhances Air Defense
22|02 Peter Layton, Evolution not Revolution. Australia’s Defence AI Pathway
21|01 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, Joseph Verbovszky, Beware the Hype. What Military
Conflicts in Ukraine, Syria, Libya, and Nagorno-Karabakh (Don’t) Tell Us About the
Future of War