UNITED NATIONS
OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
A N N UA L
R E P O R T

BRINGING THE BENEFITS
OF SPACE TO HUMANKIND
UNITED NATIONS

On the right: Original cover image
Cover: The Danube Delta, a labyrinth
of water and land shared between
Romania and Ukraine
ST/SPACE/80
© United Nations, . All rights reserved.
The designations employed and the presentation of
material in this publication do not imply the expression of
any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the
United Nations concerning the legal status of any country,
territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the
delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
This publication has not been formally edited.
Publishing production: English, Publishing and Library
Section, United Nations Office at Vienna.

U N I T E D N AT I O N S
O F F I C E F O R O U T E R S PA C E A F FA I R S

A N N U A L
R E P O R T
UNITED NATIONS
Vienna, 2022

C O N T E N T S
Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv International effort to reduce impacts of light
pollution on the night sky boosted through the
1 United Nations/Spain/International Astronomical

Union Conference on Dark and Quiet Skies
for Science and Society . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
UNOOSA: WHAT WE DO
UNOOSA reaches new audiences through
participation at Expo 2020 and the seventy-second
5 International Astronautical Congress . . . . . . . . . 20

Astronauts come together to celebrate the sixtieth
anniversary of Gagarin’s historic space flight . . . 21
UNOOSA AT A GLANCE
International Moon Day declared by
the General Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

HIGHLIGHTS OF 2021 4
Mauritius deploys its first satellite thanks to the FOCUS CHAPTER: SPACE
KiboCUBE programme of UNOOSA/JAXA . . . . 10 FOR CLIMATE ACTION
UNOOSA, Brazil and the United Arab Emirates
convene Space for Women Expert Meeting: United Nations/Austria World Space Forum 2021
Initiatives, Challenges and Opportunities on Space for Climate Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
for Women in Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Inspiring ideas on utilizing space as a tool to foster
Joint project from Egypt, Kenya and Uganda climate mitigation and adaptation selected in the
selected for the Bartolomeo Programme with third edition of the Space4Youth competition . . 28
Airbus Defence and Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
UNOOSA participates in the
Telescopes to be delivered to Kenya and Nigeria Earth Information Day at COP 26 . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
as first awardees of ISONscope opportunity . . . 14
Agreement with the United Kingdom to map
Landmark “Space2030” Agenda: Space as a global space-related climate action efforts . . . . 30
driver of sustainable development agreed by
UNOOSA and international partners advance
United Nations Member States . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
work on delivering space benefits to combat
Approval by the General Assembly enlarges climate change at the local level . . . . . . . . . . . 31
COPUOS to 100 States members . . . . . . . . . . . 16
UNOOSA and Austria come together to
UNOOSA and the European Space Agency advance dialogue on space applications
launch space debris campaign . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 for food systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
UNOOSA and the United Kingdom partner UNOOSA and the Islamic Republic of Iran
for awareness-raising and capacity-building explore the role of space technology
related to the implementation of the Guidelines applications for drought, flood and water
for the Long-term Sustainability of resource management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Outer Space Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Space4Water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

37 75
5 8
INTERNATIONAL
LEVERAGING SPACE
COOPERATION IN
FOR DISASTER RISK
OUTER SPACE
REDUCTION AND
MANAGEMENT
COPUOS updates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Planetary defence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
UN-SPIDER technical advisory support
to Member States in 2021 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 UN-Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
UN-SPIDER emergency support . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 Committee on Space Research Panel on
Planetary Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
New resources on the
UN-SPIDER Knowledge Portal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 International Committee on Global
Navigation Satellite Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Other UN-SPIDER activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Committee on Earth Observation Satellites . . . . 79

SPACE4SDGS
SPACE OBJECTS
REGISTRATION
Fifty years of the Programme
on Space Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Technical advisory services on space
Access to Space for All . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
object registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
Space for Women . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Space Law for New Space Actors . . . . . . . . . . . 60 10 87
Space for persons with disabilities . . . . . . . . . . 61
UNOOSA IN NUMBERS
Other Space4SDGs activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Sustainable Development Goal 17: List of abbreviations and acronyms . . . . . . . . . . 90
New partnerships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66

SPACE EDUCATION
Regional Centres for Space Science and
Technology Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Research and training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72

IV | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
FOREWORD
Ms. Simonetta Di Pippo
Mr. Niklas Hedman
Credit: SDA Bocconi/UNIS
2021 started with a glimmer of hope as vaccination employing all available assets. Satellites will be intrinsic
campaigns began to take shape underscoring the power components in this important quest. Space technologies
of science in addressing the global pandemic. are transformative tools for collecting data about the
Nevertheless, despite our improved understanding of the Earth, its spheres, and the dynamics and impacts of
health, social, economic and cultural impacts of the human activities that drive mitigation, adaptation and
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis, the pandemic resilience efforts. Space stakeholders are enhancing
continued to influence our lives, decisions and the evidence-based decisions and policymaking, putting
delivery of our activities. By virtually erasing decades of satellites into action for sustainable development, and
progress in many indicators, it has dealt a severe blow to working together to understand specific needs and
the mission for a sustainable world. The COVID-19 crisis develop tailored solutions. In this context, the United
serves as reminder that we ignore the warning signals Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA) utilizes
provided by science at our peril. It is important to learn the unique convening power of the United Nations to
from the lessons that have emerged from the suffering provide a platform and means to exchange information,
and sacrifices of the past two years. build capacity and engage in diplomacy in the peaceful
uses of space for climate action.
Repeating the same error in the context of the climate
crisis will prove catastrophic, causing considerably worse The focus chapter of this report singles out the activities
impacts over the longer term. We must leverage on our we embarked on in 2021 to ensure that Member States of
understanding of the danger and use it to guide the way the United Nations are better equipped with the
forward. At the global gathering in Glasgow in 2021, knowledge and instruments to help avoid a climate
world leaders exhibited strong political will to act, but catastrophe and prepare societies for consequences we
nevertheless much stronger ambition is required. cannot avoid. With Austria, we convened the third World
Space Forum to engage in conversation about space
The urgency of the climate crisis calls for an solutions and connect users with providers. We continued
unprecedented, concerted and multilateral effort, amplifying the voices of young people, collecting essays

FOREWORD | V
on the use of space as a tool to foster climate mitigation Space for All initiative, as a manifestation of triangular
and adaptation. We brought together stakeholders to cooperation, continued to break glass ceilings.
debate the benefits of space for sustainable food systems Thanks to the support offered under the KiboCUBE
and entered into a partnership to map global space- programme, Mauritius is now a spacefaring nation.
related climate action efforts. The Space4Water portal The primary objective of its satellite programme is the
continued to grow and provide a valuable platform for acquisition of technology, knowledge and skills to help
networking, promoting water management practices, and advance the country’s future efforts in the space domain.
fostering collaboration and knowledge exchange. The Bartolomeo programme, under the Access to Space
for All initiative, became the first opportunity delivered in
At UNOOSA, we also took advantage of the experience
partnership with a private sector entity to announce an
of 2020 and enhanced the work and delivery of the
awardee. A joint endeavour of researchers from Egypt,
mandates to continue the formal intergovernmental
Kenya and Uganda was selected for a free one-year
mechanisms. We adopted new solutions and applied them
mission utilizing the Bartolomeo platform at the
across our activities to guarantee adequate performance
International Space Station. Through novel avenues,
and a results-driven approach. By adjusting our modus
including our participation at Expo 2020 in Dubai, we
operandi, we succeeded in convening the full cycle of the
reached new audiences by promoting the benefits that
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
space offers to humankind. We are proud that despite the
(COPUOS). The “Space2030” Agenda developed in that
obstacles and challenges, UNOOSA continued its strong
unique setting was adopted by the General Assembly in
legacy of support for the interests of Member States in
. The Agenda represents a new road map
2021.
for advancing the use of space for a better tomorrow. In
addition, by means of active outreach and diplomatic As space occupies an ever more prominent position in
efforts, five countries joined COPUOS, taking the the United Nations system and beyond, the demand for
membership to 100 States. our activities and inputs, and the call for our engagement
as a convener and facilitator of international cooperation
We also carried on with capacity-building activities as the
will only increase. This is integral for the way forward as
means to bridge the capabilities gap between and within
the value of partnerships and the fruits of our collective
countries. To help create an equal and diverse space
work manifest themselves across the whole spectrum
sector globally, we advanced empowerment efforts
of activities. We are confident that, if we work together,
through the Space4Women Project and complemented
an even brighter future lies ahead of us as we make
that work with a new endeavour that focuses on persons
the benefits of space universally accessible. In close
with disabilities. Through the Space Law for New Space
coordination with the international space community,
Actors project, we answered the demand for promoting
UNOOSA remains committed to using all aspects of
the development of national space law and policies in line
space to build a better future for everyone, everywhere.
with existing frameworks. UN-SPIDER provided services
and advisory missions in Africa, Asia and Latin America,
strengthening capabilities to address disasters, save lives
and prevent damage. Ms. Simonetta Di Pippo
Former Director, Office for Outer Space Affairs
UNOOSA went on opening windows of opportunity and
worked to turn dreams into realities in a collective effort Mr. Niklas Hedman
Acting Director, Office for Outer Space Affairs
with the international space community. The Access to

Almost cloud-free
glimpse at a large
portion of Europe
Credit: ESA

UNOOSA:
WHAT WE DO

2 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
1 UNOOSA:
WHAT WE DO
The United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs Through the Programme on Space Applications (PSA),
is the only United Nations entity dedicated exclusively UNOOSA helps countries build capacity in basic sciences,
to outer space affairs. space technology and human space technology, and
leverage space data and applications in areas such as
The Office focuses specifically on the peaceful uses of global health, disaster and climate change management,
outer space to advance international cooperation in space humanitarian assistance, environmental monitoring and
and the use of space science and technology for natural resources management.
sustainable development, particularly for the benefit of
Access to Space for All, which is a flagship capacity-
developing countries. The Office serves as the secretariat
building initiative under the PSA, bridges the space
to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
capabilities gap among countries, aiming to make space
through which an annual multi-stakeholder dialogue on
benefits universally accessible. Partnerships and
outer space is held with the aim of advancing these
cooperation sit at the centre of the initiative, with leading
objectives. The Committee has two subsidiary bodies: the
space stakeholders enabling access to state-of-the-art
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee (STSC) and the
facilities and research and orbital opportunities for Member
Legal Subcommittee (LSC), both established in 1961.
States, particularly developing countries.
COPUOS reports to the Fourth Committee of the General
Assembly, which adopts an annual resolution on international UNOOSA works closely with the six Regional Centres for
cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space. Space Science and Technology Education affiliated with the
United Nations to reinforce space-related education
The Office helps countries enhance their capacity to
globally. The Centres provide unique training and
develop national legislation in line with international space
education programmes, especially for nurturing talent in
law. This work is done through outreach efforts,
developing countries.
consultations and dedicated capacity development
activities, including the Space Law for New Space Actors Through the United Nations Platform for Space-based
project. Advocating for and fostering responsible conduct Information for Disaster Management and Emergency
of space operations is of particular importance in these Response (UN-SPIDER) programme, UNOOSA helps
dynamic times. countries use space data and technologies, such as satellite
imagery, to reduce disaster risks and support the full
UNOOSA discharges the responsibilities of the
disaster cycle. UN-SPIDER has offices in Beijing, Bonn and
Secretary-General under international space law,
Vienna and is funded with generous financial support from
including maintaining the United Nations Register of
China and Germany.
Objects Launched into Outer Space, first created in
1961 at the request of Member States. The Register is the UNOOSA serves as Executive Secretariat of the
only treaty-based transparency and confidence-building International Committee on GNSS (ICG) that brings
mechanism that identifies the State responsible for together global navigation satellite system (GNSS)
a space object. providers to improve technology, compatibility and
interoperability, and the use of GNSS for sustainable

CHAPTER 1. UNOOSA: WHAT WE DO | 3
development. The ICG Programme is opportunities, and conducting endeavour that examines the
made possible by the generous planning activities to mitigate such contribution of space science and
financial contributions of the United threats. The work of UNOOSA with technology and their applications to
States of America and the European SMPAG is supported by the the work of the organization and the
Commission. contribution of the European Space achievement of the Sustainable
Agency (ESA) as chair of this advisory Development Goals. Through the
UNOOSA is the Secretariat to the
group. UNOOSA also cooperates with breadth of its activities, UNOOSA
Space Mission Planning Advisory
the International Asteroid Warning addresses all stages and aspects of
Group (SMPAG), which connects the
Network (IAWN) in strengthening space applications, space law and
world’s space agencies active in the
international coordination and space policy, helping all countries
domain of planetary defence. SMPAG
cooperation in case of near-Earth leverage the benefits of space for
is responsible for preparing an
object impact hazards. sustainable development.
international response to a near-Earth
object threat through the exchange of UNOOSA leads the Inter-Agency
information, the development of Meeting on Outer Space Activities
collaborative research and mission (UN-Space), a United Nations-wide
UNOOSA organizational chart
Director
Senior Adviser on Space
Science and Education
Office of the Director
Committee, Executive
Space
Policy and Secretariat UN-SPIDER
Applications
Legal Affairs ICG
Beijing Vienna Bonn
Organizational structure of UNOOSA
Credit: UNOOSA

Lake Neusiedl
Credit: ESA

UNOOSA IN 2021
AT A GLANCE

6 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
2 UNOOSA
AT A GLANCE
The Office engaged in an active The new visualization of the website, professionals, the portal saw a
outreach campaign in 2021, with the the relevance and quality of the staggering 157 per cent increase in
number of users visiting our websites information provided, and the visits compared to 2020. The
growing substantially, hitting a record ever-growing importance of space Space4Women website, now in its
with over 44 per cent growth compared assets for disaster management second year, brought over 16,000
to 2020. The users have consistently attracted more than 500,000 users. visitors to our resources on gender
consulted our space law resources, with These users consulted resources on equality, empowerment, and activities
web pages dedicated to the disaster risk reduction and early conducted within the realm of the
international treaties visited the most, warning systems, national efforts in Space4Women project. In the second
underlining the reinforced interest in these areas, and UN-SPIDER missions, half of 2021, the Office launched a
the frameworks that underpin the training and events. dedicated Space Sustainability
governance of space activities. The website, a resource to advance
The Space4Water portal welcomed
pages on the Committee sessions and awareness-raising and capacity-
close to 40,000 visitors in the third
capacity-building activities of the Office building related to the implementation
year since its commencement. With its
also experienced significant traffic over of the Guidelines for the Long-term
expanding network, growing
the year. Sustainability of Outer Space
resources on leveraging space
Activities.
Visits to the UN-SPIDER Knowledge applications for sustainable water
Portal also reached record numbers. management, and stories from space
Followers: Social media Total impressions on social media
>6 million
Total
48,419
Total page views on UN-SPIDER
57,761
66,592
1.02 million
79,863
Total page views on UNOOSA
Visitors: Websites
1.65 million
UNOOSA
SPIDER KP
Space4Water
Newsletter >1,800 subscribers
Space4Women
ESA and UNOOSA Space Debris
0 100.000 200.000 300.000 400.000 500.000
podcast plays 12,504
2018 2019 2020 2021 YouTube 24,400 views

CHAPTER 2. UNOOSA AT A GLANCE | 7
Event participants
Online events
World Space Forum United Nations/Spain/ United Nations/Mongolia
International Astronomical Union Workshop on the Applications
540 Conference on Dark and Quiet of Global Navigation Satellite
Skies for Science and Society Systems
participants
724 76 324 61

participants countries participants countries
countries
United Nations/Austria United Nations/Islamic Republic
Symposium on Space of Iran Workshop on Space
Applications for Technology Applications for
Food Systems Drought, Flood and Water
Resource Management

378 64
participants
participants countries

countries
Webinars
Webinars on Webinars on Webinars on
Access to Space for All Space Economy Space for the Great Reset
1,565 313 655
participants participants participants
In-person events
UNOOSA, Brazil and United Twenty-eighth Workshop on Space objects registered
Arab Emirates Space for Women Space Technology for Socio-
Expert Meeting: Initiatives, economic Benefits: “Space >1,900
Challenges and Opportunities Exploration – A source of
for Women in Space inspiration, innovation and
(highest ever)
discovery”
60 20 90 20
participants countries participants space
agencies

countries

An arm of the
Milky Way galaxy
Credit: S. Otarola/ESO
From the historic launch of the first
Mauritian satellite under the
KiboCUBE programme, through the
enlargement of the Access to Space
for All initiative, to the participation of
the office at Expo 2020, this chapter
focuses on the highlights of the work
of UNOOSA in 2021.

HIGHLIGHTS
OF 2021

10 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
3 HIGHLIGHTS
OF 2021
MAURITIUS DEPLOYS ITS FIRST
SATELLITE THANKS TO THE
KIBOCUBE PROGRAMME
OF UNOOSA/JAXA
In 2021, the KiboCUBE programme, delivered in partnership
with Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), continued
to break glass ceilings to enable access to space. Mauritius
The launch of the Mauritian satellite
deployed its first-ever satellite from the International Space
Credit: NASA/Tony Gray and Kevin O'Connell
Station on 22 June. The Mauritius Research and Innovation
Council (MRIC) of the Ministry of Information Technology,
Communication and Innovation constructed the Mauritius
MIR-SAT1 is equipped with an optical camera that tests the
Imagery and Radiotelecommunication Satellite (MIR-SAT 1).
transmission of imagery and onboard communication
The Government of Mauritius fully funded its construction
systems in collaboration with amateur radio enthusiasts.
and testing.
Generated data is available to all institutions in the country
KiboCUBE is a symbol of triangular cooperation under for capacity-building, experimentation and research.
the Access to Space for All initiative (see more in the
The MRIC team, supported by the Mauritius Amateur
Space4SDGs chapter) offered by UNOOSA and its
Radio Society, conducted capacity-building activities for
partners. MIR-SAT 1 is the third satellite launched under
secondary schools and university students to acquaint them
the KiboCUBE programme joining 1KUNS-PF of Kenya and
with antennas and communication technology. Within a
Quetzal-1 of Guatemala. The first Mauritian satellite was
month of the launch, over 100 students from more than a
registered with the Secretary-General on 29 July through
dozen schools and five universities constructed antennas to
the Register maintained by UNOOSA (see the final chapter
download telemetry data from MIR-SAT 1. The Forest Side
of this report).
SSS (Girls) College was the first to receive the data,
Its primary objective is technology, knowledge and skill emphasizing the role of the satellite in advancing efforts
acquisition, as well as advancing the future efforts of towards gender equality in Mauritius.
Mauritius in the space domain. MIR-SAT 1 pilots technology
pertinent to the main challenges faced by the country.

CHAPTER 3. HIGHLIGHTS OF 2021 | 11
“
We are delighted to welcome Mauritius to the community
of spacefaring nations. With eyes from above, the country
will gain powerful data and tools to confront challenges
such as rising sea levels and managing ocean resources.
UNOOSA and JAXA are proud to have made this
achievement possible and stand ready to support the
utilization of this CubeSat and the overall development of
the space sector in Mauritius. ”
Simonetta Di Pippo, former Director of UNOOSA
MIR-SAT 1, the first Mauritian satellite
Credit: JAXA
“
The first Mauritian satellite is a historic achievement for the
Republic of Mauritius. We are proud to count ourselves
among the handful of space-faring Small Island Developing
States. This initiative prompts a number of promising
avenues for research development and innovation in space
and satellite technology in Mauritius – fields which were, in
the recent past, inaccessible to our small nation. We look
forward to seeing space and satellite technology bring a
new thrust to STEM in Mauritius. ”
Vickram Bissonauth, research coordinator from the
Mauritius Research and Innovation Council
Team from Mauritius Research and Innovation Council
Credit: MRIC
Deployment of MIR-SAT 1 from Kibo
Credit: JAXA/NASA

12 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
Participants at the Space4Women Expert Meeting
Credit: United Nations/Martin Stasko
UNOOSA, BRAZIL AND THE UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
CONVENE SPACE FOR WOMEN EXPERT MEETING: INITIATIVES,
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR WOMEN IN SPACE
Science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) The meeting brought together 60 experts and
represent transformative fields to achieve the Sustainable Space4Women mentors from 20 Member States.
Development Goals (SDGs), with space exploration and its Discussions revolved around the benefits to women and
utilization as vital components in this context. Space also girls from better access to space, and ways to ensure their
matters when it comes to the rights of women and girls to equal and active role in space science, technology,
benefit from science and technology, encouraging them to innovation and exploration.
contribute to creating solutions and participate in space-
Participants highlighted the importance of providing
related education and careers. The international community
policy-relevant advice and data on gender empowerment,
strives to empower women and girls in these fields.
equity and equality to institutions and governments, and
Through the "Space for Women" project, UNOOSA
advancing knowledge management and evidence-based
continued making strides towards these goals.
awareness-raising. They also recommended developing
On the margins of the Space Week at Expo 2020 in Dubai, stocktaking exercises and assessments of impacts and
UNOOSA, the Ministry of Science, Technology and improvements resulting from gender empowerment
Innovation of Brazil, the Brazilian Space Agency, the activities in the space sector to establish common ground
National Institute for Space Research and the Mohammed and a comparable starting point for everyone.
Bin Rashid Space Centre (MBRSC) organized the United
Nations/Brazil/United Arab Emirates Space for Women
Expert Meeting: Initiatives, challenges and opportunities
for women in space.

CHAPTER 3. HIGHLIGHTS OF 2021 | 13
Bartolomeo platform mounted on the International Space Station
Credit: Airbus
JOINT PROJECT FROM EGYPT, KENYA AND UGANDA SELECTED FOR
THE BARTOLOMEO PROGRAMME WITH AIRBUS DEFENCE AND SPACE
On the margins of the seventy-second International 60 replies. The final proposals received by UNOOSA under
Astronautical Congress in Dubai, UNOOSA and Airbus the announcement of opportunity brought together
selected the ClimCam project developed by a consortium 29 different institutions from 18 countries, aspiring to
of three different national agencies from Egypt, Kenya and address 16 of the 17 SDGs, underscoring the importance of
Uganda as the awardee of the first round of the space for sustainable development.
Bartolomeo programme. This programme under the
Access to Space for All initiative offers an opportunity for
United Nations Member States to utilize the Airbus
Bartolomeo external platform attached to the European
Columbus Module of the International Space Station (ISS)
for a free one-year mission in the space environment. The
remote sensing camera to be developed by the ClimCam
Team will monitor water, floods and the changing climate,
and directly contribute to five different SDGs.
The Bartolomeo programme broadens access to space
benefits, activities and applications, and builds capacity in
space science and technology. The partnership attracted
considerable interest and catalysed international
collaboration with the initial call for interest inspiring over
Announcement of the awarded team
Credit: International Astronautical Federation

14 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
TELESCOPES TO BE DELIVERED
TO KENYA AND NIGERIA AS
FIRST AWARDEES OF ISONSCOPE
OPPORTUNITY
Following a competitive application process, UNOOSA and
the Keldysh Institute of Applied Mathematics of the Russian
Academy of Sciences (KIAM RAS), selected entities from
Kenya and Nigeria to receive small wide-field-of-view
telescopes. The Kenyan Space Observation and Research
Telescope (K-SORT Project), led by the Kenya Space
Agency, aims to monitor space debris, space weather and
near-Earth objects. The K-SORT Project also hopes to
promote and support space science research and outreach
Westerlund 2, a cluster of young stars
programmes in Kenya. The Nigeria Centre for Basic Space about 20,000 light years from Earth
Credit: X-ray: NASA/CXC/SAO/Sejong
Science will conduct a photometric study on a type of
Univ./Hur et al; Optical: NASA/STScI
variable star known as Delta Scuti. By partnering with
several Nigerian universities, access to the telescope will
academic and research institutions and to supporting the
benefit students and their skills.
establishment of telescope-related facilities located in
The selection followed after UNOOSA and KIAM RAS United Nations Member States, especially developing
entered into a partnership in early 2021 to provide an nations. As part of the Access to Space for All initiative,
opportunity within the International Scientific Optical ISONscope bridges the space capabilities gap to leverage
Network (ISON). This joint effort is devoted to providing the benefits of space by increasing visibility, accessibility
telescopes and training on their operation to the selected and ease of utilization of astronomy and space science.
“
Granting the opportunity for new generations
of discoverers, astronomers, astronauts, even
policymakers or artists, to glimpse through a
telescope is much more than just a one-time
opportunity. It is a life-changing experience.
”
UNOOSA
Small wide-field-of-view telescopes in ISONscope
Credit: KIAM

CHAPTER 3. HIGHLIGHTS OF 2021 | 15
New York City from space
Credit: Maxar Technologies
LANDMARK “SPACE2030”
AGENDA: SPACE AS A DRIVER
OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
AGREED BY UNITED NATIONS
MEMBER STATES
2021 marked the finalization of the landmark “Space2030”
Agenda and implementation plan, a blueprint document
that charts the way to enhance the contribution of space
and its applications to sustainable development. The
Sunrise on our planet Earth
Agenda contains valuable tools and international and Credit: NASA/Jeff Williams
regional mechanisms, programmes, projects and platforms
to benefit Member States and facilitate economic growth
and prosperity with a strong focus on multi-stakeholder
“
partnerships and cooperation. We, the States Members of the United Nations,
acknowledge that the exploration and peaceful uses
This multilateral agreement results from a three-year-long
of outer space have enriched our collective knowledge
negotiation process in COPUOS that began at
and revolutionized life on Earth. Space science and
UNISPACE+50, where the international community
technology are now intrinsic to our daily lives and bring
reflected on more than 50 years of achievement in space
an abundance of unique and fundamental benefits to Earth.
exploration and use, and called for reinforcing global
As the space community moves forward with its space
cooperation in space. In , the General
exploration endeavours, space will continue to serve as
Assembly expressed its appreciation for the progress in the
a source of inspiration and innovation and to provide
UNISPACE+50 process and invited COPUOS to continue to
applications for the benefit of humankind.
”
develop a “Space2030” agenda and implementation plan.
General Assembly resolution A/RES/76/3.
COPUOS endorsed the final document in 
and the General Assembly adopted it in resolution 76/3 on
25 .

16 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
Vienna International Centre
Credit: Rodolfo Quevenco/IAEA
APPROVAL BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ENLARGES
COPUOS TO 100 STATES MEMBERS
Angola, Bangladesh, Kuwait, Panama and Slovenia became As the international space community strives to address the
the latest States members of COPUOS, as confirmed by novel challenges of contemporary space dynamics, it is
the decision of the General Assembly in resolution 76/76 important to consider the perspectives of future
adopted on 9 December. Welcoming five new countries to generations and currently non-spacefaring or emerging
COPUOS brings the total membership of this space nations. UNOOSA welcomes the increased interest
intergovernmental platform to a milestone number of 100. of United Nations Member States in multilateral dialogue
In recent years, COPUOS has been one of the fastest- through the Committee and will actively engage with
growing Committees in the United Nations system. Driven non-member countries to support them on the path to
by the dynamics of the sector, we have seen becoming members of this unique intergovernmental hub
unprecedented interest by countries to invest financial, for promoting international cooperation in the peaceful
human and political capital in space activities and related uses and exploration of outer space.
policy developments. The active engagement of UNOOSA
in outreach and proactive diplomacy has also supported
countries in their path to becoming Member States of the
Committee.

CHAPTER 3. HIGHLIGHTS OF 2021 | 17
UNOOSA AND THE EUROPEAN
SPACE AGENCY LAUNCH SPACE
DEBRIS CAMPAIGN
On 10 February, UNOOSA and the European Space
Agency (ESA) started to release a series of infographics and
podcasts to address and raise awareness of the issue of
space debris. This new series of straightforward
infographics includes illustrations, facts and figures to
clarify what space debris is and the challenges it poses.
The topics range from debris generation, collision
avoidance measures and techniques, risks to human and
robotic missions and people on Earth in case of re-entries,
and technologies for space debris mitigation and removal.
UNOOSA and ESA experts also created a podcast series
to help navigate and understand the material in each of
the nine infographics. The infographics, as well as the
podcasts, are publicly available on the UNOOSA website.
Space debris infographic
Credit: UNOOSA/ESA
Space debris raises concerns across the global space and non-space community as one of the main challenges to the
long-term sustainability of outer space activities. With near-Earth space being a finite resource, millions of debris
fragments orbiting at high speeds pose the risk of damage or even destruction to active spacecraft and human space
flight missions. In the light of the rapid development of the space industry in recent years, it is increasingly important
to protect these unique orbital regions with the long-term sustainability of space activities in mind.

18 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
Infographic campaign on the Guidelines
Credit: United Nations
UNOOSA AND THE UNITED KINGDOM PARTNER FOR AWARENESS-
RAISING AND CAPACITY-BUILDING RELATED TO THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE GUIDELINES FOR THE LONG-TERM SUSTAINABILITY OF OUTER
SPACE ACTIVITIES
The partnership between UNOOSA and the Government As part of the project, UNOOSA convened regulators,
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern policymakers, space operators and the commercial sector to
Ireland boosts international efforts to protect future space share experiences about actionable and sustainable
activities. Together, the partners encourage all space solutions and to collect operational case studies. The
stakeholders to implement the Guidelines for the Long- awareness-raising component also entailed an accessible
term Sustainability of Outer Space Activities adopted by version of the Guidelines and an infographic series in all six
consensus at the sixty-second session of COPUOS in 2019 official languages of the United Nations. These materials are
to the fullest extent possible. The Guidelines focus on the publicly available on the new Space Sustainability website.
policy and regulatory framework, the safety of space In addition, the website features case studies that show how
operations, international cooperation, capacity-building the stakeholders have operationalized the Guidelines.
and awareness-raising, and scientific and technical research
In the second phase of the project, the Office has sought
and development.
experiences from the COPUOS Member States and
international intergovernmental organizations in
implementing the Guidelines to produce a stakeholder
study report.

CHAPTER 3. HIGHLIGHTS OF 2021 | 19
INTERNATIONAL EFFORT TO
REDUCE IMPACTS OF LIGHT
POLLUTION ON THE NIGHT SKY
BOOSTED THROUGH THE UNITED
NATIONS/SPAIN/INTERNATIONAL
ASTRONOMICAL UNION
CONFERENCE ON DARK AND
QUIET SKIES FOR SCIENCE
AND SOCIETY
For thousands of years, the silent and ordered beauty of
the night sky has inspired humankind in all its intellectual
and emotional pursuits, such as poetry, philosophy, religion
and science. Modern science is particularly indebted to the
observation of astronomical phenomena. Today, artificial
illumination in urban areas is making it increasingly difficult
to observe the night sky in its pristine magnificence. Even
Tenerife, Canary Islands from space
remote sites, often chosen to host the most sophisticated Credit: ESA
astronomical observatories because of their favourable
location, are becoming gradually endangered by light Building on the initial findings and draft recommendations
pollution, radio signal interference and artificially induced from the online workshops in 2020, UNOOSA and Spain,
climatic modifications, including by mega-constellations of jointly with the International Astronomical Union (IAU),
artificial satellites released in low-Earth orbit. organized the “Dark and Quiet Skies for Science and
Society” conference from 3 to 7 . The
conference hosted by the Instituto de Astrofísica de
Canarias was delivered online owing to the disruption
to air travel caused by the serious volcanic eruption
on the nearby island of La Palma.
The conference focused on the implementation of
recommendations, including by identifying technical and
political actions needed to be taken by individual
stakeholders and in partnerships to achieve effective
realization and satisfactory solutions for the preservation of
dark and quiet skies. The recommendations will be
presented to COPUOS for consideration.
Satellite tracks interfere with this image of
Venus and the Pleiades
Credit: Torsten Hansen/IAU OAE

20 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
UNOOSA REACHES NEW
AUDIENCES THROUGH
PARTICIPATION AT EXPO 2020
AND THE SEVENTY-SECOND
INTERNATIONAL ASTRONAUTICAL
CONGRESS
The space industry contributes significantly to the
achievement of global pledges to alleviate human
suffering, improve the well-being of societies, and protect
our planet. UNOOSA has been vocal about the
transformative power of space at every possible
opportunity. Expo 2020 represented a novel avenue and
influential platform to raise awareness of the benefits of
Fireside chat at the Women’s Pavilion
space and broaden the space audience. Credit: Women’s Pavilion
In cooperation with local organizers, UNOOSA helped shape
content for Space Week at Expo 2020. The Office co-curated
“The People’s Mission: Citizens in Space Exploration and
Space Tech for Inclusive Development” to popularize space
exploration, exemplify space benefits and inspire the next
generation. Director Di Pippo presented real-life examples
of the use of space to address global problems.
As a contribution to the mission of the Women’s Pavilion to
raise awareness of the influential role women have played
throughout history, Director Di Pippo paired with Marcos
Pontes, Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation of
Brazil, in the “Fireside Chat: Space4Women – Challenges UNOOSA at Expo 2020 Space Week
Credit: Stuart Wilson/Expo 2020 Dubai
and Opportunities for Women in Space.” Joining Sarah Al
Amiri, United Arab Emirates Minister of State for Advanced
Technology, Director Di Pippo contributed to the opening
of the World Women’s Majlis “Mission Equality: Expanding
Equal Opportunities in the Space Economy,” focusing on
building a prosperous and equitable future for everyone.
UNOOSA also participated in other events upon invitation
of United Nations Member States and other partners.
Following the Space Week at Expo 2020, UNOOSA joined
the space community at the seventy-second International
Astronautical Congress (IAC) at the Dubai World Trade
Centre. Through activities organized by UNOOSA and the
participation at the dedicated exhibition, the Office raised
Presenting real-life examples of the use of Space for SDGs
awareness of the opportunities under the Access to Space Credit: Stuart Wilson/Expo 2020 Dubai
for All initiative and efforts related to space law capacity-
building, as well as promoting the need for sustainable
space operations for a sustainable planet.

CHAPTER 3. HIGHLIGHTS OF 2021 | 21
ASTRONAUTS COME TOGETHER
TO CELEBRATE THE SIXTIETH
ANNIVERSARY OF GAGARIN’S
HISTORIC SPACE FLIGHT
The International Day of Human Space Flight, declared by
the General Assembly in 2011 and commemorated
annually on 12 April, “celebrates each year at the
international level the beginning of the space era for
humankind, reaffirming the important contribution of space
science and technology in achieving SDGs and increasing
the well-being of States and peoples, as well as ensuring
the realization of their aspiration to maintain outer space
for peaceful purposes.”
The bust of Yuri Gagarin at the UNOOSA exhibition
at the Vienna International Centre
In 2021, the international space community marked the
Credit: United Nations
tenth anniversary of the declaration and commemorated
the sixtieth anniversary of the first trip to space with a
human on board. The space flight of the Soviet cosmonaut
“
Yuri Gagarin opened a new chapter in space exploration
and humanity’s continuous quest to reach new frontiers. Gagarin’s first words from space – I feel well – made us
understand that humans could truly go beyond our Earth,
UNOOSA launched a campaign dedicated to commemorating
an achievement that humanity dreamed of for millenniums
this historic achievement with 29 astronauts and test
and that was finally ours. That day, people all over the
astronauts from over 15 countries sharing inspirational
world marvelled at how far our species had come.
messages about their journeys, perspectives and visions for
the future of human space flight in the decades to come. One of the great things about space exploration and
The messages are available on the UNOOSA website. human space flight is the common desire to push the
boundaries of what is possible. Space unites all humans for
a shared and higher purpose; it excites, motivates and
inspires us in so many ways. ”
Simonetta Di Pippo, former Director of UNOOSA

22 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
Chang'e 4 lander on the surface of the Moon
Credit: CNSA/Siyu Zhang/Kevin M. Gill
INTERNATIONAL MOON DAY DECLARED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
The General Assembly declared International Moon Day, – our only natural satellite. Ground-based observations
a United Nations-designated international day to be enabled by the invention of the first telescopes opened a
observed annually on 20 July, in its resolution 76/76 on new chapter in our understanding of our celestial
“International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer companion. With the birth of space activities, the Moon
space” in 2021. International Moon Day marks the became the ultimate destination of countless missions,
anniversary of the first landing by humans on the Moon as including crewed flights that brought the first human
part of the Apollo 11 lunar mission. The celebrations will footprints to another place in the universe. As Moon
also consider the achievements of all States in the exploration efforts continue taking shape with ambitious
exploration of the Moon and raise public awareness of plans, this global celebration will serve not only as a
sustainable Moon exploration and utilization. reminder of success in the past, but as an annual testimony
to future endeavours.
For thousands of years, human civilizations have looked up
to the sky pondering the origin and mysteries of the Moon

CHAPTER 3. HIGHLIGHTS OF 2021 | 23
Buzz Aldrin photographed by Neil Armstrong on the surface of the Moon
Credit: NASA

The West Lothian
region of Scotland
Credit: NASA/Joshua
Stevens
This focus chapter explores the role of
space in combating the climate crisis,
listing some of the activities UNOOSA
conducted to broaden the use of
space to address climate-related
challenges, nurture synergies and
partnerships, and amplify the voices of
future generations. It starts by looking
4 at the value of multilateral discussions
at the World Space Forum.
FOCUS CHAPTER:
SPACE FOR
CLIMATE ACTION

26 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
4 FOCUS CHAPTER:
SPACE FOR
CLIMATE ACTION
Climate science depends heavily on the hardware that
orbits our planet. It guarantees global coverage and
collects comparable, reliable and impartial data allowing us
to track changes and evaluate the different climate models.
More than half of the 54 essential climate variables that
contribute to the characterization of the planet's climate
can only be measured reliably and consistently from space.
Satellites are our eyes into the natural world.
Addressing climate change requires that we turn climate
science into climate action. The space community has
worked for decades to develop solutions to mitigate, adapt
and make societies more resilient to its impacts. Satellites
help us identify locations for renewable energy generation,
improve efficiency across industries and facilitate urban
planning. Their contributions also help feed the world,
manage precious resources, and even save lives and reduce
damage caused by disasters.
As the pressures of climate change mount, there is a
growing need to make the benefits of space universal.
The Office works to democratize access to space and helps
build regional, national and local strategies for climate
action. Promoting dialogue, advancing international
cooperation, amplifying the voices of the young
generation, and building capacity in the use of space
Phytoplankton bloom in the Arctic
assets are at the core of this effort. Credit: NASA
This focus chapter provides an overview of some of the
activities UNOOSA carried out in 2021 in a bid to translate
ambition into action, data into solutions, and individualism
into multilateralism.

CHAPTER 4. FOCUS CHAPTER: SPACE FOR CLIMATE ACTION | 27
The World Space Forum logo
Credit: UNOOSA
UNITED NATIONS/AUSTRIA WORLD
SPACE FORUM 2021 ON SPACE FOR
CLIMATE ACTION
UNOOSA launched the annual World Space Forum (WSF) As climate action starts with evidence- and science-based
in 2019 as a holistic platform for exchanging user needs, information, much of which is derived from space
actionable solutions and the means to strengthen the use infrastructure, participants called for reinforced
of space in achieving sustainable socioeconomic cooperation on greenhouse gas monitoring and the
development. The 2021 edition (held virtually) was development of new applications based on space-
organized jointly with Austria and attracted 540 individual generated knowledge. Furthermore, panellists underscored
participants, 42 per cent of whom were women. Recordings the need for increased capacity-building in applying space
of the sessions are all available on the UNOOSA YouTube data for climate action and strengthened knowledge
channel. transfer among different sectors to nurture synergies on a
national and international scale.
WSF 2021 themed “Space 4 Climate Action” focused on
stakeholder exchange about current and future activities,
actionable solutions and cooperation in support of SDG 13,
on climate action. The Federal Minister for Climate Action,
Environment, Energy, Mobility, Innovation and Technology
of Austria, the Minister for Science, Research and
Innovation of the United Kingdom, and the Director of
UNOOSA opened the event. The three-day programme
explored successful partnerships, initiatives and activities in
leveraging space technologies for climate action, elevated
the voices of youth, and provided an opportunity for both
providers and users to share their perspectives and
participate in international networking and matchmaking.
Ötztal Alps in Tyrol
Credit: ESA

28 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
INSPIRING IDEAS ON UTILIZING SPACE AS A
TOOL TO FOSTER CLIMATE MITIGATION AND
ADAPTATION SELECTED IN THE THIRD EDITION
OF THE SPACE4YOUTH COMPETITION
The Space4Youth essay competition co-organized with the Space Generation
Advisory Council aims at amplifying the voices of young people in the pressing
issues that we face as a society. The theme of the third edition was “Space as a
tool to foster climate change mitigation and adaptation.” Of the 436 submissions
from 80 countries and nine finalists, three essays were shortlisted: Mahlak
Abdullah (United States) based her essay on a research experiment she sent to
the ISS; Karina Maria Berbert Bruno (Brazil) highlighted regional applications of
Earth observation technologies in her home country; and Tejasvi Shivakumar
(India) focused on space influencers and renewable energy.
Mahlak Abdullah from the United States (19) Karina Maria Berbert Bruno from Brazil (31) Tejasvi Shivakumar from India (23)
Credit: herself Credit: herself Credit: herself

CHAPTER 4. FOCUS CHAPTER: SPACE FOR CLIMATE ACTION | 29
The United States Permanent Mission to the International
Organizations in Vienna and the UK Space Agency
supported the competition by involving awardees in
activities such as mentorship programmes and meetings
with experts. “Space4Youth has opened many
opportunities for me,” said one of the participants. One
highlight was the Space4Youth presence at the United
Nations Climate Change Conference (COP 26) in Glasgow.
The winners delivered a message to COP26 global leaders
in a pre-recorded video at a booth called “Space4Climate
Now and in the Future.” Tejasvi Shivakumar participated in
the Youth Takeover Day on November 12 in person and
shared her experience in a blogpost on the UNOOSA
Space4Youth Stories webpage.
Space4Youth Awardee Tejasvi Shivakumar at COP 26
Elevating the voices of youth is crucial to achieving the
Credit: Tejasvi Shivakumar
SDGs. Especially when it comes to climate action, young
people can contribute with innovative ideas to shape the
world they will inherit. With Space4Youth, UNOOSA
remains committed to promoting the next generation of
space professionals.
Thanks to the generous contribution of the United States,
the winners will be able to visit the United States to meet
with representatives of the space industry and attend the
Adult Space Camp, organized by the University of
Alabama, at the United States Space and Rocket Center.
Space4Youth presence at the Glasgow
Climate Change Conference
Credit: Tejasvi Shivakumar

30 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
Glasgow, host of COP 26 from space United Kingdom from the International Space Station
Credit: ESA Credit: NASA
UNOOSA PARTICIPATES IN THE AGREEMENT WITH THE
EARTH INFORMATION DAY AT COP 26 UNITED KINGDOM TO MAP
GLOBAL SPACE-RELATED
Earth Information Day provided the opportunity for CLIMATE ACTION EFFORTS
exchanging information on the state of the global climate
system and developments in systematic observation. In its
Global leaders at COP26 in Glasgow emphasized that
intervention, UNOOSA underlined the fundamental need
addressing the climate crisis demands a holistic and
for the consolidation of climate science and research to
collaborative approach using resources, tools and
generate the most accurate understanding of the drivers,
technologies at full speed. While the scientific community
dynamics and impacts of climate change. To succeed in
and the United Nations system have long recognized and
such endeavours, multilateralism, integration of data and
utilized space-based assets as essential components in
interoperability of systems are paramount – an approach
climate change research, monitoring and policy enactment,
that must be driven through political commitment.
a comprehensive overview of the broad spectrum of
UNOOSA pledged to continue delivering targeted
current and planned activities in using space for climate
capacity-building and technical advisory activities,
action has been missing. The agreement with the United
facilitating multi-stakeholder collaboration, and promoting
Kingdom addresses this information gap for space-related
efforts to encourage the use of space for sustainable
climate action and will also contribute to building
development.
synergies, facilitating coherence and avoiding duplication
among already existing activities. The outcome report aims
to help the international community gain a better
understanding of existing technical, policy and
coordination efforts. The report can also inform strategy
development or research and bring policy coherence across
the multilateral system.

CHAPTER 4. FOCUS CHAPTER: SPACE FOR CLIMATE ACTION | 31
UNOOSA AND INTERNATIONAL PARTNERS ADVANCE WORK ON
DELIVERING SPACE BENEFITS TO COMBAT CLIMATE CHANGE AT
THE LOCAL LEVEL
With climate action embedded within the mandate of in advancing universal access to space benefits.
UNOOSA across different levels, both the participation and SCO breaks down the benefits that space assets readily
contribution to the work of international coordination bodies offer to national and local levels, helping authorities and
are of great importance. For these reasons, UNOOSA has communities on the ground to make informed decisions
been involved with the Space Climate Observatory (SCO) and adopt the right policies based on the data available.
since 2016, which offers a unique opportunity to raise In 2021, SCO continued to expand its membership with
awareness of the transformative power of space tools and the incorporation of three new members bringing the total
facilitate the adoption of space solutions on the ground. to 36. By the end of 2021, 43 activities had been labelled
Combining space technology expertise in the downstream as SCO projects.
sector with the broad reach of the United Nations is
efficient in connecting solution providers with users, and
Valentine Island in northern Western Australia
Credit: ESA

32 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
“
The crisis brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic is
unfolding against a planetary crisis that is threatening our
climate and life as we know it. Sustainable food production
systems should be recognized as an essential solution to
these existing challenges. It is possible to feed a growing
global population while protecting our planet.
”
Secretary-General’s Chair Summary and Statement of
Action on the United Nations Food Systems Summit
Farmland in Hereford, Texas, United States
Credit: ESA
UNOOSA AND AUSTRIA
COME TOGETHER TO ADVANCE
DIALOGUE ON SPACE
APPLICATIONS FOR FOOD SYSTEMS
The 2021 United Nations/Austria Symposium "Space regional, national or local contexts. Participants also
Applications for Food Systems", held virtually from 7 to 9 discussed specific challenges to the implementation of
September, showcased the concrete support of space space applications for food systems, such as the need to
applications for food systems. The discussions and enhance the understanding of user needs, raising
outcomes contributed to activities around the United awareness of space solutions, technology transfer, financing
Nations Food Systems Summit convened by the Secretary- for development and youth engagement.
General as part of the Decade of Action to achieve the
Keynote statements from UNOOSA and ESA complemented
17 SDGs by 2030.
the sessions, providing insights into international
The Symposium provided a platform for specific policy cooperation to leverage space technologies against climate
discussions and the exchange of experience and know-how change in support of sustainable food systems.
on the integration of space applications and tools into the
For the first time, post-symposium online training was
domain of agriculture and food security. The overarching
organized by UNOOSA, ESA, the Indian Space Research
objective was to offer users an opportunity to explore
Organisation and NASA to raise awareness of the use of Earth
tools, policies and approaches fit for their respective
observation technologies and remote sensing for agriculture
and enhance participants' capabilities to use them.
All presentations made at the Symposium are available on
the UNOOSA website.

CHAPTER 4. FOCUS CHAPTER: SPACE FOR CLIMATE ACTION | 33
Qeshm Island – the largest island in the Islamic Republic of Iran
Credit: ESA
UNOOSA AND THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN EXPLORE THE ROLE
OF SPACE TECHNOLOGY APPLICATIONS FOR DROUGHT, FLOOD
AND WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
Earth observation technologies are crucial to managing and the possibilities offered by outer space for monitoring
monitoring water resources and water-related disasters floods, drought conditions and water resource
such as floods and droughts, which increasingly affect environments. Speakers emphasized that capacity-building,
agricultural production and food security. In this context, knowledge exchange, interdisciplinary thinking, policy
UNOOSA, through UN-SPIDER, and the Islamic Republic of developments and international cooperation were the
Iran organized the “United Nations/Islamic Republic of Iran driving factors for the achievement of the SDGs. Convening
Workshop on Space Technology Applications for Drought, over 370 participants from 64 countries, this event
Flood and Water Resource Management” in August. The contributed to the Food Systems Summit of the Secretary-
workshop hosted by the Iranian Space Agency provided an General and the Decade of Action to achieve the SDGs.
opportunity to deepen awareness and understanding of

3344 || UUNNIITTEEDD NNAATTIIOONNSS OOFFFFIICCEE FFOORR OOUUTTEERR SSPPAACCEE AAFFFFAAIIRRSS
Maupiti Island in the South Pacific Ocean
Credit: NASA/Robert Simmon
SPACE4WATER
Climate change has wide-reaching implications in the water stakeholders in the space and water sectors and helps tap
domain. Alterations in the water cycle, growing disaster risks into the full potential of space assets in addressing water
and rising sea levels, and increased water stress are only a issues. The Portal’s delivery comprises three pillars:
few examples. These realities underscore the demand for multilateralism, awareness-raising and community-building.
more effective water and disaster management and
international cooperation. Space technology and The effort to facilitate scientific exchange via conferences
applications play a crucial role in mapping watercourses and informs decision-making and helps shape policy. The
aquatic ecosystems, monitoring and mitigating the effects Space4Water Portal showcases exceptional work in the
of floods and droughts, and monitoring the water cycle. water domain, enables networking opportunities, and
To leverage this potential, UNOOSA launched the supports capacity-building by making information easy to
Space4Water Project, delivered jointly with the Prince Sultan access and compare. The community-building component
bin Abdulaziz International Prize for Water. The project of the Portal aims at creating an Experts Committee for
fosters collaboration and knowledge exchange between Quality Assurance and Scientific Guidance.
“
Water is one of the immediate means of experiencing how our climate is changing.
Stuart Crane in his 2021 Space4Water, Meet a Professional interview. ”

CCCHHHAAAPPPTTTEEERRR 444... FFFOOOCCCUUUSSS CCCHHHAAAPPPTTTEEERRR::: SSSPPPAAACCCEEE FFFOOORRR CCCLLLIIIMMMAAATTTEEE AAACCCTTTIIIOOONNN ||| 333555
In 2021, the Office continued to expand the Portal with
new content. As of 2021, it featured 66 stakeholders,
interviews with 12 professionals and 15 young
professionals, and over 500 knowledge resources on the
use of space-based technology for water, with over 200
items added in 2021 alone. Throughout the year, the Portal
continued to advance its reach, evidenced by the ground-
breaking growth of users visiting the platform in 2021,
surpassing 2020 figures by 150 per cent. The Office also
launched calls for local perspectives and case studies as a
new feature. These calls aim to identify needs and potential
space solutions and learn about gaps in water resource
management from individuals, communities, civil society,
professionals, researchers or organizations in the field.
The Space4Water Community keeps growing and
UNOOSA invites stakeholders and professionals to reach
out and learn more at Space4Water Portal.
Type of content/
Number of content As at 31 Dec. 2021
items published
Stakeholders 62
(Young) Professionals 24
Articles 35
Interviews 23
Activities/opportunities 25
Publications 77
Software 21
Projects 12
Training material 79
Events 155
TOTAL 513
Space4Water Logo
Credit: UNOOSA

Lake Powell
bordering Utah
and Arizona,
United States
Credit:
NASA/Lauren
Dauphin
The resilience of communities
depends on an interplay of data and
information, technologies and policy
developments. Space assets are
crucial for evidence-based decision-
making, tailored and targeted policies
and reinforcing the full disaster
management cycle. UNOOSA,
through the UN-SPIDER programme,
helps developing countries find,
access and use space-based
information and implement the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction, the Paris Agreement and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. In this chapter devoted
to UN-SPIDER, you can read about the
main activities of 2021.

LEVERAGING SPACE
FOR DISASTER RISK
REDUCTION AND
MANAGEMENT

38 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
5 LEVERAGING SPACE
FOR DISASTER RISK
REDUCTION AND
MANAGEMENT
Extreme seasonal fires in Nepal
Credit: NASA
The impacts of climate change affect the occurrence, At the request of Member States, UN-SPIDER conducts
type and severity of disasters, exerting pressures on technical advisory missions to assess a country’s existing
adaptation and resilience as crucial components of capacity for leveraging space for disaster management and
climate action. Investing in technologies and capacities emergency response. Since 2006, UN-SPIDER has carried
to advance disaster preparedness and management is out 38 such missions and produced recommendations on
paramount. Space technologies play a vital role in this the following topics: policy and coordination; data access,
context. Established in 2006, UN-SPIDER enhances access availability and sharing; capacity-building; institutional
to and the use of these technologies by all countries and strengthening; early warning; and preparedness and
international and regional organizations in all phases emergency response efforts. These have helped countries
of the disaster management cycle. institutionalize the use of space-based information in

CHAPTER 5. LEVERAGING SPACE FOR DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENT | 39
disaster management. Building on UN-SPIDER TECHNICAL ADVISORY SUPPORT
the results of technical advisory TO MEMBER STATES IN 2021
missions, UN-SPIDER follows up with
technical advice and training activities
tailored to the needs of a country and
strengthens local capacity for using Guatemala Nigeria
Earth observation and remote sensing
In March and April, UN-SPIDER UN-SPIDER organized several virtual
assets.
provided virtual advisory support to teleconferences with the National
UN-SPIDER is based in Vienna with the National Coordinating Agency for Space Research and Development
offices in Beijing and Bonn, thanks Disaster Risk Reduction following the Agency, the National Emergency
to generous contributions by the eruption of the Pacaya volcano. As Management Agency, and the
Governments of China and Germany. part of this support, the National Nigerian Hydrological Services
A global network of 26 regional Space Commission of Argentina, in its Agency to advance discussions on
support offices (RSOs) hosted by role as a UN-SPIDER regional support ways to address the growing
space agencies, universities, research office, donated satellite imagery from challenges posed by the annual
institutions and civil protection its SAOCOM 1 satellite to contribute floods. As part of these discussions,
entities supports the programme to the tracking of active lava flows. the parties agreed to conduct a
and provides expertise, services national expert meeting, which took
and content for the UN-SPIDER place from 13 to 15 .
Knowledge Portal. With the
conclusion of the memorandum of
understanding in , the
Niger River delta in Nigeria
Joint-Stock Company National Center Credit: Airbus
of Space Research and Technology
(NCSRT) in Kazakhstan joined the RSO
network, bringing valuable experience
of monitoring various disasters and
emergencies using space-based
information. Over the years, the
Center has developed technologies in
remote sensing and Earth observation
and become experienced in
international capacity-building.

40 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
Namibia Malawi Paraguay
In recent years several countries in Standardized Vegetation Index maps In October, at the request of the
Southern Africa have been covering more than 20 years of data Paraguayan Space Agency, ZFL in its
experiencing more frequent and were also created for Malawi. To raise role as a UN-SPIDER RSO, prepared
intense droughts that impact rural awareness regarding the benefits of almost 500 maps of the Standardized
communities. To raise awareness of the combined use of archived and Vegetation Index in the country over a
the use of UN-SPIDER recommended up-to-date satellite imagery in drought period of two decades. This effort was
practices, the RSO Centre for Remote early warning systems, ZFL created conducted in response to agricultural
Sensing of Land Surfaces (ZFL) of the hundreds of maps of the Standardized and hydrological droughts that
University of Bonn created more than Vegetation Index. Complemented by contributed to severe forest fires in
490 maps of the Standardized the map of areas flooded in March Paraguay in 2021.
Vegetation Index, covering the period 2019, these resources were presented
between and June to the Department of Disaster
2021. In addition, maps of flooded Management Affairs of Malawi and to
areas in Namibia from were the Office of the United Nations
also presented to the National Resident Coordinator in Malawi.
Directorate of Disaster Risk
Management of Namibia.
Convergence of two contrasting geological Lake Malawi in the eastern rift
regions in south-central Namibia of the Great Rift Valley
Credit: NASA Credit: ESA

CHAPTER 5. LEVERAGING SPACE FOR DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENT | 41
Colombo, from above
Credit: Airbus
Sri Lanka
UN-SPIDER organized three capacity-
building programmes in Sri Lanka with
officials from various agencies and
provincial offices of the National
Emergency Management Agency. The
national consultant supported the
strengthening of the Platform for
Real-time Impact and Situation
Monitoring, developed with the help
of the World Food Programme, and
assisted the National Emergency
Management Agency with the training
programme required to become an
authorized user of the International Afghanistan Niger
Charter on Space and Major Disasters.
In January, UN-SPIDER held an At the request of the National Civil
UN-SPIDER also supported the
introductory meeting to support Protection Directorate of Niger,
establishment of approaches for
Afghanistan at the request of the UN-SPIDER carried out a second
monitoring forest fires, burn severity
Office of the State Ministry for online training course on flood
mapping and drought monitoring
Disaster Management and mapping with Sentinel-1 radar
using open-source satellite images
Humanitarian Affairs. This meeting imagery in Google Earth Engine to
and software tools. The Programme
focused on understanding policy, continue strengthening the capacity of
also facilitated the nomination of two
institutional coordination, current Niger to use space-based information
officers from the Disaster
capacity and supportive legislation to respond to floods in the country.
Management Centre of Sri Lanka to
related to the use of geospatial UN-SPIDER staff introduced basic
undertake a nine-month postgraduate
information for disaster preparedness, principles of radar remote sensing to
diploma course in Remote Sensing
early warning, response and recovery. 36 participants from government
and Geographic Information Systems
The priorities identified at the meeting agencies and the United Nations
at the Centre for Space, Science and
led to the provision of advisory Resident Coordinator’s Office, and
Technology Education for Asia and the
support on drought monitoring in taught all participants to use relevant
Pacific (CSSTEAP).
Afghanistan in the January–May recommended practices, present the
period. In May, the Office of the State results in geographic information
Ministry for Disaster Management and systems as flood maps, and explore
Humanitarian Affairs and UN-SPIDER the process with selected case studies.
conducted a virtual thematic meeting
with key stakeholder agencies on
“Assessing Drought and Water
Resources Conservation using Earth
Observation” together with Delta State
University, Mississippi, United States
and the Intentional Water Management
Institute as UN-SPIDER RSOs.

42 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
UN-SPIDER EMERGENCY SUPPORT
Activations of the International Charter
“Space and Major Disasters”
As part of its activities, UN-SPIDER facilitates activations of
the International Charter on Space and Major Disasters, a
worldwide collaboration through which satellite data are
made available for disaster relief efforts. In 2021, the
Charter was activated on behalf of the National Board for
Disaster Management of Indonesia, and with support from
the Indonesian National Institute of Aeronautics and Space
as an RSO, as a result of a major earthquake on 15 January.
Group photo of the Guatemala training
The earthquake displaced almost 95,000 people, causing course participants
over 90 deaths and 3,300 injuries. Credit: UNOOSA
In addition to requesting the activation of the mechanism,
UN-SPIDER continued to raise awareness of the
opportunities offered by the Charter through international
events and conferences. For example, from 30 November
to 2 , UN-SPIDER, the Central American
Coordination Centre for Natural Disaster Prevention
(CEPREDENAC) and the International Charter on Space
and Major Disasters carried out a training course on the
procedures employed by project managers in case of
activation of the International Charter in Guatemala.
The training course allowed over 20 participants from
Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua and Panama to understand
the procedures and rules related to the use of the Charter.
Participants were trained in the use of the UN-SPIDER
recommended practice for rapid flood mapping using
Sentinel-1 radar imagery. The training course was also
used to establish a regional remote sensing team that will Raja Ampat archipelago in the West Papua
province of Indonesia
support CEPREDENAC and national disaster management Credit: Airbus
agencies in countries of the region in mapping efforts in
UN-SPIDER worked with relevant institutions in
case of disasters.
Bangladesh, the Gambia, Honduras, Mexico, Mozambique,
Additionally, thanks to the efforts of UN-SPIDER, in 2021 Nicaragua, Niger, Panama, the Solomon Islands, Viet Nam
the Charter Secretariat incorporated the national disaster and Zimbabwe to support them to become authorized
management agencies of Mexico and the Gambia as users of the International Charter. As a result, Mexico
authorized users. and the Gambia have already been accepted as authorized
users of the Charter.

CHAPTER 5. LEVERAGING SPACE FOR DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENT | 43
NEW RESOURCES ON THE UN-SPIDER KNOWLEDGE PORTAL
The UN-SPIDER Knowledge Portal, as one of the the Copernicus programme, in combination with
cornerstones of the programme, hosts information on in-situ historical data on impacts of floods in these
activities conducted by UN-SPIDER as well as by the five countries to improve flood early warning systems
disaster management, emergency response and space through the incorporation of impact-based forecasts.
communities. The Portal provides easy digital access to
• Procedure to use the Global Wildfire Information
resources and recommended practices on using space
System of the Copernicus programme for national
technologies for disaster management.
focal points of the Sendai Framework Monitor to
In 2021, the Portal was updated to a newer version and report on forests destroyed by fire in reference
further content was added to the French and Spanish to target C of the Sendai Framework. Within the
versions. The Portal continued to attract an increasing framework of the procedure, a benchmark for
number of users, with website visits rising by over calculating the extent of burned areas was created
10 per cent compared to 2020, and approximately that serves as a baseline for present measurements.
45,000 monthly visitors in 2021. UN-SPIDER continued
• UN-SPIDER increased the use of cloud-based
to add and update content items and improved the
geographic information system solutions based on
coverage of activities of the RSOs.
observations made during technical advisory support
activities about the limited availability of information
UN-SPIDER developed the following tools/resources:
on technology resources among civil protection
• Flood Guide project with Copernicus, Airbus Defence agencies. Examples include the use of online and
and Space, ZFL of the University of Bonn, and web-based systems, such as Google Earth Engine,
institutions from Ghana, Guatemala, Nigeria, Peru and in recommended practices.
South Africa. The project aims to use the information
generated in the Global Flood Awareness System of
Forest fires on the Greek island of Euboea
Credit: Airbus

4444 || UUNNIITTEEDD NNAATTIIOONNSS OOFFFFIICCEE FFOORR OOUUTTEERR SSPPAACCEE AAFFFFAAIIRRSS
OTHER UN-SPIDER ACTIVITIES
UN-SPIDER Bonn International Conference on “Space-based
Solutions for Disaster Management in Africa: Networks and
Information Technologies in Times of Crisis”
The visualizations using GIS and take advantage of such solutions
web-based dashboards, the wider effectively. The conference addressed
reach of communication technologies innovative solutions by the space
and the increasing availability of community and the means of
information technologies open an implementation of space solutions,
opportunity for the increased use of and allowed UN-SPIDER to strengthen
space solutions. Virtual networks and its network of African stakeholders for
partnerships must be reinforced to improved use of space technologies
Snow atop Mount Kilimanjaro in the
facilitate these opportunities and for disaster management. It was United Republic of Tanzania
Credit: NASA
ensure that staff in civil protection attended by 225 participants from
agencies and other actors involved in 81 institutions in more than
disaster management activities can 28 countries.
UN-SPIDER regional expert meeting for Latin America and
the Caribbean on “Space-based Solutions for Disaster Risk
Reduction and Emergency Response in Latin America”
In November, UN-SPIDER, Latin American institutions in the use
CEPREDENAC, four RSOs and NASA of space technologies and the
joined forces to organize an expert establishment of a regional technical
meeting to discuss the contribution of group of professionals to contribute to
satellite technologies and innovative disaster response efforts. Participants
applications to tackle natural hazards also recommended that quarterly
in Latin America and the Caribbean. virtual meetings should be organized
The event was attended by almost to continue raising awareness of the
200 participants from 16 countries efforts, exchange lessons learned on
who represented more than the use of space technologies, and Hurricane Dorian over the
Caribbean from the ISS
100 institutions, including United continue facilitating synergies Credit: NASA
Nations entities. Participants between the space and disaster
highlighted the need to continue management communities.
noting the advances made by

CCHHAAPPTTEERR 55.. LLEEVVEERRAAGGIINNGG SSPPAACCEE FFOORR DDIISSAASSTTEERR RRIISSKK RREEDDUUCCTTIIOONN AANNDD MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT || 4455
Virtual training course on “Space Technology for Building
Disaster Resilience to Water Scarcity”
Monitoring drought conditions and organized two virtual training sessions.
water stress using space assets is Experts from UNOOSA, the National
becoming increasingly essential to Disaster Reduction Centre of China,
enable early warnings and response, and three RSOs of UN-SPIDER Multitemporal Sentinel-1A
especially in developing countries. delivered technical sessions on various radar image of the Aral Sea
Credit: NASA
Considering the importance of the topics related to water scarcity.
topic, UNOOSA and the Asia Pacific The courses were attended by over
Space Cooperation Organization 60 participants from 11 countries.
Second Massive Open Online Course on “Geospatial
Applications for Disaster Risk Management”
On 1 June, UNOOSA, together with of geospatial and Earth observation
the India-based CSSTEAP, launched technologies in disaster risk
the second phase of the Massive management. The second phase
Open Online Course (MOOC) on of MOOC reflected lessons learned
Geospatial Applications for Disaster from the first course launched
Risk Management. MOOC provided in 2020. Phase II attracted more
free and flexible online training to than 6,300 participants from
enhance capabilities related to the use 122 countries.
The eye of Hurricane Dorian seen from the ISS
Credit: NASA

4466 || UUNNIITTEEDD NNAATTIIOONNSS OOFFFFIICCEE FFOORR OOUUTTEERR SSPPAACCEE AAFFFFAAIIRRSS
Regional expert meeting on “Space-based Solutions for Risk
And Disaster Management in Southern Africa”
The expert meeting organized by from different regional, national and
UN-SPIDER and ZFL brought together international institutions explored the
120 participants and addressed the structures and activities of disaster
role of satellite technologies and novel management agencies in Southern
applications developed by the space Africa. Concrete tools that support
community to respond to challenges disaster management efforts were
posed by natural hazards in Southern presented alongside UN-SPIDER
Africa. In three sessions, participants recommended practices.
Sand seas of the Namib Desert
Credit: ESA
Regional workshop on “Enhancing Preparedness for
Climate-related Disasters Using Space-based Technologies”
The Workshop was carried out jointly warning and risk information were
by UN-SPIDER and the South Asian attended by 50 experts. This effort
Association for Regional Cooperation allowed participants to identify areas
(SAARC) Disaster Management at risk, access flood- and cyclone-
Centre, in collaboration with the related early warning information, use
International Water Management emergency response mechanisms such
Institute of Sri Lanka and CSSTEAP. as the International Charter on Space
The training and simulation exercises and Major Disasters and Sentinel Asia,
that support regional efforts for the and prepare products needed for
effective utilization of space-based supporting emergencies.
information for providing early
Himalayas, the Tibetan Plateau and the
Indo-Gangetic plain from the International
Space Station
Credit: NASA

CCHHAAPPTTEERR 55.. LLEEVVEERRAAGGIINNGG SSPPAACCEE FFOORR DDIISSAASSTTEERR RRIISSKK RREEDDUUCCTTIIOONN AANNDD MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT || 4477
National expert meeting on Online workshop on Annual meetings with
“Space-based Solutions for “Drought Monitoring and UN-SPIDER regional
Disaster Risk Management Management Using Earth support offices
and Emergency Response in Observation and Weather
Nigeria” Forecast Data”
In April, UN-SPIDER together with The workshop carried out jointly by Following the recommendation of the
ZFL, the National Space Research and UN-SPIDER, the SAARC Disaster tenth annual RSO meeting,
Development Agency, the National Management Centre and the UN-SPIDER organized three virtual
Emergency Management Agency of International Water Management gatherings of its RSOs to debate and
Nigeria and the Nigerian Hydrological Institute in Sri Lanka addressed the coordinate workplans, explore
Services Agency delivered a national increased frequency of droughts in potential joint activities and identify
expert meeting. More than South Asia. Over 50 senior officials knowledge gaps. The parties
80 participants from European and from SAARC member States discussed discussed Earth observation
African institutions received insights advances in Earth observation and techniques for monitoring locust
on challenges and recommendations weather forecast data as well as infestation and new ways to conduct
for flood management in Nigeria. approaches and tools to foster capacity-building activities, including
UN-SPIDER delivered a technical drought resilience in the region, eLearning. At the last meeting, a new
presentation on procedures highlighting global and regional RSO was introduced, and updates
developed by the Programme to platforms and related tools for were provided about ongoing and
process satellite imagery for efficient drought management. upcoming activities.
generating relevant information on
flood management. Recordings and
materials from the meeting are
available on the Knowledge Portal.
RUS Remote Training on “Disaster Management:
Assessment of Floods and Burned Areas”
The European Commission-funded other interested young or aspiring Sentinel-2 imagery and (b) floods
Copernicus Research and User disaster management professionals on using Sentinel-1 imagery. The
Support (RUS) capacity strengthening 18 and 19 . The 68 participants who attended the
team (through the service provider training used practical examples from course were provided access to a RUS
SERCO), the Central European recent disaster events in Europe to virtual machine environment for image
University and UN-SPIDER demonstrate how to generate maps of processing and other complex
co-organized a two-day online training the geographical extent of (a) burned analytical tools.
session for master-level students and areas caused by forest fires using

Algal blooms
swirling just off
the coast of Japan
Credit: ESA
Our quest for sustainable
development requires the utilization of
all assets. Satellites are among the
most important. More than 50 per
cent of SDG targets benefit from
space operations. Space activities
have become inalienable parts of our
lives, even if their impact often
remains hidden. Exploration efforts
change our perspectives, satellites
enable countless benefits that improve
our well-being, and the data we
gather empower economic growth
and industrial development. This
chapter opens a window on UNOOSA
activities that bring the benefits of
space to everyone, everywhere.

SPACE4SDGS

50 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
6 SPACE4SDGS
FIFTY YEARS OF THE PROGRAMME ON SPACE APPLICATIONS
At the first United Nations Conference on the Exploration All initiative, which consolidates such activities, manifests
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE) held in the value of cooperation and the work of the United
1968, Member States recommended the creation of a Nations in democratizing the benefits of space. The three
dedicated programme in the framework of the United satellites launched by Guatemala, Kenya and Mauritius are
Nations. In 1971, the United Nations Programme on Space outstanding examples of dreams becoming a reality. The
Applications was established to raise awareness of the opportunities arising from the opening of the China Space
benefits of space technology and assist countries in Station to the international community and those offered in
acquiring the knowledge, skills and practical experience partnership with selected private entities will further
necessary for their application. contribute to the achievements of the Programme.
In 2021, UNOOSA celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of the Over these 50 years, the Office has exhibited flexibility in
Programme and its achievements. Provision of country the delivery of the Programme, keeping abreast of the
capacity-building, education, research and development latest developments in space science and technology.
support, and technical advisory services have all helped Targeted training through webinars and massive open
reduce the capabilities gap between countries. In the five online courses, new ways of convening experts and
decades of its existence, the Office has welcomed more partners, and reaching new audiences, especially from
than 25,000 participants, mainly from developing countries, developing countries, are but some of the results. As we
in over 700 training courses, workshops, seminars and look towards the future, this innovative spirit will ensure the
conferences conducted globally. Office remains well equipped to address the capacity-
building needs of countries, facilitate the use of space-
In addition, capacity-building efforts have evolved to offer
based solutions in building a better future, and promote
hands-on opportunities. Cooperating with space
international cooperation in the peaceful uses of space.
stakeholders, the Office has developed programmes to
enable access to space research facilities, infrastructure and A commemorative video featuring JAXA astronaut Soichi
information. These efforts contribute to developing Noguchi speaking from the International Space Station was
technical know-how, engineering processes and shown as a highlight during COPUOS 2021. The video is
infrastructure in Member States. The Access to Space for available on UNOOSA YouTube.

CHAPTER 6. SPACE4SDGS | 51
“
From outer space, you don’t see countries, you see
continents, you see oceans, you see mountains.
You see one Earth. We are all in this together and we need
to work together, utilizing all available technologies, to
solve the pressing issues of our times, here on the only
planet that we call home.
”
Soichi Noguchi, JAXA astronaut featured
in the PSA 50 video
“
The Programme on Space Applications is committed to
building capacity among Member States to harness
space technologies to address issues of common
concern to all humanity and to contribute to achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals. As we celebrate
the fiftieth anniversary of the Programme on Space
Applications, we would like to thank all Member
States, space agencies and other stakeholders for their
contributions. The Office looks forward to many more
collaborations in the years to come. ”
Simonetta Di Pippo, former director of UNOOSA
The Great Rift Valley of Kenya has been shaped
by major tectonic and volcanic activity
Credit: ESA

52 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
ACCESS TO SPACE FOR ALL
Access to Space for All is a UNOOSA Access to Space for All is structured In 2021, Access to Space for All kept
initiative delivered in partnerships with around three tracks that share the evolving. Two new partners joined the
space agencies, research institutions objective of bringing the benefits of initiative, expanding the portfolio with
and industry. This unique cooperative space to humankind: additional activities. UNOOSA and
venture offers access to space partners selected awardees in several
Hypergravity and Microgravity Track:
research facilities, infrastructure and programmes, with these updates
Aimed at gradually acquiring the
information to bridge the capabilities covered in chapter 3 of this report.
capability of designing, implementing
gap among nations in accessing and Furthermore, building on the success
and conducting experiments in orbit
utilizing the benefits of space. The of the educational activities in 2020,
and of the associated engineering
initiative actively contributes to the Access to Space for All has advanced
skills and processes
achievement of the SDGs as the Office from providing hands-on opportunities
requires applicants to link their project Satellite Development Track: to delivering a comprehensive
proposals with at least one of the Aimed at gradually acquiring the capacity-building programme with
SDGs. Many successful applications capability of designing, building, each track underpinned by three
target multiple Goals, mostly focusing verifying, deploying, operating and components developed to provide
on SDG 4, on quality education, SDG decommissioning small satellites in better support to Member States.
8, on decent work and economic orbit
• The hands-on component is
growth, SDG 9, on industry, innovation
Space Exploration Track: Aimed at based on opportunities provided
and infrastructure, SDG 10, on
broadening engagement in space by different partners and aims at
reduced inequalities, and SDG 17, on
exploration and developing associated providing access to space
partnerships for the Goals.
capacity through technology and research facilities and
communication infrastructure to develop technical
know-how.
S
S•
TO • SPAC
E
• 4
• T
in
h
fo
e
r
t
m
o
a
o
t
ls
io
c
n
o
o
m
n
p
o
o
p
n
e
e
n
n
-
t
s
p
o
r
u
o
r
v
c
i
e
d e
to
s
o ls
C
E •
A
C L to support the hands-on
A L component.
• The education component
provides the theoretical
foundation to fully utilize the tools
and opportunities.
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE
FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

CHAPTER 6. SPACE4SDGS | 53
The success of the initiative rests on Aerospace Exploration Agency, UNOOSA remains committed to
partnerships with public and private the Keldysh Institute of Applied expanding opportunities on offer
actors. As of 2021, the following Mathematics, part of the Russian through the Access to Space for All
partners contributed to the Access to Academy of Sciences, as well as initiative and welcomes offers for
Space for All initiative: Airbus Defence and Space GmbH, new partnerships to develop and
The Center of Applied Space Avio S.p.A. and the Sierra Space strengthen strategic alliances
Technology and Microgravity, the Corporation. to help address the challenges
China Manned Space Agency, the facing humanity using the power
European Space Agency, the German of space.
Aerospace Center, the Japan
HYPERGRAVITY AND MICROGRAVITY
Building capacity for conducting SATELLITE DEVELOPMENT
experiments in orbit
Building capacity that enables SPACE EXPLORATION
Hands-on opportunities in
hypergravityand microgravity the development, deployment
from ground to orbit and operation of satellites
Broadening the engagement in
Open sourcetools bridging
hands-on and education Hands-on opportunities for space exploration
satellite deployment
components
Hands-on opportunities to
Education material for Open sourcetools bridging engage in space exploration
building up experiments hands-on and education
components
Open sourcetools bridging
Education material hands-on and education
supporting the whole components
life cycle of satellites
Education material for
Structure of the Access space exploration
to Space for All initiative
Credit: UNOOSA

54 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
KiboCUBE
UNOOSA and JAXA continued
advancing the opportunity for
institutions from developing countries
to construct a cube satellite (CubeSat)
and deploy it from the ISS Japanese
Experiment Module (Kibo).
As of , the KiboCUBE
programme, delivered under the
Satellite Development Track of the
Access to Space for All initiative,
conducted five rounds of selection to
deploy a 1-unit CubeSat from the
Kibo module of the International
Space Station. MIR-SAT1, the first-ever CubeSats from Costa Rica, Kenya and
satellite of Mauritius, was launched in Turkey are installed into the JEM Small
Satellite Orbital Deployers
 (see details in the Credit: JAXA/NASA
Highlights chapter) as the third
CubeSat under KiboCUBE, after
Kenya and Guatemala. The fifth-round
awardee, the Central American
Integration System (SICA), is in the
initial stage of satellite development,
working to finalize the design of its
CubeSat. Surya University of Indonesia
and the Technical University of
Moldova, the awardees of the third
and fourth round, completed the
assembly and testing of their satellites
and are preparing for launch in 2022.
In 2021, UNOOSA and JAXA also
concluded the application period for
the sixth round and opened the
seventh round of this opportunity.
Quetzal-1, the first Guatemalan CubeSat
by Universidad del Valle de Guatemala
Credit: JAXA

CHAPTER 6. SPACE4SDGS | 55
United Nations/China
Cooperation on the
Utilization of the China
Space Station
The China Space Station programme
with the China Manned Space Agency
under the Hypergravity and
Microgravity Track is an innovative and
future-focused programme to open up
space exploration activities to all
nations and create a new paradigm in
building capabilities in space science
and technology. This opportunity
enables the utilization of the China
Space Station platform for on-orbit
experiments. The nine projects
The complete structure of China Space
selected in the first round involve Station to be established around 2022
Credit: CMSA
23 institutions from 17 Member States
and are in development.
Drop Tower Experimental
Series
The Drop Tower Experimental Series
(DropTES), under the Hypergravity
and Microgravity Track of the initiative,
is an opportunity to conduct
microgravity experiments at the
Bremen Drop Tower in collaboration
with the Centre of Applied Space
Technology and Microgravity (ZARM)
at the University of Bremen, Germany
and the German Aerospace Centre
(DLR). The awardee of the seventh
Inside the Drop Tower in Bremen
round, Universidad Católica Boliviana Credit: ZARM
“San Pablo” from Bolivia, selected in
2020, postponed their experiment due
to the pandemic. Despite the 3D printing technology are scheduled
obstacles, the team has continued for 2022. In 2021, the partners of the
developing the experiment module. DropTES fellowship also opened the
Their material science experiments in seventh round, with applications
microgravity to demonstrate currently under review.

56 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
HyperGES
The HyperGES programme, under Centre (ESTEC) in the Netherlands.
the Hypergravity and Microgravity Mahidol University in Thailand, the
Track of the initiative, is an first-round awardee, will conduct
opportunity delivered in collaboration biology experiments in hypergravity
with the European Space Agency to study the effects of modified
(ESA) to conduct hypergravity gravity on the watermeal plant, which
experiments at the Large Diameter could support space exploration as a
Centrifuge facility at the European source of food and oxygen.
Space Research and Technology
The Large Diameter Centrifuge
at the European Space Research
and Technology Centre
Credit: ESA
United Nations/Japan Long-term Fellowship Programme
for Postgraduate Study on Nano-satellite Technologies
The Postgraduate Study on and Zimbabwe were selected for the
Nanosatellite Technologies (PNST) master’s, and three students from
fellowship programme established in Ethiopia, Laos and Trinidad and
2012 by UNOOSA and the Tobago for the doctoral programme.
Government of Japan, in cooperation The 2022 round opened in August.
with the Kyushu Institute of Technology
UNOOSA and Kyutech conducted a
(Kyutech), offers selected master’s and
webinar to share experiences from
doctoral students from developing
past and present fellows. The
countries and non-spacefaring nations
presentations and recordings along
extensive research opportunities using
with an interview with one of the
the nano-satellite development and
current beneficiaries are available on
testing facilities at Kyutech. The chosen
the UNOOSA website. Soldering some components of a LoRa
candidates receive a grant from the receiver which was later distributed for
testing with ground terminals in various
Government of Japan for the duration
countries
“I feel that Kyutech brings the world
of their fellowship. The programme Credit: Fátima Durán
into your hands. The Space
equips students with knowledge of
Engineering International Course at
space science and technology to help
Kyutech is truly international and
their countries access the space sector
interdisciplinary, with students from
and its benefits.
diverse backgrounds and numerous
The 2021 round of applications for countries from around the globe.”
PNST closed in January: three Master’s student at Kyutech,
students from Bhutan, Cambodia Fátima Durán from El Salvador.
Fátima Durán (left) and Pooja Lepcha (right),
PNST awardees
Credit: Fátima Durán

CHAPTER 6. SPACE4SDGS | 57
KiboCUBE Academy
In the course of 2021, UNOOSA
released a series of live webinars,
technical consultations and
pre-recorded lectures as part of the
KiboCUBE Academy, tailored for
future participants of the programme.
The Academy is a series of educational
activities that address the technical
aspects of the design, development
The Kibo laboratory module from the
and testing of CubeSats and support
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency
building better project plans. Credit: NASA
The Academy also teaches
participants about satellite operations
Webinar series on “Conducting R&D in hypergravity
and the utilization of the data that
and microgravity”
they acquire from their CubeSats in
order to develop useful applications In 2021, UNOOSA organized a series presented different types of
on Earth. The activity was delivered of webinars to introduce general experiments that can be conducted
thanks to the contribution of JAXA aspects of developing and conducting under altered gravity conditions and
and supported by the University Space research and development in the implications these might have for
Engineering Consortium. The webinars hypergravity and microgravity. different industries. The series of eight
are available on the UNOOSA Throughout the series, 45 experts webinars is available on the UNOOSA
YouTube channel. from 40 organizations in 13 countries YouTube channel.

58 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
SPACE FOR WOMEN
The Space4Women project consists of efforts to raise women and men in education and careers in STEM and
awareness of issues related to gender equality in space and space. The mentorship programme is based on data
STEM, identifying the factors that contribute to gender indicating that the lack of role models was one of the main
inequality in these fields, and devising solutions to address obstacles preventing women and girls from pursuing
these issues. To take stock of the work done in 2020 and to careers in STEM fields. The Space4Women network also
discuss a road map for the future development of the brings together space industry leaders – men and women
Space4Women initiative, UNOOSA organized an “Expert – to break the barriers that prevent future generations from
Meeting: Making Space4Women in the Decade of Action” pursuing their dreams.
on the International Day of Women and Girls in Science in
In a bid to raise further awareness, identify obstacles and
February. The event was also an opportunity to bring
find solutions to the issue of gender inequality in the space
together Space4Women mentors, collect feedback and
sector, UNOOSA collected the perspectives of the mentors
identify ways forward.
as part of the “Women in Space” theme selected for World
The mentorship programme unites female role models and Space Week in 2021. World Space Week is an annual
mentors from different countries, professions and celebration that takes place on 4–10 October.
backgrounds to inspire, guide, encourage and support
NASA astronauts Jessica Meir (left) and
Christina Koch (right) getting ready for the first
ever all-female spacewalk in 
Credit: NASA

CHAPTER 6. SPACE4SDGS | 59
Feedback from mentors Feedback from mentees:
“
“
“Through Space4Women we have a The idea of living in a world where
unique opportunity to reach further, there is no need to fight for gender
to set the agenda and to change equality is incredible, however, it is
structures, and not least to capture still too far from reality. We should
the hearts and minds of women not wait for this change to happen.
across the world, creating an We need to be the change!
unstoppable positive force as the The Space4Women programme has
sky is no longer the limit. given me the honour of being part
”
of this change and, by helping
“
teachers, inspiring a future
The initiative is so important in
generation of women in STEM!
raising the profile of professional
”
women within the space industry “
and highlighting them as role The experience of participating in
models to the emerging the Space4Women programme was
generations of young women, refreshing to me. Working for girls
which is crucial as it waves a big red and women in science has been
flag at them saying – yes, dream empowering, encouraging me to
big, you can do it, it is possible, persist in a work environment that
there is a place for you in the future is sometimes so hostile and not
of space exploration! ” inclusive. ”
The Libyan Desert stretches towards
the Mediterranean Sea
Credit: NASA

60 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
SPACE LAW FOR
NEW SPACE ACTORS
Responding to the growing number of requests for legal
advisory services, UNOOSA established the Space Law for
New Space Actors project in 2019 to help Member States
enhance their capacity to develop national legislation in line
with international space law. In , UNOOSA
delivered a tailored technical advisory mission to Chile,
to which it also invited other countries from the region,
namely, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Paraguay and Peru.
The technical mission staff presented a series of 16 lectures
to engineering students attending the Space Engineering
International Course of Kyushu Institute Technology
(Kyutech) to enhance understanding of the importance of
national space law. As a subsequent step, UNOOSA plans
to conduct in-country missions to the nations that requested
support, as soon as the pandemic allows.
In 2021, the Space Law for New Space Actors project was
made possible through the generous contributions of the
Governments of Belgium, Chile, Japan, Luxembourg, and
Dubai at night
of Kyutech and the Secure World Foundation. Credit: ESA
Global Networking Forum on Space Law for
New Space Actors – Fostering Responsible
National Space Activities
At the seventy-second International Astronautical Congress
(IAC) in October, UNOOSA organized a panel to explore
the support that the Office, with the help of donors, can
offer to emerging spacefaring nations to develop national
space law and policy in line with international space law.
This gathering offered an opportunity to listen to and
gather feedback from beneficiaries who have already
received these services, and to identify ways forward for
the Space Law for New Space Actors project. The
discussion featured, among other speakers, Minister Franz
Fayot from Luxembourg, and attracted over
100 participants and more than 30 questions from the floor.
Part of the Laguna San Rafael National Park
in Chile
Credit: ESA

CHAPTER 6. SPACE4SDGS | 61
SPACE FOR PERSONS
WITH DISABILITIES
An estimated one billion people experience some form
of disability, with the prevalence higher in developing
countries. Owing to various factors, the figures are
predicted to increase over the coming decades.
Recognizing the rights of persons with disabilities in
accordance with the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities and aligning with the
United Nations Disability Inclusion strategy, UNOOSA
launched the Space for Persons with Disabilities project
in 2021 and worked with specialized associations and
agencies to raise awareness of initiatives that promote
inclusion in space. With the support of ESA, the webinar
“Pushing Frontiers: Human Spaceflight and Disability”
was conducted on 31 to raise awareness
of the opportunities and challenges for the inclusion of
persons with disabilities in space exploration through
the lens of technology, engineering, physiology and
psychology, in particular in light of the ESA Parastronaut
feasibility project.
In observance of the International Day of Persons with
Disabilities, the Office conducted interviews with
stakeholders in space science to explore initiatives towards
an inclusive, accessible and sustainable post-COVID-19
world. The interviews are available on the UNOOSA
website.
The Office also initiated an internship adapted to support
the needs of persons with disabilities and ensure their
voices are heard in the development of the project with
hopes to provide valuable on-the-job learning
opportunities to realize the potential of every individual.

62 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
OTHER SPACE4SDGS ACTIVITIES
Workshop on Space Technology for Socioeconomic Benefits:
“Space Exploration – A source of inspiration, innovation and
discovery”
UNOOSA, the International promote inclusiveness in the field.
Astronautical Federation (IAF) and the Attended by 90 participants and
Mohammed Bin Rashid Space Centre 20 space agencies, the workshop also
(MBRSC) organized the twenty-eighth aimed to advance the integration of
Workshop on Space Technology for space into evidence-based policy and
Group photo of participants
to the Workshop Socioeconomic Benefits: “Space decision-making. Space exploration,
Credit: IAF Exploration – A source of inspiration, capacity-building activities and
innovation and discovery” in opportunities for emerging space
conjunction with the seventy-second nations were presented and discussed
IAC. Its main objective was to raise from the national, international,
awareness of exploration activities and industry and civil society perspectives.
Space for Our Planet exhibition
Throughout 2021, the Office worked humanity transition towards a
with TIMKAT, a visual storytelling sustainable planet. Testimonials from
company, to put into action an 28 professionals examine the
agreement signed the previous year. contribution of space to the
In this joint effort to advance the attainment of the 17 SDGs. From
understanding of the benefits that Brussels to Rome, from Paris to Dubai,
space activities offer society, TIMKAT this multi-stakeholder effort created
Space for Our Planet was
inaugurated in October at created the “Space for Our Planet” under the patronage of UNOOSA and
the Jardin de l’Observatoire exhibition with the support of supported by a range of space entities
in Paris
Credit: Timkat/Benoît Delplanque UNOOSA to display real-life examples travelled the world to reach new
of how space technology helps audiences.

CHAPTER 6. SPACE4SDGS | 63
UNOOSA/International Telecommunication Union/
Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Technology
event on “Opportunities of satellite connectivity”
Daily life for a large portion of the Connectivity, UNOOSA in cooperation This session contributed to the joint
world’s population now involves with ITU and the Office of the effort for the implementation of
sharing information via mobile phones, Secretary-General’s Envoy on Key Actions on Global Connectivity
personal computers and other Technology organized a webinar on outlined in the United Nations
electronic communication devices. “Opportunities of satellite Secretary-General’s Road map
However, many people have been left connectivity.” Speakers from both for Digital Cooperation, as well as
behind. Space-based technologies, private and public sectors presented Sustainable Development Goal 9
namely communications satellites, recent activities in various world that addresses, among other things,
present a unique opportunity to regions designed to connect universal access to information and
bridge the digital divide. On 9 July, underserved areas, explained lessons communications technology, and
during the International learned and limitations, and discussed the Internet.
Telecommunication Union (ITU) global further actions in terms of space
event on Emerging Technology for policies and regulations.
UNOOSA and New York Permanent Missions of Italy and
the United Arab Emirates host event: “Space Diplomacy
for a Growing Global Space Economy.”
On 26 May, the Office joined the enhance diplomatic efforts in the
Permanent Mission of Italy and the space domain. This virtual event
United Arab Emirates in New York to highlighted the importance of
organize an event devoted to the role harnessing the power of space to
of space diplomacy in the global tackle challenges facing humanity.
space economy. With its profound Leaders of national and international
positive impact, space has become institutions and CEOs from some of
a cornerstone of modern society. the world’s leading private entities
Despite the significant increase in shared their views on the future of
space solution providers and users, space affairs and the most pertinent
many global communities remain priorities for space diplomacy.
behind, accentuating the need to New York from above captured
by an ESA Astronaut
Credit: ESA/NASA-L. Parmitano

64 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
Space for the Great Reset: the central role of space
in the post-pandemic recovery process
As humanity battles the COVID-19 Representatives from the international You can read the full report from the
crisis, momentum has grown to rethink space community underscored the event series on the UNOOSA website
our future and identify ways to importance of space activities in and watch recordings on our YouTube
promote sustainable, equal and addressing the pandemic and in our channel.
inclusive growth. Inspired by the Great daily lives. Collectively, they
Reset initiative of the World Economic emphasized that international
Forum, UNOOSA launched the virtual cooperation was essential to
event series, “Space for the Great maximizing the potential of space
Reset,” to examine the contribution assets and facilitate the recovery
of space in building back better process.
and ways to leverage access to
space-derived benefits.
Space Economy initiative goes regional:
Putting the African space economy in focus
Building on the success of the virtual Participants agreed that the future of
Space Economy series, UNOOSA space in Africa was bright and pointed
continued to provide insights into out that space entrepreneurs should
space economies worldwide as drivers be aware of the challenges in the
of sustainable development. With the African space sector. It is crucial to
support of the African Union and the understand the local environment and
Portuguese presidency of the Council key stakeholders to build a thriving
of the European Union, UNOOSA space business on the continent.
hosted a virtual one-day conference
In addition, the conference
dedicated to the African continent, its
encouraged engagement in the
space economy structure and
regional dimension of space
outlooks. This one-of-a-kind platform
economies and collaboration across
brought together 12 representatives
sectors and countries. In this context,
of the commercial space entities
UNOOSA will continue to provide
operating in Africa to discuss the Shadow cast by the Moon over the
perspectives from different (regional)
growth of strong, responsible and Arctic during a solar eclipse
space economies and facilitate Credit: The NASA Goddard Space
sustainable space economies. Flight Center/Lisa Poje and Greg
transdisciplinary exchange among
Shirah/Ernie Wright/Alison Gold
stakeholders through the Space
Economy initiative.

CHAPTER 6. SPACE4SDGS | 65
Newton’s space sapling
planted at the United
Nations in Vienna
The Vienna International Centre (VIC)
is now home to a special apple tree
grown from seeds taken to the
International Space Station in 2015
by the British/European Space Agency
astronaut Tim Peake during his
“Principia” mission. The sapling,
planted during a special
ceremony by the Ambassador of the
United Kingdom Corinne Kitsell
and UNOOSA Director Simonetta
Di Pippo, is a descendant of the
400-year-old tree that inspired Isaac
Newton’s theory of gravity and is still
growing at Woolsthorpe Manor in the
United Kingdom. Visitors can now
admire the tree outside the UNOOSA
Space Exhibition.
The sapling of Newton’s tree in
its new home at the United Nations
in Vienna
Credit: UNIS

6666 || UUNNIITTEEDD NNAATTIIOONNSS OOFFFFIICCEE FFOORR OOUUTTEERR SSPPAACCEE AAFFFFAAIIRRSS
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOAL 17: NEW PARTNERSHIPS
New opportunity with Memorandum of UNOOSA joined forces with
Mohammed Bin Rashid understanding with the the International Space
Space Centre under the General Secretariat of the University to promote space
Access to Space for All Central American Integration education
portfolio System
UNOOSA signed an agreement with
On the margins of the seventy-second UNOOSA and the General Secretariat the International Space University
International Astronautical Congress in of the Central American Integration (ISU), a non-profit entity dedicated to
Dubai, UNOOSA and MBRSC signed System entered into a partnership to the pursuit of excellence in teaching
an agreement to provide an advance cooperation in the areas of and research for peaceful uses in all
opportunity under the Satellite disaster management, space law and fields relating to space activities.
Development Track of the Access to capacity-building to enhance the use UNOOSA and ISU recognize the vital
Space for All initiative. Through this of space for sustainable importance of the 2030 Agenda for
agreement, the two parties will socioeconomic development in the Sustainable Development for humanity
provide opportunities in the Payload region. and the crucial role space technology
Hosting Initiative (PHI), which offers a and applications have for the
cost-effective and modular satellite successful attainment of the SDGs.
Memorandum of
platform that can host multi-purpose The memorandum of understanding
understanding with
payloads. PHI is intended to build will facilitate cooperation between
International Institute for
capacity and broaden space activities UNOOSA and ISU to further their
the Unification of Private
and applications. shared goals and objectives regarding
Law
space education and
Within the framework of this capacity-building.
Agreements with the United
memorandum of understanding, the
Kingdom to promote space
parties will work to advance common
sustainability
interest in international cooperation,
UNOOSA and the United Kingdom economic development and the use of
announced a strategic partnership in uniform law instruments and standards
 and reinforced the joint for the space sector. This partnership
effort later in the year to advance aims to generate materials in line with
global awareness on space the Space Economy initiative, conduct
sustainability and foster tailored joint outreach efforts and support
capacity-building services for States to develop national regulatory
emerging spacefaring nations. frameworks and policy approaches to
facilitate commercial activities in the
space sector and in broader economy.

CCHHAAPPTTEERR 66.. SSPPAACCEE44SSDDGGSS || 6677
Cooperation agreement New UN-SPIDER regional
signed with the Mexican support office in Kazakhstan
Space Agency
The memorandum of understanding, Together, the parties promote the use
The memorandum of understanding signed in , incorporated the of space-based resources for disaster
with the Mexican Space Agency (AEM) National Center of Space Research of and emergency response management,
covers a range of themes with the aim Kazakhstan (NCSRT) as an UN-SPIDER facilitate the sharing and use of Earth
of improving access to space benefits regional support office (RSO). As an observation derived data and
for countries in Latin America and the RSO, NCSRT contributes to UN-SPIDER collaborate in capacity-building
Caribbean. This memorandum of activities in this region of Asia. activities.
understanding frames collaboration on
capacity-building and the promotion
of space solutions, as well as the
empowerment of students,
researchers and professionals in the
region, with special focus on women
and girls. AEM reinforced the effort to
support UN-SPIDER as its regional
support office in Mexico.
Memorandum of
understanding with the
Philippines Space Agency
UNOOSA has a long history of joint
activities and close relations with the
Philippines and the organization
shares the objective of advancing
international cooperation in the
peaceful use of outer space. The
memorandum of understanding,
signed in 2021, is a testament to the
joint effort to take access to space
benefits to another level in the country
and beyond through capacity-building
activities, efforts under the Access to
Space for All and Space Economy The beauty of frozen Lake Balkhash
in Kazakhstan
initiatives, as well as enhanced
Credit: NASA
cooperation in the context of
UN-SPIDER.

Fimbulheimen mountain
range in Antarctica
Credit: NASA/Joshua
Stevens
Nurturing a future workforce is
integral to building sustainable space
economies and expanding access to
space benefits. Through space-related
education and training opportunities
globally, with particular attention to
young students and professionals in
developing countries, UNOOSA
fosters the next generation. Learn
more about our activities in this
context in this chapter focused on
space education.

SPACE
EDUCATION

70 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
7 SPACE EDUCATION
Access to education and research REGIONAL CENTRES FOR
opportunities in space science and SPACE SCIENCE AND
technology is fundamental to
TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION
nurturing the future workforce and
leaders in the space industry.
The network of Regional Centres for Space Science and
UNOOSA works to advance both the
Technology Education, affiliated with the United Nations,
availability and quality of space-
fosters education and research on space science and
related education, targeting a variety
technology. Established by UNOOSA, the Centres are
of topics. The Office offers fellowship
based at existing research and higher education
programmes and advisory services to
institutions. Currently, six of them located in China, India,
space agencies and research
Jordan, Mexico/Brazil, Morocco and Nigeria are part of the
institutions in developing countries to
network. The Centres develop the skills and knowledge of
expand their knowledge of space
university educators, scientists and government officials
applications. It also provides online
through rigorous theory, research, applications, field
educational resources and directories
exercises and pilot projects in space science and
of educational opportunities on space
technology that contribute to sustainable development.
topics. International conferences and
workshops on space applications and
Ensuring a common standard of teaching at the Centres is
services are other important parts of
vital. In this context, UNOOSA developed education
this effort.
curricula in all major fields of space applications, such as
satellite meteorology and global climate, satellite
UNOOSA also engages with children
communications, space, atmospheric science, remote
and students to raise awareness of the
sensing, and geographic information systems and GNSS.
benefits of space and motivate the
The curricula used at the Regional Centres are also
next generation to study STEM fields
available for other educational institutions and training
relevant to space exploration and use.
initiatives.
For example, UNOOSA staff virtually
engaged with a group of students
The Regional Centres actively work with UN-SPIDER to
from the Central European region to
develop professional skills in space-based technologies for
talk about the work of the Office
resilience: for example the Centre for Space Science and
during the shadowing day organized
Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific (CSSTEAP),
by the United Nations Information
based in Dehradun, India, regularly provides experts for the
System (UNIS) in Vienna. This chapter
technical advisory missions and capacity-building
presents selected educational
programmes organized by UN-SPIDER in Asia. In addition
initiatives from 2021.
to supporting UN-SPIDER, the Regional Centres conduct
routine postgraduate programmes related to the SDG
framework, as presented below, helping to promote the
importance of leveraging space applications for the future
of our planet. The following section presents highlights
from the work of selected Centres in 2021.

CCHHAAPPTTEERR 77.. SSPPAACCEE EEDDUUCCAATTIIOONN || 7711
African Regional Centre Regional Centre for
for Space Science and Space Science and
Technology Education Technology Education in
Asia and the Pacific
Each year, the African Regional Centre
for Space Science and Technology The Regional Centre for Space
Education (CRASTE-LF), based in Science and Technology Education in
Rabat and operating in the French Asia and the Pacific (RCSSTEAP),
language, organizes postgraduate hosted by the Beihang University of
courses for a master’s degree in Space Beijing, continued to develop the Morocco captured by NASA from the ISS
Science and Technology. In 2021, the delivery of its programmes to ensure Credit: NASA
Centre conducted three postgraduate the continuity of educational activities.
Centre for Space
courses, which brought together Through online broadcasting,
Science and Technology
32 trainees from 13 countries. recording, MOOC, WeChat and
Additionally, the Centre organized providing learning materials, the Education in Asia and
several workshops focusing on Centre strived to carry out virtual the Pacific
environmental monitoring and the teaching, participant self-study and
digitalization of statistics in agriculture, independent research. In 2021, In 2021, CSSTEAP continued
among others. 35 international participants majoring delivering quality education, training,
in three academic fields enrolled to and knowledge-sharing activities.
study at the Centre. October saw the The six short courses organized
launch of an APSCO Student Small throughout the year offered the
Satellite-1 developed in a joint effort opportunity to learn about forest
by Beihang University as the lead monitoring, disaster management,
institution and the eight member weather, climate and GNSS, among
States of the Asia-Pacific Space other topics. A special training course
Cooperation Organization. This on “Remote Sensing Applications for
achievement is a tribute to the Crop Mapping and Monitoring” was
Centre’s work in international also delivered. In total, these courses
cooperation, talent training and attracted more than 300 participants
Wadi Rum Desert Valley, Jordan
scientific innovation. from the region.
Credit: Airbus

72 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
RESEARCH AND TRAINING
The International Space Weather United Nations/Mongolia Workshop
Initiative workshop on space weather: on the Applications of Global
science and applications Navigation Satellite Systems
The activities falling under the International Space Weather This workshop was organized by UNOOSA and the
Initiative (ISWI) aim at facilitating collaboration among Mongolian Geospatial Association and the Agency for
scientists and promoting research in countries with Land Administration and Management, Geodesy and
expertise in building scientific instrumentation. In line with Cartography of Mongolia to enhance information exchange
the mission of UNOOSA, workshops convened in the between participating countries on the application of
framework of the ISWI and the ICG programme on GNSS GNSS solutions. The workshop’s aim was also to scale up
applications promote global cooperation in space weather. capacities in Asia and the Pacific, including through
Jointly with the Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre of the Indian information-sharing on projects that can benefit the regions
Space Research Organization, this online workshop and enhance cross-fertilization. During the
organized advanced discussions on the physics behind workshop, ICG organized a seminar to describe the
space weather and provided updates on the recent importance of spectrum protection, interference detection
scientific advances made in the field. Those who and mitigation at a national level, and explain how to reap
participated in of the workshop assessed the status of the benefits of GNSS.
space weather instruments, data, modelling and other
efforts to advance space weather research and improve its
forecasting. Efforts in space weather education,
empowerment of women and girls, and international
cooperation and collaboration in addressing space
weather-related issues were also among the key topics.

CHAPTER 7. SPACE EDUCATION | 73
A mid-level solar flare captured in 2015
by the NASA Solar Dynamics Observatory
Credit: NASA/SDO
Southern Mongolia captured
by Sentinel-2A in this false-colour image
Credit: Copernicus Sentinel data/ESA

A salt bath in Bolivia
Credit: NASA/Lauren
Dauphin
UNOOSA serves as the secretariat
to several international coordination
bodies and mechanisms, including
COPUOS, the main intergovernmental
forum for analysing and debating the
scientific and legal aspects of outer
space activities. This chapter presents
the work of UNOOSA in advancing
international cooperation in outer
space and building capacity in
international space law.

INTERNATIONAL
COOPERATION
IN OUTER SPACE

76 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
8 INTERNATIONAL
COOPERATION IN
OUTER SPACE
COPUOS UPDATES
The General Assembly set up COPUOS as a permanent session of the Legal Subcommittee (LSC), Member States
committee in 1959 to address the exploration and use of considered international space law and policy, and related
outer space for the benefit of all humanity. To this day, it developments. The mandate, terms of reference, workplan
provides a unique multilateral platform for exchanging and methods for the newly established Working Group on
perspectives, needs and solutions on space affairs. The Space Resources were also agreed upon and later
agenda of COPUOS and its Subcommittees has been endorsed by COPUOS at its sixty-fourth session.
evolving to address emerging changes and challenges,
At the sixty-fourth main session of COPUOS in September
and its growing membership is a natural response to
2021, the Working Group on the “Space2030” Agenda
democratized access to space and its benefits. COPUOS
concluded its three-year-long negotiation process with the
now includes 100 countries (see more in the Highlights
final deliverable in the form of a high-level policy
section) representing around 90 per cent of the population,
document, the “Space2030” Agenda: Space as a Driver of
and 45 observer organizations from around the world.
Sustainable Development and its implementation plan
At the fifty-eighth session of the Scientific and Technical (more details in the Highlights section). In 2021, COPUOS
Subcommittee, countries elected the new Chair of the also advanced its agenda on several critical matters to keep
Working Group on the Long-term Sustainability of Outer pace with the rapid development and diversification of
Space Activities and convened the Working Group for the space activities and their relevance for tackling global
first time. The Working Group on Space and Global Health challenges. Member States exchanged views on topics
progressed on the set of recommendations regarding such as “Space and Climate Change” and proposed new
policies, experiences and practices in the use of space initiatives to strengthen the use of space tools to tackle the
science and technology for global health. At the sixtieth climate crisis.
First meeting of the ad hoc COPUOS in 1959
at United Nations Headquarters in New York
Credit: United Nations

CHAPTER 8. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN OUTER SPACE | 77
PLANETARY DEFENCE
The issue of near-Earth objects has
long been on the agenda of COPUOS.
UNOOSA works with the International
Asteroid Warning Network (IAWN)
and the Space Mission Planning
Advisory Group (SMPAG) established
by COPOUS in 2014. These entities
serve as global mechanisms to address
challenges posed by near-Earth
objects, including through detection,
tracking, and impact risk assessment
and planetary defence measures such
as civil protection or asteroid
deflection.
As part of these activities, UNOOSA
and ESA hosted the virtual seventh
International Academy of Astronautics
(IAA) Planetary Defense Conference
from 26 to 30 April, which attracted
more than 700 participants. The Barringer Crater in the flat-lying desert
sandstones in Arizona, United States
Conference focused on technical and
Credit: NASA
legal issues, decision-making and
preparedness relating to asteroid
impact hazards. Speakers presented
groundbreaking results from the
sample return missions Hayabusa2,
led by JAXA, and OSIRIS-REx, led by
NASA. They also provided updates on
the Double Asteroid Redirection Test
(DART), the first-ever mission to
demonstrate the capability to deflect
an asteroid using the kinetic impactor
technique, and the follow-up mission,
Hera, to assess the results. Eleven
representatives of space agencies
delivered statements expressing
support for international collaboration
on planetary defence.

78 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
UN-SPACE
UNOOSA leads United Nations
system-wide cooperation and
coordination on space-related issues
and activities through the Inter-
Agency Meeting on Outer Space
Activities (UN-Space). This mechanism
was set up to promote collaboration,
synergy, the exchange of information
and the coordination of programmes
among United Nations entities in the
implementation of activities involving
the use of space technology and its
applications.
Three impact craters in the
On 14 , UNOOSA Lunae Planum region of Mars
Credit: ESA/Roscosmos/CaSSIS
convened the fortieth session of
UN-Space in a virtual format to
continue exploring the use of space COMMITTEE ON SPACE
technology in the implementation of RESEARCH PANEL ON
plans and programmes of United
PLANETARY
Nations entities. Eleven United Nations
PROTECTION
entities and related organizations
participated in this session. In its annual
resolution on “International In 2021, UNOOSA continued working
cooperation in the peaceful uses of with the Committee on Space
outer space”, the General Assembly Research (COSPAR) Panel on Planetary
urged UN-Space, under the leadership Protection, holding the role of
of UNOOSA, to continue to examine vice-chair of the Panel. UNOOSA
how space science and technology and supported virtual meetings of the
their applications could contribute to Panel, which resulted in updated
the 17 SDGs and encouraged United requirements for missions to the Moon
Nations-system entities to participate in the COSPAR Planetary Protection
in UN-Space coordination efforts. Policy. In addition, UNOOSA
undertook various outreach activities,
such as articles to raise awareness of
planetary protection and the work of
COSPAR.

CHAPTER 8. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN OUTER SPACE | 79
INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE ON EARTH
UNITED NATIONS
OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
COMMITTEE ON OBSERVATION
GLOBAL NAVIGATION SATELLITES
THE INTEROPERABLE
GLOBAL NAVIGATION
SATELLITE SYSTEMS SATELLITE SYSTEMS
SPACE SERVICE
VOLUME In 2021, UNOOSA was elected the
SECOND EDITION
The International Committee on chair of the Working Group on
Global Navigation Satellite Systems Capacity-building and Data
(ICG), established in 2005, offers an Democracy (WGCapD) of the
optimal cooperation mechanism and a Committee on Earth Observation
flexible forum for global navigation Satellites (CEOS) as the first United
satellite system (GNSS) providers and Nations entity since the inception of
UNITED NATIONS
users to discuss matters related to the WGCapD. The working group
use of multiple GNSS signals. This increases the capacity of institutions in
multilateral coordination mechanism less developed countries to use Earth
to which UNOOSA serves as Executive observation data more effectively for
Secretariat has allowed GNSS the benefit of society and to achieve
technology to evolve, while still sustainable development. The group
providing the structure necessary to pursues a variety of activities to unify
achieve efficient interaction in one of CEOS efforts. These include
the most important fields of space enhancing access to Earth observation
applications. In 2021, UNOOSA data, increasing the sharing of
organized and chaired the fifteenth software tools, expanding data
meeting of ICG in Vienna. In multi- dissemination capabilities, transferring
stakeholder partnerships, UNOOSA relevant technologies, and providing
advanced capacity-building activities intensive capacity-building, education
in GNSS technology and carried out a and training for enabling end users.
series of training courses to boost its UNOOSA will be serving this role
use for scientific applications. These until 2023.
activities covered, among other topics,
GNSS generalities, space weather,
An artistic depiction of the four global and
ionospheric monitoring, modelling two regional navigation satellite systems
surrounding the Earth
and irregularities. Credit: NASA
In cooperation with the ICG space use
subgroup, UNOOSA issued the
second edition of the publication
entitled “The Interoperable Global
Navigation Satellite Systems Space
Service Volume” to define, establish
and promote an interoperable GNSS
space service volume for the benefit
of GNSS users and receiver
manufacturers.

Deployment of
the MIR-SAT1
from the Kibo
Credit: JAXA/NASA
UNOOSA maintains the United
Nations Register of Objects Launched
into Outer Space, an important
transparency and confidence-building
mechanism to increase trust among
countries in outer space activities,
particularly considering the rapidly
increasing number of launches
globally. In 2021, 1,936 functional and
non-functional objects were registered
with the Secretary-General.

SPACE OBJECTS
REGISTRATION

82 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
9 SPACE OBJECTS
REGISTRATION
The increasing realization of the power Throughout the year, 31 Member
of space assets coupled with more States submitted registrations on
affordable access to the space 1,895 objects, an increase of
environment have led to significant 50 per cent on 2020. The rise was
dynamics in satellite figures and truly driven predominantly by registrations
sparked a new era in space flight of mega-constellation satellites by
operations. 2021 was the third in a established space nations. First-time
series of record-breaking years in registrations were received from
terms of objects launched into outer Mauritius, the Netherlands and
space and registered with the United Paraguay. With the addition of
Nations voluntarily under General 41 rocket stages and other
Assembly resolution 1721B (XVI) or as non-functional objects, a total of
a treaty obligation under the 1975 1,936 space objects were registered in
Convention on Registration of Objects 2021. In , Kenya notified
Launched into Outer Space. As new the Secretary-General of the
challenges emerge from the rapid conclusion of the life cycle of
pace of development in the space 1KUNS-PF, the first satellite launched
sector, the Register, as the only by Kenya through the KiboCUBE
treaty-based transparency and programme. The satellite re-entered
confidence-building measure, the atmosphere in .
becomes ever more relevant to safe,
At the time this report went to print,
secure and sustainable operations in
an additional 310 objects launched
this unique domain.
during 2021 or prior had also been
registered.

CHAPTER 9. SPACE OBJECTS REGISTRATION | 83
State of registry Functional Non- functional Re-entry Change Total
Australia 6 0 0 0
Belgium 1 0 0 0
Brazil 1 0 0 0
Canada 5 0 0 0
China 98 0 0 0
Denmark 0 0 1 0
Finland 8 0 0 0
France 4 6 9 3
Germany 13 0 0 0
Hungary 2 0 0 0
India 7 3 0 0
Indonesia 1 0 0 1
Japan 46 7 4 8
Kenya 0 0 1 0
Lithuania 2 0 0 0
Luxembourg 8 0 0 1
Malaysia 1 0 0 1
Mauritius 1 0 0 0
Netherlands 1 0 0 0
New Zealand 6 8 4 0
Norway 1 0 0 0
Paraguay 1 0 0 0
Philippines 3 0 0 0
Poland 1 0 0 0
Republic of Korea 10 0 0 0
Russian Federation 30 0 15 0
Slovakia 1 0 0 0
Spain 1 0 0 1
Turkey 1 0 0 0
United Arab Emirates 4 0 0 0
United Kingdom 288 0 0 6
Uruguay 13 0 0 0
United States 1 330 17 138 2
Functional registered 1 895
Non-functional registered 41
Total space objects registered in 2021 1 936
Satellite re-entry notifications 172
Change in status (decommissioned, GSO position, etc.) 23

84 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
TECHNICAL ADVISORY SERVICES
ON SPACE OBJECT REGISTRATION
As part of its responsibilities in discharging the obligations
of the Secretary-General under international space law,
UNOOSA provides technical advisory services on space
object registration-related matters to States and
international organizations. In 2021, UNOOSA provided
assistance and services to 22 governmental entities and
other institutions.
A hundred and forty-three payloads of all
sizes went to space in a single record launch
Credit: SpaceX
Humanity’s last glimpse of the James Webb Space Telescope launched in December
Credit: Arianespace/ESA/NASA/CSA/CNES

CHAPTER 9. SPACE OBJECTS REGISTRATION | 85
Hope Probe first image of Mars
Credit: Emirates Mars Mission
A selfie of rover Zhurong
Credit: CNSA

Southern Kalahari
Desert as seen
from the ISS
Credit: NASA
This chapter provides an overview of
the UNOOSA budget, expenditure,
voluntary contributions and staff
numbers in 2021.

UNOOSA IN
NUMBERS

88 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
10 UNOOSA
IN NUMBERS
This section presents data on Budget overview
the financial and human
resources of UNOOSA
covering the period through
12 000
31 . The
Office acknowledges and 10 000
wishes to express its 1 971 1 900
8 000 1 880 2 238 3 187
gratitude to all its Member
States that continuously
6 000
support its activities, whether
through an in-kind or a cash 4 000 789 1 257
contribution.
2 000
Since , and at
8 592 8 306 7 774 7 562 7 720 3 877 4 025
the time of finalizing this 0
2010 – 2011 2012 – 2013 2014 – 2015 2016 – 2017 2018 – 2019 2020 2021
report, the Office received
Regular budget expenditure Voluntary cash contributions received
additional cash contributions
from the following donors:
International Astronautical
Federation, Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency (JAXA),
Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz
International Prize for Water
(PSIPW), and United
Kingdom Space Agency
(UKSA). The data relating to
those and other
contributions will be
reflected in the Annual
Report 2022.
DSU
fo
sdnasuohT
4 000 000
3 500 000
3 000 000
2 500 000
2 000 000
1 500 000
1 000 000
500 000

DSU
Expenditure
3 852 800 3 867 000 3 876 600 4 025 283
1 285 988 1 410 126 1 066 098 1 166 450
2018 2019 2020 2021
Regular budget Extra-budgetary

CHAPTER 10. UNOOSA IN NUMBERS | 89
Voluntary cash contributions (does not include in-kind contributions)
0 100 000 200 000 300 000 400 000 500 000 600 000
Space Law
Budget overview Programme
on Space
Applications
Space
sustainability
UN-Spider
International
Committee on
GNSS (ICG)
World Space Forum
Other
Access to
Space for All
JAXA ESA European Commission Luxembourg Kyushu Institute Germany
Austria PSIPW UKSA Japan Chile SWF
Expenditure Staff overview

Regular budget
2 2 funded posts
35 3 3 3 3
3 4 4
2 3 Extra-budgetary
2 2 4 3 funded posts
30 2 6 5 5 4 5 6 2 3
3 5 5 6 5 5 Non-reimbursable
25 1 2 2 2 2 3 2 3 4 loans
20 Associate
experts

Temporary/
24 24 24 24 23 23 23 23 23 23 23 23
consultants/
contractors

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

90 | UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
CMSA China Manned Space Agency
CNSA China National Space Administration
COPUOS Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
COSPAR Committee on Space Research
CSSTEAP Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific (India)
DropTES Drop Tower Experiment Series
DLR German Aerospace Centre
ESA European Space Agency
ESTEC European Space Research and Technology Centre
GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System
IAU International Astronomical Union
IAWN International Asteroid Warning Network
ICG International Committee on Global Navigation Satellite Systems
ISS International Space Station
JAXA Japanese Aerospace and Exploration Agency
Kyutech Kyushu Institute of Technology (Japan)
LSC Legal Subcommittee (of COPUOS)
MOOC Massive Open Online Course
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration (United States of America)
PNST Fellowship Programme on Nanosatellite Technologies
PSIPW Prince Sultan bin Abdulaziz International Prize for Water
RCSSTEAP Regional Centre for Space Science Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific (China)
RSOs Regional support offices (of UN-SPIDER)
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
SMPAG Space Mission Planning Advisory Group
STEM Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
STSC Scientific and Technical Subcommittee (of COPUOS)
UNIS United Nations Information Service (in Vienna)
UN-SPIDER United Nations Space-based Information for Disaster Management and Emergency Response
WSF World Space Forum

To access the electronic version of this Report, please go to

UNOOSA_Annual_Report_2020.pdf

THE UNITED NATIONS OFFICE
FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS (UNOOSA)
IS RESPONSIBLE FOR ADVANCING INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
IN THE PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE AND HELPS ALL COUNTRIES
USE SPACE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY TO ACHIEVE
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT.
BRINGING THE BENEFITS
OF SPACE TO HUMANKIND
WWW.UNOOSA.ORG
57120-22.V