September 15, 2021
Photo by: National Aeronautics and Space Administration
On-Orbit Servicing
Opportunities for U.S. Military Satellite Resiliency
BY Hannah Duke
Satellites endure the harsh environment of space almost periodically serviced and upgraded over time. As
completely on their own. If something goes wrong, it is competition in space rises, satellite owners and
extremely difficult to physically access a satellite once it operators need to start thinking about how servicing
is in orbit. It has been this way since the first satellite capabilities used on Earth can be extrapolated for use in
was launched in 1957. Imagine the air conditioning in a space. This involves developing robust on-orbit
house breaks, but you cannot fix it. So instead, you must servicing capabilities as well as making space assets
abandon the house and buy a new one. Or imagine that serviceable in the future.
every time a car runs out of gas, you take it to the
“There is nowhere on Earth where we spend a billion
junkyard and then buy a new car. This is how satellites
dollars on a system and then never inspect it, and never
are treated on-orbit. When satellites run out of
maintain it, and never upgrade it.”
propellant, they are deorbited or retired to a graveyard
orbit. Or if something breaks—say, a solar panel fails to – Dr. Gordon Roesler, former DARPA RSGS program manager
deploy—millions or even billions of dollars could be lost
over a potentially simple mechanical anomaly.
Hannah Duke was a research intern for the Aerospace
Military satellites launched to geostationary orbit (GEO) Security Project at the Center for Strategic and
can cost over a billion dollars.1 On Earth, multimillion- International Studies in Washington, D.C.
dollar military assets do not sit untended; they are
AEROSPACE.CSIS.ORG | 1

The term on-orbit servicing (OOS) encompasses a set of they have. However, NASA’s servicing missions usually
emerging capabilities that provide access to satellites involve humans, which is not ideal for servicing
after launch, which could potentially revolutionize satellites in orbits as high as GEO. For OOS to become a
logistics and resiliency in space. For example, being able robust capability for the DoD, it needs to utilize
to upgrade sensors or add capabilities every few years, autonomous robotic technologies.
maneuver without regret, and inspect and repair
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
satellites will cause a shift in the way satellites are
(DARPA) demonstrated robotic refueling capabilities in
designed, launched, and operated. Though OOS poses
2007 with its Orbital Express program.3 Since then,
many benefits for the commercial space industry, this
SpaceLogistics LLC, a subsidiary of Northrop Grumman,
paper will focus on the benefits that OOS can provide
has successfully demonstrated OOS capabilities in GEO
the Department of Defense (DoD) and military-centric
on two commercial missions, MEV-1 in 2020 and MEV-2
operations in space.
in 2021.4 The Mission Extension Vehicle (MEV) docks to a
What is on-orbit servicing (OOS)? client and uses the MEV’s thrusters to extend the lifetime
of the client satellite.5 In this piggyback manner, when
Typically, discussions about spacecraft servicing are
the client satellite runs out of fuel, the MEV uses its fuel
included in a larger grouping called on-orbit servicing,
to keep the client operational for up to five more years.6
assembly, and manufacturing (OSAM). This grouping is
DARPA has another program called Robotic Servicing of
broad and covers everything from repairing spacecraft
Geosynchronous Satellites (RSGS), which has been
to assembling space stations to 3D printing in space.
developing robotic arms capable of repair, upgrade
While these capabilities are related to each other, this
installation, inspection, and relocation.7 RSGS is
paper will focus solely on on-orbit servicing (OOS) and
scheduled to launch these robotic arms on
how it enhances logistics and resiliency of DoD
SpaceLogistics’ Mission Robotic Vehicle (MRV) satellite
operations in space.
bus in 2024.8
OOS is defined as the observation or alteration
of a satellite after initial launch by another
spacecraft, also referred to as the servicing
vehicle.2 OOS encompasses inspecting,
refueling, repairing, relocating, or upgrading a
satellite while in orbit. For example, a servicing
vehicle can extend the lifetime of a satellite by
conducting a maintenance repair, taking over
stationkeeping and maneuver functions, or
transferring propellant.
Figure 1: DARPA Robotic Servicing of Geosynchronous Satellites (RSGS)
The concept of servicing a spacecraft on-orbit is
How does OOS fit into DoD’s space strategy?
not new; NASA has been doing it for decades. NASA
astronauts have serviced the Hubble Space Telescope Satellites are essential to modern military operations.
numerous times and service the International Space These space assets support ground operations by
Station routinely. Without the ability to repair or replace providing superior communications; missile warning;
parts, these spacecraft would not have lasted as long as position, navigation, and timing (PNT) capabilities; and
2 | DUKE | On-Orbit Servicing

sensing of key areas on Earth.9 Particularly in GEO, these countries continue developing OOS capabilities, either
satellites can be multimillion-dollar assets that take up for SML or counterspace purposes, it is important for the
to a decade to develop, so it is important to be able to DoD to consider how OOS can enhance logistics and
protect and maintain them.10 resiliency in U.S. military space operations.
On-orbit servicing enables technology upgrades, “No nation has maintained a dominant position in a
repairs, and inspection of these satellites so that they domain (air, land, maritime, space, and cyber) without a
can be maintained and kept in service for longer. OOS superior capability for movement and sustainment within
also enables the ability to maneuver these satellites that domain.”
without regret and can help speed up acquisition
- 2020 State of the Space Industrial Base Report
timelines. Each of these capabilities enhances logistics
and resiliency in space. The 2020 Space Force Capstone OOS Benefits for DoD
Publication, Spacepower, highlighted space mobility
On-orbit servicing (OOS) contributes to greater satellite
and logistics (SML) as one of five core competencies of
resiliency by enabling the ability to upgrade, refuel,
military spacepower.11 As Space Force doctrine defines
repair, and inspect satellites. OOS can also help mitigate
it, SML “enables movement and support of military
orbital debris. Each section below will explore how
equipment and personnel in the space domain.”12 The
these capabilities can benefit DoD operations in space.
publication describes orbital sustainment as an
important application of SML. Orbital sustainment Upgrade
involves the ability to “replenish consumables and
Due to lengthy development timelines and longer
expendables on spacecraft” and enables “spacecraft
lifespans of satellites in GEO, it can be difficult to keep
inspection, anomaly resolution, hardware maintenance,
those satellites up to date. However, this is critical to
and technology upgrades.”13 These orbital sustainment
maintaining superior space operations. OOS can help
activities can be accomplished through on-orbit
address this by providing a means to upgrade satellite
servicing.
technology components on-orbit at a lower cost than
Developing robust OOS capabilities is integral to building and launching an entirely new satellite. A
maintaining superior SML in space. According to the servicer spacecraft can dock with a satellite and attach
Space Force, SML is relatively uncontested right now, modules with new sensors, communications systems, or
but as U.S. competitors continue investing in space replacements for failed parts, similar to how certain
capabilities, this may change.14 Other countries with hardware components in computers can be replaced.
robust space programs, such as Russia and China, have Updating sensors or other components every few years
demonstrated sophisticated on-orbit capabilities such would help bolster a satellite’s defenses and better
as rendezvous and proximity operations (RPOs) with protect classified data. For example, a client satellite
inspection satellites.15 For example, a Chinese inspector could receive a new defensive payload that upgrades its
satellite, Shijian-17, has a robotic arm and has jamming capabilities or an encryption hardware
performed a variety of orbital maneuvers in GEO to upgrade that strengthens its communications systems.
approach other Chinese satellites.16 17 This could be a
Modular payloads can add new capabilities to satellites
reflection of an investment in OOS-related capabilities
relatively quickly because these modules can be
or it could be related to developing counterspace
developed and launched on their own timelines. The
capabilities. It can be hard to determine the intent of
benefit of a module is that it does not have to be
these types of capabilities. Regardless, as other
| 3

integrated into a satellite bus prior to launch; a servicing military satellites secure and technologically
vehicle can simply attach a module to the client satellite sophisticated.
already in orbit. This helps lower mission costs and
Refuel
speed up the timeline for developing, launching, and
integrating new capabilities with existing military The amount of on-board propellant can ultimately
satellites. As the space domain becomes more determine the lifespan of a satellite. Without propellant,
contested, a modular upgrade process can help the DoD a satellite has no way to maintain its position and
respond more quickly and efficiently to threats. It also orientation in orbit (called stationkeeping), so it must be
keeps an adversary guessing a satellite’s capabilities if deorbited or retired to a graveyard orbit.23 Since solar
they are being upgraded or changed over time. power usually powers a satellite’s onboard computers
and sensors, a satellite may still be operational after
An example of where this capability could be useful is
running out of propellant. However, without the ability
with the Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF)
to stationkeep, the satellite cannot continue fulfilling its
program, a jam-resistant military communications
mission objectives.
constellation that is being replaced by the next-
generation Evolved Strategic Satellite Communications If satellites could be refueled by a servicing vehicle, it
(ESS) program and the Protected Tactical SATCOM (PTS) could extend the satellite’s lifetime potentially by years.
system.18 The ability to attach a module with new A servicing vehicle can refuel a client by transferring
capabilities from the ESS or PTS program to an existing propellant. This is similar to what SpaceLogistics did in
AEHF satellite could help with the transition between 2020 and 2021 for two Intelsat satellites. However, the
these systems.19 If AEHF had been designed to support MEV doesn’t refuel client satellites directly; it docks with
modular upgrades, the existing constellation could have the client and uses its own fuel to extend the client’s
been updated and built upon instead of being fully lifetime.24 This “piggyback” life extension service is
replaced, which could have saved billions of taxpayer currently enabling two Intelsat satellites to provide
dollars. This concept is similar to the Navy’s EA-18G communications for up to five more years.25 This was an
Growler aircraft, which is being equipped with an important demonstration because it proved that
external Next Generation Jammer pod to upgrade servicing capabilities are viable for clients that were not
electronic warfare capabilities instead of replacing the originally designed to be serviced.
entire aircraft.20
A similar upcoming mission is NASA’s On-orbit Servicing,
DARPA’s RSGS program hopes to demonstrate robotic Assembly, and Manufacturing (OSAM) 1, which plans to
installation of new payloads carrying upgrades.21 For demonstrate robotic refueling services in low-Earth
now, these attachable payloads would need their own orbit (LEO) for a U.S. government satellite, Landsat 7,
means of power and communication since most host that was not designed to be refueled.26 The OOS
satellites are not designed to support upgrades. spacecraft bus is designed by Maxar Technologies and
However, future satellites can include interfaces that will support a NASA Goddard payload of two robotic
enable data and power transfers.22 It will be important arms that will grab, refuel, and relocate the client
to make these interfaces standardized across industry, satellite.27 This demonstration is an important proof of
similar to a USB port on a computer. As technology concept because, unlike MEV’s piggyback life extension,
continues to improve rapidly, OOS provides a way to OSAM-1 aims to directly refuel the client satellite.
match the evolving technology pace and keep critical Without standardized grapple fixtures, it is difficult to
service a satellite already in orbit. These missions are
4 | DUKE | On-Orbit Servicing

helping shape standards for servicing and rendezvous without a full load of fuel so they can carry more
and proximity operations (RPOs). The NASA mission will payload, and once they are at altitude, they refuel.
also include another payload by Maxar called the Space Ideally, future spacecraft will have standardized fuel
Infrastructure Dexterous Robot (SPIDER), a robotic arm valves so that they can be easily refueled by a servicing
that will demonstrate on-orbit assembly and vehicle.
manufacturing.28
Repair
Being able to directly refuel a satellite or use a
The ability to repair space assets is an important aspect
piggyback life extension service enables an expanded
of satellite resiliency. Currently, if a military satellite’s
satellite architecture as older satellites are kept in
antenna breaks or a solar panel doesn’t deploy
operation for longer. If a satellite in a graveyard orbit is
correctly, the entire mission could fail, resulting in the
still functional, a servicing vehicle can bring it back to
loss of hundreds of millions of taxpayer dollars. In some
operational orbit, similar to what MEV did for Intelsat
cases, less than a pound of force may be necessary to fix
901.29 In a conflict, this could potentially add surprise
mechanical problems, but because it is currently
redundancy as OOS vehicles retrieve or refuel
infeasible to physically access satellites on-orbit, a
decommissioned satellites, returning them to full
simple mechanical anomaly can be devastating.31 OOS
operation.
provides that physical access to space assets that is
Even before a satellite is retired, refueling could give a currently lacking. Another feature of DARPA’s RSGS
satellite enough extra fuel to relocate to a new location program is the development of robotic arms to
within an orbit. This could be useful for strategic or demonstrate that robotic repairs on-orbit are feasible
defensive purposes. For example, during the Gulf War, and can be a key tool in increasing satellite resiliency.
military satellites were maneuvered so that more GPS
Inspect
satellites passed over the Persian Gulf to increase global
positioning system (GPS) availability in that area.30 OOS vehicles can use cameras for imaging a satellite up
Alternatively, if a satellite is in a vulnerable position, it close or from a distance. These images provide an
can perform a defensive maneuver and change its additional way to inspect satellites on-orbit. If a satellite
location within an orbit. To make these maneuvers, experiences an anomaly, an external inspection can
satellites must expend fuel, which reduces the overall identify the issue and help operators with anomaly
lifespan of a satellite. However, with a refueling resolution. Inspection is also an important precursor to
capability, an operator can maneuver a satellite without any repair or upgrade operation. Since a servicing
sacrificing the overall lifespan of the satellite. This is vehicle needs to attach to a client to perform a repair or
known as “maneuvering without regret” and is key to attach a module, it’s crucial to thoroughly inspect the
superior SML. client before attempting an RPO. For example,
SpaceLogistics’ MEV vehicles used cameras, onboard
Finally, launching all the fuel a satellite will need for its
computers, and laser rangefinders to thoroughly inspect
entire lifetime at once adds greatly to the mission
Intelsat’s satellites before docking.32 Without thorough
weight, which limits available launch options, and cost.
inspection capabilities, the two spacecraft could be in
Being able to refuel on-orbit means that satellites could
danger of colliding and damaging or destroying both
launch with less propellant, thus reducing launch cost
spacecraft in the docking attempt.
and weight so that more launch providers could be
used. This is similar to how some military planes takeoff
| 5

Inspection capabilities also increase in-situ space reaches its end of life (EOL), OOS vehicles can deorbit or
situational awareness (SSA). The ability to inspect other relocate a satellite to a graveyard orbit. OOS can also
satellites by taking images from space is an important help declutter orbits by grappling and relocating
deterrence capability because it makes the space existing orbital debris. Private company missions like
domain more transparent. In-situ inspection allows for a the recently launched End-of-Life Services by Astroscale
more detailed characterization of space objects that demonstration (ELSA-d), are developing servicing
might not be possible with ground-based sensors.33 technologies for life extension, EOL, and debris
Inspection also allows a user to track behaviors in space mitigation.35
and better determine
their purpose. For
example, on-orbit
inspection can help
determine whether
anomalous satellite
maneuvers are due to
nefarious activities or
simply avoiding a piece
of space debris.
Inspection is currently
being used to gain more
Figure 2: Objects in Space. Credit: European Space Agency
situational awareness
about other nations’ In , the Secretary of Defense released a memo
satellites. For example, the U.S. Geosynchronous Space outlining tenets of responsible military behavior in
Situational Awareness Program (GSSAP) includes space.36 One of the tenets is to “limit the generation of
multiple satellites in the near-GEO region that can long-lived debris.”37 A way to make sure that debris is
inspect other space objects and perform RPOs.34 The not “long-lived” is to actively remove it through OOS.
GSSAP program could utilize servicing satellites as part The DoD helps set international norms of behavior in
of its inspection constellation to increase redundancy space through example, and debris mitigation should
and coverage of the GEO belt. continue being a priority to keep the space domain
sustainable for future military, civilian, and commercial
Debris Mitigation
activity.
Part of maintaining superior SML is ensuring the
Challenges & Recommendations
environment remains sustainable. GEO is a high-value
orbit for military activity, but it is also a limited resource.
The Chicken and the Egg
Similarly, high-value LEO orbits are getting more
As OOS capabilities continue to emerge, it will be
crowded, and the risk of debris colliding with an
important for the DoD to clearly communicate its needs
operational spacecraft is rising. In all operating orbits,
to industry. If commercial companies do not see a
the DoD should consider how OOS can aid in keeping
demand for OOS, then there is little incentive to develop
the space domain sustainable. OOS can help extend a
or continue investing in these capabilities. However, if
satellite’s life through refueling or upgrading so that less
there are not commercially available servicing
proliferation of space assets is needed. Once a satellite
6 | DUKE | On-Orbit Servicing

capabilities, then government stakeholders may not see slots to serve multiple customers.42 Ideally, servicing
a need to make their satellites serviceable. This is a vehicles could have their own spectrum allocation that
classic chicken and egg problem.38 The DoD can help allows them to access spectrum across multiple orbital
solve this dilemma by continuing to invest in programs slots.
like DARPA’s RSGS, which helps further demonstrate the
Another regulatory challenge involves remote sensing
technological feasibility of robotic on-orbit servicing.
licenses. Since servicing satellites use cameras for
RSGS’s partnership with SpaceLogistics also helps
inspecting client satellites, they need remote sensing
assure the commercial sector that the DoD is interested
licenses even if their intention is not to take images of
in investing time and resources into these services. By
Earth.43 Obtaining these licenses is a lengthy process
sharing case studies and specific DoD needs for
because it goes through national security review.44 The
servicing, commercial companies will have more
first step in addressing these regulatory obstacles is
guidance for which servicing technologies should
having the federal government outline high-level policy
receive priority investment.
priorities for servicing. From there, separate regulations
Another key step the DoD can take to support the could be created specifically for the OOS industry so
emerging servicing industry is to design future satellites that it does not have to go through as many
to be serviceable. For example, military satellites can bureaucratic hoops.
include standardized grapple fixtures, refueling valves,
Additionally, the liability involved in these operations
and interfaces for connecting modular payloads to
may be a challenge. The International Space Station
satellite buses. NASA recently partnered with three
(ISS) sets some precedent for multilateral servicing
commercial companies, Altius Space Machines,
agreements, but a robust OOS industry will need more
Honeybee Robotics, and Orbit Fab, to start developing
thorough liability procedures. For example, if two
and testing various autonomous, robotic grapple
parties interested in a servicing partnership agree to
fixtures.39 Additionally, DARPA runs the Consortium for
waive liability, what happens if an uninvolved third
Execution of Rendezvous and Servicing Operations
party is somehow affected? Nations are ultimately liable
(CONFERS) which aims to develop technical and safety
for private citizen activity in space, so commercial
standards for a reliable and responsible OOS industry.40
companies can potentially be limited in their operations
DARPA is transitioning CONFERS leadership over to
if their respective governments do not approve of their
industry so that the commercial sector has more say in
plans.45
shaping these standards. Having standardized
components and procedures for RPO will help boost Conclusion
investors’ confidence in this emerging industry.
OOS capabilities can enhance military operations in
Policy Challenges
space by enabling mobility and logistics and increasing
resiliency and redundancy of satellite systems. Being
In order for the servicing industry to thrive, regulation
able to upgrade, refuel, relocate, repair, and inspect
and liability issues should be addressed. For example,
satellites on-orbit can revolutionize the way the DoD
OOS vehicles typically have to ask the federal
operates in the space domain. OOS can also help enable
government to share spectrum.41 GEO is particularly
the ability to maneuver satellites without regret and
difficult because the International Telecommunication
mitigate orbital debris. DoD investment in programs like
Union (ITU) only allocates spectrum by orbital slot, but
RSGS reflects an interest in developing these
servicing vehicles will need to travel through multiple
| 7

capabilities. Companies like SpaceLogistics are already Acronyms
demonstrating satellite mission extension services that
CONFERS – Consortium for Execution of Rendezvous
can greatly increase military satellite resiliency and
and Servicing Operations
redundancy. As other countries with robust space
programs pursue sophisticated OOS capabilities, it will
DARPA – Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
be integral for the DoD to incorporate these services into
DoD – Department of Defense
its space operations. By stating clear needs, setting
policy priorities, and addressing the regulatory ELSA-d – End-of-Life Services by Astroscale
challenges involved, the DoD can help bolster demonstration
commercial investment in OOS. As the space domain
EOL – End of life
becomes more contested, it is important to embrace
emerging capabilities like on-orbit servicing that can GEO – Geostationary orbit
help maintain superior DoD operations in space.
GSSAP – Geosynchronous Space Situational Awareness
Program
Acknowledgements ISS – International Space Station
ITU – International Telecommunication Union
Special thanks to Joe Anderson, Nick Boensch, Renata
Kommel, Thomas Roberts, Gordon Roesler, and Charity
LEO – Low-Earth orbit
Weeden for sharing their expertise and insight on the
MEV – Mission Extension Vehicle
topic of OOS.
NASA – National Aeronautics and Space Administration
OOS – On-orbit servicing
OSAM – On-orbit servicing, assembly, and
manufacturing
RPO – Rendezvous and proximity operations
RSGS – Robotic Servicing of Geosynchronous Satellites
SPIDER – Space Infrastructure Dexterous Robot
SSA – Space situational awareness
8 | DUKE | On-Orbit Servicing

About CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research organization dedicated to
advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding former U.S. Senator Sam Nunn (D-GA).
Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of values—nonpartisanship,
independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity and professionalism, and talent development.
CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research, analysis, and recommendations. We
organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media appearances that aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and
salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policymakers and the thinking of key influencers.
We work toward a vision of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS is ranked the number one think tank in the United States as well as the defense and national security center of excellence for
2016-2018 by the University of Pennsylvania’s annual think tank report.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be understood to be solely those of
the author(s).
| 9

ENDNOTES
1 Flight Software Workshop, “Day 1 - Keynote - Gordon Roesler,” YouTube video, 1:10:46, February 16th, 2018,

2 Amana Abdurrezak et al., Global Trends in On Orbit Servicing, Assembly and Manufacturing (OSAM) (Washington, DC: IDA Science
and Technology Policy Institute, 2020), 
servicing-assembly-and-manufacturing-osam/d-13161.ashx.
3 “Orbital Express,” Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, accessed , 
us/timeline/orbital-express.
4 “SpaceLogistics,” Northrop Grumman, accessed , 
5 Ibid.
6 Ibid.
7 Ibid.
8 Joe Anderson, (Vice President of Operations and Business Development for SpaceLogistics LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of
Northrop Grumman), in discussion with the author, .
9 Defense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space (Washington, DC, 2019),

10 DARPAtv, “TTO Technical Panel: Space and Maritime,” YouTube video, 1:06:39, December 7, 2018,

11 United States Space Force Capstone Publication, Spacepower: Doctrine for Space Forces (2020),

12 Ibid.
13 Ibid.
14 Ibid.
15 Defense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space.
16 General James H. Dickinson, Presentation to the Senate Armed Services Committee, U.S. Senate (United States Space Command,
2021), 
17 Todd Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2021 (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and International Studies, 2021),

18 Capt. Elizabeth Forbes, “End of an Era: The AEHF Program comes to a close,” Los Angeles Air Force Base, U.S. Air Force, accessed
, 
19 Joe Anderson, in discussion with the author.
20 “Next Generation Jammer,” Naval Air Systems Command, accessed , 
Generation-Jammer.
21 “SpaceLogistics,” Northrop Grumman.
22 Abdurrezak et al., Global Trends.
23 Dr. Gordon Roesler, (former program manager of DARPA’s RSGS program), in discussion with the author, .
10 | DUKE | On-Orbit Servicing

24 “SpaceLogistics,” Northrop Grumman.
25 Ibid.
26 “NASA’s On-orbit Servicing, Assembly, and Manufacturing 1 Mission Ready for Spacecraft Build,” National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, last modified May 6, 2021, accessed , 
orbit-servicing-assembly-and-manufacturing-1-mission-ready-for-spacecraft.
27 Ibid.
28 Ibid.
29 Joe Anderson, in discussion with the author.
30 Space and Missile Systems Center and SMC History Office, “Evolution of GPS: From Desert Storm to today’s users,” U.S. Air Force,
published March 24, 2016, accessed , 
desert-storm-to-todays-users/.
31 Dr. Gordon Roesler, in discussion with the author.
32 Intelsat Corporate Communications, “MEV-1: A look back at Intelsat’s groundbreaking journey,” Intelsat (blog), April 17, 2020,

33 Charity Weeden, (Vice President of Global Space Policy and Government Relations at Astroscale), in discussion with the author,
.
34 “Geosynchronous Space Situational Awareness Program,” U.S. Space Force, current as of , accessed ,

35 “About Astroscale,” Astroscale, accessed , 
36 Theresa Hitchens, “Exclusive: In A First, SecDef Pledges DoD To Space Norms,” Breaking Defense, July 19, 2021, accessed 
37 Ibid.
38 Joshua P. Davis et al., On-Orbit Servicing: Inspection, Repair, Refuel, Upgrade, and Assembly of Satellites in Space (Washington,
DC: Aerospace, 2019), 
39 “NASA Partners with Companies to Test Satellite Fixtures for Robotic Grappling,” National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, last updated March 16, 2021, accessed , 
test-satellite-fixtures-for-robotic-grappling.
40 Ana Saplan, “Consortium for Execution of Rendezvous and Servicing Operations (CONFERS),” Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency, accessed , 
operations#:~:text=CONFERS%20envisions%20a%20permanent%2C%20self,Government%20about%20on%2Dorbit%20servicin
g.&text=The%20Agency%20also%20intends%20by,commercial%20on%2Dorbit%20servicing%20organizations.
41 Charity Weeden, in discussion with the author.
42 Ibid.
43 Ibid.
44 Ibid.
45 Ibid.
| 11