INDUSTRY BRIEF
Healthcare,
Life Sciences,
and AI

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Introduction
We are pleased to announce our new HAI Industry Briefs, which we
hope will provide a valuable bridge between academic research at
Stanford and our industry stakeholders seeking to understand and
guide the impact of AI technologies.
– John Etchemendy and Fei-Fei Li, the Denning Co-Directors of the
Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI)
For the full text of the introduction to the HAI Industry Briefs,
visit hai.stanford.edu/blog/announcing-hai-industry-briefs.
HAI’s mission is to advance AI research, education, policy and practice to improve
the human condition. To learn more about HAI, visit hai.stanford.edu

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Healthcare &
Life Sciences

Drug Discovery

Telehealth

Ambient Intelligence

Operational Excellence

Medical Imaging

Augmented Intelligence

Data & Privacy
Photo: Drew Kelly

INDUSTRY BRIEF

HEALTHCARE &
LIFE SCIENCES
DRUG DISCOVERY
WHAT’S NEW?
New computational approaches to drug discovery help to identify and
examine relevant protein and molecular targets (such as the COVID-19
spike protein), design candidate drugs, anticipate therapeutic responses 4
and side-effects in patients, and optimize clinical trial enrollment. These “By augmenting and
approaches leverage natural language processing to extract value from
enhancing scientist
biomedical literature at scale and apply neural network architectures that
capabilities with
enable deep learning on multi-modal data and simultaneous predictions
on multiple tasks. computational approaches,
AI has demonstrated the
potential to overcome
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW?
major bottlenecks in
Drug development is expensive and time-consuming with low success
drug development. In my
rates, where it is not uncommon for R&D to cost upwards of $1B and span
over 10 years. The COVID-19 pandemic has spurred urgency to accelerate research with Genentech
these processes with AI. Indeed, the category “Drugs, Cancer, Molecular,
and Roche, we have
Drug, Discovery” received the greatest amount of AI investment in 2020 with
found that AI can make
over $13.8B (4.5 times higher than in 2019).
clinical trials, one of the
lengthiest phases of drug
development, both more
EYE ON CAMPUS
efficient and more inclusive.
Researchers on campus are...
This is only an early glimpse
• T ackling COVID-19 with NLP and machine learning by rapidly scanning
biomedical literature for target proteins, predicting the 3D structure of those into how AI can help us
target proteins, and identifying drug candidates push the boundaries of
• P redicting antibody binding sites on the receptor binding domain of the viral discovering, testing, and
spike protein targeted by vaccine development efforts with machine learning
accelerating the delivery of
• Predicting antigen molecules relevant to the development of vaccines with
medicines of the future.”
multi-modal recurrent neural networks
• J ointly predicting drug response, targets, and side effects with multi-task –James Zou, Assistant
learning
Professor of Biomedical
• E stimating drug side-effect pro-arrhythmia risk by combining machine
Data Science;
learning and multiscale modeling
HAI Faculty Affiliate
• O ptimizing clinical trial enrollment

INDUSTRY BRIEF

HEALTHCARE &
LIFE SCIENCES
TELEHEALTH
WHAT’S NEW?
Machine learning is being newly applied to digital health contexts to
automate processes in virtual patient visits, enable remote clinical
diagnoses from patient mobile phone images, and assess the quality of 5
“The landscape of
text-based therapeutic services. Reinforcement learning and deep learning
on mobile health data additionally enable real-time health analysis and digital health
personalized interventions.
is being rapidly
transformed by the
COVID-19 pandemic,
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW?
with the exponential
COVID-19 has accelerated the adoption of digital health technologies in the
form of virtual appointments, chatbots, and wearables -- providers report adoption of telehealth
50-175 times the number of telehealth visits pre-COVID-19. The additional
and remote care
data generated from these digital touchpoints creates opportunities for
AI to enhance remote healthcare delivery and provide more proactive, likely to only continue
individualized care.
growing in the post-
pandemic future.
EYE ON CAMPUS
This is an exciting
Researchers on campus are...
moment to study the
• A utomating patient history-taking in virtual visits from text with active
learning possibilities and role
of AI in digital health
HAI • Augmenting psychotherapy in both in-person and digital
technology.”
contexts with NLP
RESEARCH
–Serena Yeung,
• I dentifying diabetic retinopathy with deep learning on mobile phone images
Assistant Professor
• D etecting poor telehealth image quality for patient guidance with an
automated machine learning pipeline of Biomedical Data
• D etecting stroke risk-factors in real-time from wearable data with multi-task
Science; HAI Faculty
deep learning
Affiliate
• P ersonalizing mobile health interventions with reinforcement learning
• D etecting illness with “smart toilets” and automated urine and stool analysis

INDUSTRY BRIEF

HEALTHCARE & LIFE SCIENCES
AMBIENT INTELLIGENCE
WHAT’S NEW?
Low-cost sensors and advances in computer vision enable accurate activity
recognition in healthcare and daily living spaces where constant human
observation is infeasible. 6
“For AI algorithms,
Technical advances in visual tracking, human pose estimation, activity
understanding dynamic
recognition, real-time inference, and generalization to new environments
help to overcome major algorithmic challenges to these applications. human behavior in health-
This progress is reflected by the improving performance of submissions
critical situations is far
to several computer vision benchmark challenges, such as the ActivityNet
more challenging than
Temporal Action Localization Task, which has seen a 140% increase in
highest mean average precision in the last five years. labeling cats and chairs in
images. From a technical
perspective, many
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW?
computer vision problems
Extended passive vigilance can help improve the quality of healthcare
remain to be overcome
delivery, clinician productivity, and business operations, particularly
before these technologies
in times of scarce resources amidst healthcare crises. Fueled by the
maturation of computer vision technologies, these solutions are can be widely deployed.
becoming increasingly practical. However, we are on
the right track with
researchers and care
EYE ON CAMPUS
providers partnering
Researchers on campus are...
closely to combine the
best of sensor hardware,
• Making our hospitals smarter by embedding ambient
AI algorithms, and a
intelligence into their dark spaces
HAI holistic understanding
• Designing integrated solutions to help remotely monitor
RESEARCH of patient needs and
clinically relevant activities of seniors with non-intrusive
existing practices.”
sensors
–Fei-Fei Li, Professor of
• M easuring movement impairment in patients with cerebral palsy and
Computer Science and
parkinson’s with video
Co-Director of HAI
• M onitoring hand hygiene of health workers with depth sensors
• A utomating video analysis of surgical operations

INDUSTRY BRIEF

HEALTHCARE & LIFE SCIENCES
OPERATIONAL EXCELLENCE
WHAT’S NEW?
Prediction and simulation tools have been developed in direct response to
COVID-19. They have demonstrated potential to effectively allocate limited
resources and triage patients in emergency departments and model “The insights prov 7 ided by
pandemic spread using population-scale cell phone data.
Stanford Medicine’s AI
World class advances leveraging machine learning, mathematical systems on COVID-19
optimization, simulation, and other computational tools show potential to
patients have helped
supercharge the engines powering healthcare operations everywhere from
front-line doctors reassess
hospitals to public health departments.
the appropriateness
of care guidelines and
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW? better manage hospital
A health delivery system must be efficient and effective in daily resources without
operations but also elastic enough to respond to unplanned systemic
compromising health
shocks. AI has found early success in creating value with automated tools
outcomes. These early
that predict or simulate risk, optimize resource allocation, and enhance
operational efficiencies in a system where 25% of spending may already successes demonstrate the
be considered wasteful.
importance of partnering
closely with care providers
to bring AI into clinical use,
EYE ON CAMPUS safely, ethically and cost
Researchers on campus are... effectively. The challenge
• B uilding data platforms that enable AI approaches to clinical data and have after the pandemic will be
already powered insights boosting ICU capacity by 25% at Stanford Hospital to make these solutions
• D eveloping an AI-based system capable of real-time identification and scalable and sticky to
triage of handwritten faxed COVID-19 forms
provide lasting value.”
• A llocating scarce resources such as COVID-19 PCR tests and PPE according
–Nigam Shah, Associate
to predicted need
Professor of Medicine
• I nforming policy responses with fine-grained simulations of COVID-19
and Biomedical Data
spread as modeled by mobility networks
Science; Associate CIO of
• W orking with the Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital Stanford to forecast Data Science @ Stanford
surgical procedure duration, improve operating room utilization, schedule
Healthcare; HAI Faculty
procedures, forecast patient flow, and automate nurse workload, patient
Affiliate
transfer, and billing decision-support

INDUSTRY BRIEF

HEALTHCARE & LIFE SCIENCES
MEDICAL IMAGING
WHAT’S NEW?
Applications of deep learning to medical images and video continue
to show promise in outperforming human experts on a wide range of

diagnostic tasks. Researchers also find ways to use less hand-labeled
data, reducing costs while still achieving accurate results. “Progress in deep
learning has generated
Human-in-the-loop AI outperforms either human or machine alone,
suggesting a path to achieving the ideal symbiosis of human experts incredible excitement
and AI models.
among medical imaging
researchers. Because
medical images have
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW?
been captured in
Hospital systems face pressure to rapidly deliver diagnostic results,
while smaller clinics face a shortage of expertise. AI can expand access standard digital format
to advanced imaging and assist physician judgment. AI models can
for decades, scientists
automatically analyze scans not only to enhance clinician accuracy, but
are making dramatic
also to triage patients according to urgency. Advances in medical imaging
analysis may also unlock value beyond immediate clinical questions by progress developing
enabling longer-range analysis of a patient’s imaging history. new methods to tackle
the massive size and
high complexity of
EYE ON CAMPUS
medical images. We are
Researchers on campus are...
starting to see concrete
• A utomatically extracting labels from radiology text reports using BERT to results that improve
serve as training data for computer vision experiments.
patient care.”
• R eleasing 10,000+ photos of Chest X-rays so clinics can obtain AI advice from
smartphones –Curtis Langlotz,
• L earning medical visual representations from paired images and text, Professor of Radiology
reducing the need for hand-labeled datasets and of Medicine;
• U sing deep learning on medical images and videos to assess cardiac function, Director of the Stanford
diagnose appendicitis, diagnose pneumonia with swarm-based technology, Center for Artificial
predict outcomes of non-small-cell lung cancer, and detect pulmonary
Intelligence in Medicine
embolisms
and Imaging Center;
HAI Faculty Affiliate

INDUSTRY BRIEF

HEALTHCARE & LIFE SCIENCES
AUGMENTED INTELLIGENCE
WHAT’S NEW?
Machine-learning powered tools show potential to augment decision making
systems and provide more personalized care by tapping into existing patient

health records and genomic data. Some have moved beyond experimental
phases to being deployed in practice, such as Stanford Medicine’s first-of-its- “As offline AI algorithms
kind, in-house whole genome sequencing service, launched in January of 2021.
in healthcare improve,
we are increasingly
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW?
turning to the
On top of the estimated $34B - $251B cost of caring for COVID-19 patients,
challenges of real time
deferred treatments and exacerbated behavioral health problems caused by
the pandemic are projected to incur additional costs between $125B and $200B. implementation. It is
With employer health insurance premiums expected to rise anywhere between an urgent priority to
4% and 40% in 2021 and healthcare spending already accounting for roughly
understand how human
17% of GDP, urgency to make patient care more efficient and cost-effective with
technology should not be felt by healthcare providers alone. AI tools have the experts respond to a
potential to scale care without sacrificing cost, quality, and access.
workflow augmented
by AI and to study
EYE ON CAMPUS
how AI is, in turn,
Researchers on campus are...
incrementally impacted
• Launching the first in-house clinical, whole-genome, sequencing-based
by expert input or new
diagnostic testing service, initially targeting patients with inherited
cardiovascular diseases observations. Indeed,
• Predicting the deterioration of patients with COVID-19 from past respiratory completing the Human
infection data
Intelligence-Artificial
• Informing advanced care planning by predicting 12-month mortality from
Intelligence cycle will
EHR data
be the major focus for
• Distinguishing high-value from low-value medical diagnostic testing with a
systematic machine learning approach healthcare AI efforts
over the next few years.”
• M ining patient electronic medical records to assess and
HAI recommend clinical orders, inspired in approach by Amazon’s –Euan Ashley, Professor
RESEARCH
and Netflix’s product recommenders* of Medicine & Genetics;
Associate Dean,
• Predicting patient response to antidepressants and antibiotic susceptibility
Precision Health
with machine learning
* Only first reference is to HAI funded research. 9

INDUSTRY BRIEF

HEALTHCARE & LIFE SCIENCES
DATA: BIAS & PRIVACY
WHAT’S NEW?
Researchers have developed new computational and ethical frameworks for
identifying and addressing issues of bias, consent, security, privacy, and justice.

Techniques such as federated learning and secure multi-party computation
(SMC) demonstrate potential as privacy-preserving approaches to aggregating, “As biomedical AI
sharing, and computing on data for machine learning while maintaining
increasingly moves
regulatory compliance and patient privacy.
into real-world use, we
must ensure that it is
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW?
a force for addressing
During COVID-19, AI has already shown potential to exacerbate health
health disparities, not
disparities and inspired calls for industry to create better off-the-shelf
technologies for protecting patient privacy while responding to the pandemic. exacerbating them.
As medical AI becomes more widely deployed, both developers and health
It is imperative that
practitioners must ensure the technology and its applications benefit the
entire population. all stakeholders -
academia, industry,
EYE ON CAMPUS regulators, clinicians,
Researchers on campus are...
patients, ethicists, and
• Deploying the world's largest application of SMC in a health context,
others - proactively
demonstrating the practicality of privacy-preserving analytics for
population-scale digital health interventions collaborate to
• Developing a federated learning-based distributed AI system for detecting anticipate and address
COVID-19 without sharing patient data across institutions
these issues.”
• Identifying geographic bias in datasets used to train clinical deep learning
algorithms
–Russ Altman,
• Raising concerns about unrepresentative training data and a lack of
Professor of
regulated COVID-19 data resources that may be exacerbating disparities or
underrepresenting older people and people of color Bioengineering,
Genetics, Medicine,
HAI • Developing ethical frameworks for the sharing and use of
and Biomedical Data
clinical and sensor data in AI development*
RESEARCH
Science; Associate
Director of HAI
* Only second reference is to HAI funded research. 10

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Industry Take
Industry will play a critical role in scaling the
applications of AI research. For this reason, it is a
goal and privilege of HAI to convene stakeholders
from industry in addition to those in academia,
government, and civil society to address the
technical and societal challenges posed by AI.
Leading venture investors, positioned at the
frontlines of startup innovation, can provide
a unique perspective on the development and
deployment of AI technologies in the healthcare
and life sciences industries.

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Industry Take
“In recent years the power of AI to augment human performance to superhuman
levels has been amply demonstrated in diverse medical applications such as
interpreting radiological images, histopathology, genomics, colonoscopies,
retinal images, EKGs, identifying gaps in care, and providing improved
antibiotic recommendations. There should now be no question that AI, if
deployed correctly, can be used to increase the quality of care, lower costs,
and increase accessibility. Radical new technology can create opportunities for
radically new ways of providing healthcare and new business models.”
–Alex Morgan, Partner, Khosla Ventures
“With a growing shortage of physicians and the increased strain caused by the
pandemic, many medical professionals have their schedules packed so tightly that
much of the human element which motivated their pursuit of medicine in the first
place is reduced. In this state of affairs, AI will be an accelerant and enabler, not a
threat. Already, it is helping care providers scale their ability to proactively detect
and mitigate the risk of adverse events. Automated scribes are reducing the burden
of tedious tasks, allowing doctors to focus on the patient. It would be good business
for AI companies to help, rather than attempt to replace, medical professionals.”
–Konstantin Buhler, Partner, Sequoia Capital
“Given its immense potential utility, AI is now a part of every link on bio’s value
chain, from drug discovery, to diagnostic development, to healthcare delivery
technologies. There are so many new applications for AI in bio that it is
increasingly difficult to delineate the signal from the noise. One of the best ways
to do this is to determine whether a new AI-driven technology is differentiated
from the competition. To understand the innovative nature of a given product, it
is naturally important to have a deeper understanding of the application domain
(medical transcription, drug design, biomarker discovery, clinical trial prediction, etc).
The core question here is whether it actually enables something unprecedented in the field, be it a
completely new use case or an order of magnitude improvement in speed/efficiency/cost/etc. The
logic here is actually the same for all new products, AI or not.”
–Vijay Pande, General Partner, Andreessen Horowitz
Adjunct Professor of Bioengineering, Stanford University

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Nearly 200 Stanford faculty
LATEST
FROM HAI
FACULTY are affiliates of Stanford HAI,
spanning all seven schools and
and more than 90 departments.
The Value of Data and AI: Strategies for Senior
Leadership, is an upcoming HAI Executive Education
Program in which Stanford faculty take senior
executives and key decision-makers through the
emerging business strategies and research around
the economics of data and AI.
Program: March 29 - 31
Application Deadline: March 22
Apply early for the best chance to secure your seat. Admitted applicants should
use the promo code “INDUSTRYBRIEF" at the time of course registration to
receive a 20% discount for the program.
Submit your application today.
JAMES ZOU
is the HAI Faculty Director for The Value of Data and
AI Executive Education Program. He is an Assistant
Professor of Biomedical Data Science (and Computer
Science and Electrical Engineering, by courtesy), HAI
Faculty Affiliate, Faculty Director of Stanford AI for
Health, and a Chan-Zuckerberg Investigator.

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Are you prepared for
the next wave of change?
THINGS YOU SHOULD KNOW.
52%
$15.7
T
of Fortune 500 companies
in value will be added
were extinguished by
by AI to the global
digital disruption between
economy by 20303
2000 and 20141
$1.4
50% B
in annualized value can
of the S&P 500 in 2018
be gained by AI-led
was forecasted to be
transformation of a
replaced in just ten years2
Fortune 500 company4
References:
1 Ray Wang, “Research Summary: Sneak Peeks From Constellation’s Futurist Framework
And 2014 Outlook On Digital Disruption,” Constellation Research, February 18, 2014.
2 Scott D. Anthony et al., “2018 Corporate Longevity Forecast: Creative Destruction is Accelerating,” Innosight, .
3 “PwC’s Global Artificial Intelligence Study: Sizing the prize,” PricewaterhouseCoopers, Retrieved March 1, 2021.
4 “Incorporate enterprise A.I. now or risk getting disrupted,” Fortune + C3. Ai, Retrieved March 1, 2021.

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Become a
corporate
member today.
50% of companies are likely to
miss the window of opportunity.1
Let’s talk.
Learn more about the
Corporate Members Program
and the Stanford advantage.
Panos Madamopoulos,
HAI Director of Partnerships
1 Jacques Bughin, “Wait-and-See Could Be a Costly AI Strategy,” MIT Sloan Management Review, June 15, 2018.

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Appendix

Artificial
Intelligence
Definitions
Intelligence might be defined as the ability to learn such as winning games, without explicit examples of
and perform suitable techniques to solve problems and good techniques, enabling autonomy.
achieve goals, appropriate to the context in an uncertain,
Deep Learning is the use of large multi-layer
ever-varying world. A fully pre-programmed factory robot
(artificial) neural networks that compute with
is flexible, accurate, and consistent but not intelligent.
continuous (real number) representations, a little like the
Artificial Intelligence (AI), a term coined by hierarchically-organized neurons in human brains. It is
emeritus Stanford Professor John McCarthy in 1955, was currently the most successful ML approach, usable for all
defined by him as “the science and engineering of making types of ML, with better generalization from small data
intelligent machines”. Much research has humans program and better scaling to big data and compute budgets.
software agents to behave in a clever way, like playing
An algorithm lists the precise steps to take, such
chess, but, today, we emphasize agents that can learn, as
as a person writes in a computer program. AI systems
human beings navigating our changing world do.
contain algorithms, but often just for a few parts like a
Autonomous systems can independently plan and learning or reward calculation method. Much of their
decide sequences of steps to achieve a specified goal behavior emerges via learning from data or experience,
without micro-management. A hospital delivery robot which is a sea change in system design that Stanford
must autonomously navigate busy corridors to succeed in alumnus Andrej Karpathy dubbed Software 2.0.
its task. In AI, autonomy doesn’t have the sense of being
Narrow AI is intelligent systems for particular tasks,
self-governing that is common in politics or biology.
e.g., speech or facial recognition. Human-
Machine Learning (ML) is the part of AI studying level AI, or Artificial General Intelligence
how computer systems can improve their perception, (AGI), seeks broadly intelligent, context-aware
knowledge, decisions, or actions based on experience or machines. It is needed for effective, adaptable social
data. For this, ML draws from computer science, statistics, chatbots or human-robot interaction.
psychology, neuroscience, economics, and control theory.
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence is
In supervised learning, a computer learns to AI that seeks to augment the abilities of, address the
predict human-given labels, such as dog breed based on societal needs of, and draw inspiration from human
labeled dog pictures; unsupervised learning does beings. It researches and builds effective partners and
not require labels, sometimes making its own prediction tools for people, such as a robot helper and companion
tasks such as trying to predict each successive word in for the elderly.
a sentence; reinforcement learning lets an agent Text by Professor Christopher Manning, v 1.1, 
learn action sequences that optimize its total rewards, Learn more at hai.stanford.edu

References Zhang, D., Mishra, S., Brynjolfsson, E., Etchemendy, J., Ganguli D.,
Grosz B., Lyons T., Manyika J., Niebles, JC., Sellitto, M., Shoham,
Y., Clark J., and Perrault, R. “The AI Index 2021 Annual Report,”
HEALTHCARE & AI Index Steering Committee, Human-Centered AI Institute,
LIFE SCIENCES Stanford University, Stanford, CA, .
Telehealth
Drug Discovery Agarwal, P., Shcherbina, A., Day, S., Saberi, S., Mealiffe, M.,
Edelberg, J.M., Li, Y., & Ashley, E. (2020). Abstract 14963:
Chen, B., Khodadoust, M.S., Olsson, N. et al. Predicting Accelerometer-measured Activity in Non-obstructive Hypertrophic
HLA class II antigen presentation through integrated deep Cardiomyopathy: Patient-generated Activity Measures Correlate
learning. Nat Biotechnol 37, 1332–1343 (2019). With, and Are Convolutional Neural Network Predictors of, Clinical
org/10.1038/s41587-019-0280-2 Parameters in the MAVERICK-HCM Study. Circulation, 142. https://

Buhler, K. (2020, July 7). What A Stanford Researcher’s
Fight Against Covid-19 Can Tell Us About The Future Of Armitage, H. (2020, April 6). ‘Smart toilet’ monitors for signs of
Drug Discovery. Forbes. disease. Stanford Medicine News Center. 
konstantinebuhler/2020/07/07/what-a-stanford-researchers- edu/news/all-news/2020/04/smart-toilet-monitors-for-signs-of-
fight-against-covid-19-can-tell-us-about-the-future-of-drug- disease.html
discovery/?sh=404bd0a71e01
Ludwig, CA., Perera, C., Myung, D., Greven, MA., Smith, SJ., Chang,
Fast, E., Altman, R. B. & Chen, B. Potential T-cell and B-cell RT., Leng, T; Automatic Identification of Referral-Warranted
Epitopes of 2019-nCoV. (2020). Preprint at Diabetic Retinopathy Using Deep Learning on Mobile Phone
org/10.1101/2020.02.19.955484 Images. Trans. Vis. Sci. Tech. 2020;9(2):60. doi: 
org/10.1167/tvst.9.2.60.
Liu, R. (2021, April 7). AI uses patient data to optimize
selection of eligibility criteria for clinical trials. Nature. Miller, K. (2021, January 14). Augmenting Psychotherapy with AI.
 Stanford Institute for Human-Centered AI. 
5?error=cookies_not_supported&code=d8270d24-95ca-4c28- edu/blog/augmenting-psychotherapy-ai
8f02-37e06df9ac20
McKinsey on Healthcare: 2020 Year in Review | Healthcare Systems
Lynch, S. (2020, April 30). Russ Altman: AI’s Potential To Detect & Services. (2020). McKinsey & Company. 
COVID and Find Cures. Stanford Institute for Human-Centered com/industries/healthcare-systems-and-services/our-insights/
AI. mckinsey-on-healthcare-2020-year-in-review
detect-covid-and-find-cures
Mottaghi, A., Sarma, P., Amatriain, X., Yeung, S., & Kannan, A.
Sahli-Costabal, F., Seo, K., Ashley, E., & Kuhl, E. (2020). (2020). Medical symptom recognition from patient text: An active
Classifying Drugs by their Arrhythmogenic Risk Using Machine learning approach for long-tailed multilabel distributions. ArXiv,
Learning. Biophysical journal, 118(5), 1165–1176. 
org/10.1016/j.bpj.2020.01.012
Tomkins, S., Liao, P., Klasnja, P.V., Yeung, S., & Murphy, S. (2020).
Jiang Y, Rensi S, Wang S, Altman RB. DrugOrchestra: Jointly Rapidly Personalizing Mobile Health Treatment Policies with
predicting drug response, targets, and side effects via deep Limited Data. ArXiv, 
multi-task learning. bioRxiv; 2020. Prepint at 
Torres-Soto, J., & Ashley, E. A. (2020). Multi-task deep learning
org/10.1101/2020.11.17.385757
for cardiac rhythm detection in wearable devices. NPJ digital
Rensi, S., Altman, R. B., Liu, T., Lo, Y. C., McInnes, G., Derry, medicine, 3, 116. 
A., & Keys, A. (2020). Homology Modeling of TMPRSS2 Yields
Vodrahalli, K., Daneshjou, R., Novoa, R., Chiou, A., Ko, J., & Zou, J.
Candidate Drugs That May Inhibit Entry of SARS-CoV-2 into
(2020). TrueImage: A Machine Learning Algorithm to Improve the
Human Cells. ChemRxiv : the preprint server for chemistry,
Quality of Telehealth Photos. ArXiv, 
10.26434/chemrxiv.12009582.v1. 
chemrxiv.12009582 Webster, D.E., Tummalacherla, M., Higgins, M., Wing, D., Ashley,
E., Kelly, V.E., McConnell, M., Muse, E., Olgin, J., Mangravite, L.M.,
Wouters OJ, McKee M, Luyten J. Estimated Research and
Godino, J.G., Kellen, M.R., & Omberg, L. (2020). Heart Snapshot:
Development Investment Needed to Bring a New Medicine
a broadly validated smartphone measure of VO2max for
to Market, 2009-2018. JAMA. 2020;323(9):844–853. https://
collection of real world data. bioRxiv. 
jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-abstract/2762311
content/10.1101/2020.07.02.185314v1 81

References
Operational Excellence
HEALTHCARE & Chang, S., Pierson, E., Koh, P.W. et al. Mobility network models
of COVID-19 explain inequities and inform reopening. Nature
LIFE SCIENCES
589, 82–87 (2021). 
Chebrolu, K., Ressler, D., & Varia, H. (2022, October 22). Smart
use of artificial intelligence in health care. Deloitte Insights.

care/artificial-intelligence-in-health-care.html
Ambient Intelligence
Datta, S., Posada, J., Olson, G., Li, W., O’Reilly, C., Balraj, D.,
Abate, T. (2020, September 9). Smarter Hospitals: How AI-
Mesterhazy, J., Pallas, J., Desai, P., & Shah, N. (2020). A new
Enabled Sensors Could Save Lives. Stanford Institute for
paradigm for accelerating clinical data science at Stanford
Human-Centered AI. 
Medicine. ArXiv, 
hospitals-how-ai-enabled-sensors-could-save-lives
Joshi, R.P., Pejaver, V., Hammarlund, N., Sung, H., Lee, S.K.,
Flynn, L. (2020, August 12). Improving Hospital Hand Hygiene:
Furmanchuk, A., Lee, H., Scott, G., Gombar, S., Shah, N.,
The Solution May Lie with AI. Stanford Medicine Clinical
Shen, S., Nassiri, A., Schneider, D., Ahmad, F.S., Liebovitz,
Excellence Research Center. 
D.M., Kho, A., Mooney, S., Pinsky, B., & Banaei, N. (2020).
news/cerc-articles/improving-hospital-hand-hygiene.html
A predictive tool for identification of SARS-CoV-2 PCR-
Lu, M., Poston, K., Pfefferbaum, A., Sullivan, E., Fei-Fei, L., Pohl, negative emergency department patients using routine test
K.M., Niebles, J.C., & Adeli, E. (2020). Vision-based Estimation of results. Journal of Clinical Virology, 129, 104502 - 104502.
MDS-UPDRS Gait Scores for Assessing Parkinson's Disease Motor 
Severity. Medical image computing and computer-assisted S1386653220302444?via%3Dihub
intervention : MICCAI ... International Conference on Medical
Lavertu, A., Stribling, A., White, M., McInnes, G., Altman, R.,
Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, 12263,
Pramanik, R., & Kaushal, A. (2020). Covid Fast Fax: A system for
637-647. 
real-time triage of Covid-19 case report faxes. medRxiv. https://
Myers, A. (2020, August 11). A Powerful AI Tool Could Help 
Medical Professionals Treat Serious Motor Dysfunction. Stanford
Scheinker, D., & Brandeau, M.L. (2020). Implementing Analytics
Institute for Human-Centered AI. 
Projects in a Hospital: Successes, Failures, and Opportunities.
blog/powerful-ai-tool-could-help-medical-professionals-treat-
Interfaces, 50, 176-189. 
serious-motor-dysfunction
full/10.1287/inte.2020.1036?af=R
Senior Care | Stanford Partnership in AI-Assisted Care (PAC).
Shaban, B. R. C. (2021, February 11). Silicon Valley Prescribes
(n.d.). Stanford Partnership in AI-Assisted Care. Retrieved
‘Big Data’ to Combat COVID-19. NBC Bay Area. 
February 9, 2021, from 
nbcbayarea.com/investigations/silicon-valley-prescribes-big-
senior_care/
data-to-combat-covid-19/2465131/
Task 1 – Temporal Action Localization | International
Challenge on Activity Recognition 2020 (ActivityNet). (2020).
ActivityNet. Medical Imaging
anet_localization.html
Huang, SC., Kothari, T., Banerjee, I. et al. PENet—a scalable
Zhang, M., Cheng, X., Copeland, D., Desai, A., Guan, M.Y., Brat,
deep-learning model for automated diagnosis of pulmonary
G.A., & Yeung, S. (2020). Using Computer Vision to Automate
embolism using volumetric CT imaging. npj Digit. Med. 3, 61
Hand Detection and Tracking of Surgeon Movements in Videos
(2020). 
of Open Surgery. ArXiv, 
Hughes, J., Yuan, N., He, B., Ouyang, J., Ebinger, J., Botting,
Zhang, D., Mishra, S., Brynjolfsson, E., Etchemendy, J., Ganguli D.,
P., Lee, J., Tooley, J., Neiman, K., Lungren, M.P., Liang, D.,
Grosz B., Lyons T., Manyika J., Niebles, JC., Sellitto, M., Shoham,
Schnittger, I., Harrington, R., Chen, J.H., Ashley, E., Cheng,
Y., Clark J., and Perrault, R. “The AI Index 2021 Annual Report,” AI
S., Ouyang, D., & Zou, J. (2021). Deep Learning Prediction of
Index Steering Committee, Human-Centered AI Institute, Stanford
Biomarkers from Echocardiogram Videos. medRxiv. https://
University, Stanford, CA, .

References Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2020, December
16). NHE Fact Sheet. CMS.Gov. 
Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-
HEALTHCARE & Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/NHE-Fact-Sheet
LIFE SCIENCES
Corbin, C. K., Medford, R. J., Osei, K., & Chen, J. H. (2020).
Personalized Antibiograms: Machine Learning for Precision
Selection of Empiric Antibiotics. AMIA Joint Summits on
Translational Science proceedings. AMIA Joint Summits on
Mukherjee, P., Zhou, M., Lee, E. et al. A shallow convolutional Translational Science, 2020, 108–115. 
neural network predicts prognosis of lung cancer patients in nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7233062/
multi-institutional computed tomography image datasets. Nat
Jung, K., Kashyap, S., Avati, A., Harman, S., Shaw, H., Li,
Mach Intell 2, 274–282 (2020). 
R., Smith, M.A., Shum, K., Javitz, J., Vetteth, Y., Seto, T.,
020-0173-6
Bagley, S.C., & Shah, N.H. (2020). A framework for making
Ollove, M. (2020, January 31). Rural America’s Health Crisis predictive models useful in practice. medRxiv. https://
Seizes States’ Attention. Pew. academic.oup.com/jamia/advance-article/doi/10.1093/jamia/
en/research-and-analysis/blogs/stateline/2020/01/31/rural- ocaa318/6045012
americas-health-crisis-seizes-states-attention
Li, R., Wang, J., Sharp, C.D., & Chen, J. (2019). When order
Ouyang, D., He, B., Ghorbani, A., Yuan, N., Ebinger, J., Langlotz, sets do not align with clinician workflow: assessing practice
C. P., Heidenreich, P. A., Harrington, R. A., Liang, D. H., Ashley, patterns in the electronic health record. BMJ Quality
E. A., & Zou, J. Y. (2020). Video-based AI for beat-to-beat & Safety, 28, 987 - 996. 
assessment of cardiac function. Nature, 580(7802), 252–256. content/28/12/987

Rajpurkar P, Yang J, Dass N, et al. Evaluation of a Machine
Patel, B.N., Rosenberg, L., Willcox, G. et al. Human–machine Learning Model Based on Pretreatment Symptoms and
partnership with artificial intelligence for chest radiograph Electroencephalographic Features to Predict Outcomes
diagnosis. npj Digit. Med. 2, 111 (2019). of Antidepressant Treatment in Adults With Depression:
s41746-019-0189-7 A Prespecified Secondary Analysis of a Randomized
Clinical Trial. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(6):e206653.
Phillips, N.A., Rajpurkar, P., Sabini, M., Krishnan, R., Zhou, S.,

Pareek, A., Phu, N.M., Wang, C., Jain, M., Du, N.D., Truong,
fullarticle/2767367
S.Q., Ng, A., & Lungren, M. (2020). CheXphoto: 10,000+ Photos
and Transformations of Chest X-rays for Benchmarking Deep Lee, V. (2021, February 2). U.S. Health Care Is in Flux. Here’s
Learning Robustness. arXiv: Image and Video Processing. What Employers Should Do. Harvard Business Review.
 
employers-should-do
Rajpurkar, P., Park, A., Irvin, J. et al. AppendiXNet: Deep
Learning for Diagnosis of Appendicitis from A Small Dataset Sang, S., Sun, R., Coquet, J., Carmichael, H., Seto, T., &
of CT Exams Using Video Pretraining. Sci Rep 10, 3958 (2020). Hernandez-Boussard, T. (2021). Learning from past respiratory
 infections to predict COVID-19 Outcomes: A retrospective
study. Journal of medical Internet research. 
Smit, A., Jain, S., Rajpurkar, P., Pareek, A., Ng, A., & Lungren, M.
jmir.org/preprint/23026/accepted
(2020). CheXbert: Combining Automatic Labelers and Expert
Annotations for Accurate Radiology Report Labeling Using Understanding the hidden costs of COVID-19’s potential
BERT. EMNLP. impact on US healthcare. (2020, September 4). McKinsey
& Company. 
Zhang, Y., Jiang, H., Miura, Y., Manning, C.D., & Langlotz, C. (2020).
healthcare-systems-and-services/our-insights/understanding-
Contrastive Learning of Medical Visual Representations from
the-hidden-costs-of-covid-19s-potential-impact-on-us-
Paired Images and Text. ArXiv, 
healthcare#
Wang, J.X., Sullivan, D.K., Wells, A.C., & Chen, J. (2020).
ClinicNet: machine learning for personalized clinical order
Augmented Intelligence
set recommendations. JAMIA Open, 3, 216 - 224. https://
academic.oup.com/jamiaopen/article/3/2/216/5864422
Armitage, H. (2021b, February 11). Stanford Medicine launches
in-house service for whole genome sequencing. Stanford
Medicine. 
stanford-medicine-service-for-whole-genome-sequencing.html

References Röösli, E., Rice, B., & Hernandez-Boussard, T. (2021). Bias at warp
speed: how AI may contribute to the disparities gap in the time of
COVID-19. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
HEALTHCARE &
: JAMIA, 28, 190 - 192. 
LIFE SCIENCES PMC7454645/
Xu, Y., Ma, L., Yang, F., Chen, Y., Ma, K., Yang, J., Yang, X., Shu,
C., Fan, Z., Gan, J., Zou, X., Huang, R., Zhang, C., Liu, X., Tu, D.,
Xu, C., Zhang, W., Yang, D., Wang, M., Wang, X., Xie, X., Leng, H.,
Holalkere, N., Halin, N.J., Kamel, I., Wu, J., Peng, X., Shao, J.,
Data & Privacy Mongkolwat, P., Zhang, J., Rubin, D., Wang, G., Zheng, C., Li, Z.,
Bai, X., & Xia, T. (2020). A collaborative online AI engine for CT-
E, Andrews. “Finding the COVID-19 Victims That Big Data Misses.” based COVID-19 diagnosis. medRxiv. 
Stanford HAI, Stanford Institute for Human-Centered AI, 8 Feb. content/10.1101/2020.05.10.20096073v2
2021, 
big-data-misses Zoppi, B. L. A. (2020, March 24). New ethical framework developed
to tackle ethical issues in clinical AI data sharing. News Medical Life
Enya Inc. (2020, December 8). Six Million Fighting Covid-19: Sciences. 
FeverIQ Offers Premium Covid Safety Solution for Free to Public ethical-framework-developed-to-tackle-ethical-issues-in-clinical-
Elementary Schools. PR Newswire. AI-data-sharing.aspx
com/news-releases/six-million-fighting-covid-19-feveriq-offers-
premium-covid-safety-solution-for-free-to-public-elementary-
schools-301188180.html Other
Larson, D., Magnus, D., Lungren, M., Shah, N., & Langlotz, C. Anthony, S. D., Viguerie, S. P., Schwartz, E. L., & Landeghem, J.
(2020). Ethics of Using and Sharing Clinical Imaging Data for D. (2018, February). 2018 Corporate Longevity Forecast: Creative
Artificial Intelligence: A Proposed Framework. Radiology, 192536. Destruction is Accelerating. Innosight. 
 com/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Innosight-Corporate-
Longevity-2018.pdf
Lynch, S. (2020, September 21). The Geographic Bias in Medical
AI Tools. Stanford Institute for Human-Centered AI. Incorporate enterprise A.I. now or risk getting disrupted. (n.d.).
stanford.edu/blog/geographic-bias-medical-ai-tools Fortune + C3.Ai. Retrieved March 1, 2021, from 
studio.fortune.com/c3.ai/incorporate-enterprise-ai-now-or-risk-
Martinez-Martin, N., Luo, Z., Kaushal, A., Adeli, E., Haque, A., Kelly,
getting-disrupted/?prx_t=hx0GAQ6hIAoPEQA&ntv_fr
S.S., Wieten, S., Cho, M., Magnus, D., Fei-Fei, L., Schulman, K., &
Milstein, A. (2020). Ethical issues in using ambient intelligence Bughin, J. (2018, June 15). Wait-and-See Could Be a Costly AI
in health-care settings. The Lancet. Digital health. Strategy. MIT Sloan Management Review. 
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2589750020302752 edu/article/wait-and-see-could-be-a-costly-ai-strategy/
Nyczepir, D. (2020, July 8). As data-sharing becomes more crucial, PricewaterhouseCoopers. (n.d.). PwC’s Global Artificial Intelligence
agencies say industry can help with privacy issues. FedScoop. Study: Sizing the prize. PwC. Retrieved March 1, 2021, from https://
 
census-bureau/ artificial-intelligence-study.html
Ranjan, A., Li, S., Chen, B., Chiu, A., Jagadeesh, K., & Liphardt, J. Wang, R. (2014, February 18). Research Summary: Sneak Peeks From
(2020). FeverIQ - A Privacy-Preserving COVID-19 SymptomTracker Constellation’s Futurist Framework. Constellation Research. https://
with 3.6 Million Reports. medRxiv. 
content/10.1101/2020.09.23.20200006v2 peeks-constellations-futurist-framework-and-2014-outlook-digital
Acknowledgments
This brief was produced by the HAI Partnerships team as one of its strategic initiatives, with research and writing led
by Alice Hau. We are grateful for the generosity of the following people for providing their time, helpful suggestions,
and constructive feedback in the creation of this brief (names listed in alphabetical order): Alex Morgan, Amit Kaushal,
Curtis Langlotz, Erika Strandberg, Euan Ashley, Fei-Fei Li, Hesam Motlagh, James Zou, Jan Liphardt, John Etchemendy,
Jonathan Chen, Jure Leskovec, Konstantine Buhler, Nigam Shah, Pablo Paredes, Russ Altman, Serena Yeung, Serina

Chang, Stefano Rensi, Tina Wie, Vijay Pande, and the HAI Staff.