Guarding the Alliance’s
Eastern Frontiers
Defense AI in Poland
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Rafał Lipka, Jakub Wernik, and Wojciech Dzięgiel
DAIO Study 25|29

About the Defense AI Observatory
The Defense AI Observatory (DAIO) at the Helmut Schmidt University in Hamburg
monitors and analyzes the use of artificial intelligence by armed forces. DAIO comprises
three interrelated work streams:
Culture, concept development, and organizational transformation in the context of
military innovation
Current and future conflict pictures, conflict dynamics, and operational experience,
especially related to the use of emerging technologies
Defense industrial dynamics with a particular focus on the impact of emerging
technologies on the nature and character of techno-industrial ecosystems
DAIO is an integral element of GhostPlay, a capability and technology development
project for concept-driven and AI-enhanced defense decision-making in support of fast-
paced defense operations. GhostPlay is funded by the Center for Digital and Technology
Research of the German Bundeswehr (dtec.bw). dtec.bw is funded by the European Union
– NextGenerationEU.
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von

Guarding the Alliance’s
Eastern Frontiers
Defense AI in Poland
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Rafał Lipka, Jakub Wernik, and Wojciech Dzięgiel
DAIO Study 25|29

About the Authors
Rafał Lipka graduated in economics from the Warsaw School of Economics (SGH) and has
served as an expert in defense and international security at the Pulaski Foundation since
2014. His research interests include armed forces modernization, the defense industry, and
the political economy of the Transatlantic region, as well as East and Southeast Asia, with a
particular focus on structural reforms, industrial policy and economic diversification.
Jakub Wernik graduated from the Warsaw School of Economics with a degree in Finance
and Accounting. He also completed postgraduate studies on the innovative economy. He is
currently a doctoral student at the Doctoral School of the University of Warsaw, specializing
in political science and administration. He has gained professional experience in consult-
ing firms, non-governmental organizations, and public institutions, including the National
Bank of Poland and the National Center for Research and Development. He is currently a
research fellow at the Pulaski Foundation.
Wojciech Dzięgiel is a Member of the Board of the Casimir Pulaski Foundation. He is a
lawyer by training, having specialized in Public International Law and has graduated from
the Hague Academy of International Law (2002) and Utrecht University (2003). After grad-
uating from law school, he joined the state public administration and later was admitted to
the National School of Public Administration (2005-2006). Mr. Dzięgiel is a career diplomat
and has previously worked at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Poland studies on innovation
economy at the Warsaw University (2017), ESG and sustainable finance at the Kozminski
University (2023) and AI for Executives at the University of Warsaw (2025).
Design
Almasy Information Design Thinking
Imprint
Rafał Lipka, Jakub Wernik, and Wojciech Dzięgiel, Guarding the Alliance’s Eastern Frontiers.
Defense AI in Poland. DAIO Study 25/29 (Hamburg: Defense AI Observatory, 2025)
Defense AI Observatory | Chair of Political Theory | Helmut Schmidt University
Holstenhofweg 85 | 22043 Hamburg | T +49 40 6541 2776
 | contact@defenseai.eu | @Defense_AIO
ISSN (online): 2749–5337
ISSN (print): 2749–5345
4 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

Content
1 Summary ..................................................................................................................... 6
2 Thinking About Defense AI ....................................................................................... 9
2.1 Defense and Security Landscape –
Enormous Needs, Even Greater Challenges Ahead ....................................................10
2.2 Strategic Approach to the Implementation of Defense AI ...........................................13
2.3 Preparing for the Implementation of AI for Defense and Security Purposes .................17
3 Developing Defense AI. ........................................................................................... 20
3.1 R&D Priorities ............................................................................................................22
3.2 Overview of Poland’s Defense AI Ecosystem ..............................................................26
3.3 AI in Transformation of the Defense Industry ..............................................................37
4 Organizing Defense AI ............................................................................................. 38
5 Funding Defense AI ................................................................................................. 41
6 Fielding and Operating Defense AI. ....................................................................... 45
6.1 Command, Control, Communications, Computers,
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) ..............................................46
6.2 Cybersecurity ............................................................................................................47
6.3 Other Applications ....................................................................................................48
7 Training for Defense AI ............................................................................................ 50
8 Conclusion. ................................................................................................................ 54
Literature ...................................................................................................................... 57
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 5

1 Summary
Poland has recently launched an ambitious plan to integrate artificial intelligence
(AI) technologies into its defense sector as part of a broader digital transformation
agenda. These initiatives reflect both the need to enhance the effectiveness of
public institutions and the determination to modernize the Polish Armed Forces
in line with evolving security challenges. The Ministry of National Defense has
assumed a central role in this process, with growing emphasis on cross-ministerial
collaboration and institutional support.
A milestone in this effort has been the publication of Poland’s Military AI Strategy
2024–2039 by the Ministry of National Defense and the establishment of the Arti-
ficial Intelligence Implementation Center within the Cyberspace Defense Forces.
This decision reflects a more centralized and coordinated approach, designed to
capitalize on existing expertise and ensure synergies between the armed forces,
industry, and the research sector. At the same time, significant challenges remain,
particularly in securing adequate funding and building the necessary human capi-
tal to sustain these initiatives.
Although the adoption of AI in the military is still in its early stages, Poland’s
efforts mirror the approach taken by leading NATO nations. Strategic documents
adopted by the Ministry of National Defense outline a broad research and devel-
opment agenda, covering areas such as Cognitive AI, Data Science, Cybersecurity,
Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance,
and Reconnaissance (C4ISR), Human-Machine Interfaces (HMI), and autonomous
platforms, among others. In addition to identifying specific R&D priorities, the
government has also launched national programs—such as PERUN—designed to
stimulate the development of domestic solutions in these fields.
At the same time, several AI technologies have already been developed and
deployed by the Cyberspace Defense Forces Component Command, particularly
in the area of cybersecurity, where they are used to enhance threat detection. Also
notable in this context is the Legion Battle Management System, currently being
developed by specialists within the Cyberspace Defense Forces. Its AI-enabled
architecture reportedly allows for the automated analysis of imagery data provided
by unmanned platforms operated by the Polish Armed Forces. Furthermore, AI is
increasingly being integrated into operational systems, including unmanned aerial
vehicles.
6 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

To date, little is known about the allocation of funds for acquiring AI-enabled
systems for the Armed Forces, as such expenses are embedded within the broad-
er procurement programs of the Ministry of National Defense. Nonetheless,
significant resources have been dedicated to establishing the Artificial Intelligence
Implementation Center, which is tasked with coordinating most efforts related to
the development of AI solutions for the military. At the same time, the government
is preparing additional funding mechanisms—such as the Artificial Intelligence
Fund and the Defense and Security Fund—intended to support research and
development of dual-use technologies.
AI is emerging as a key tool for enhancing training within the Polish Armed Forces,
with potential applications ranging from personalized e-learning and automated
assessment to advanced simulations and VR-based scenario design. While not a
substitute for live exercises, AI-enabled simulators can reduce both the costs and
risks of training, while strengthening decision-making skills at all levels of com-
mand. The growing role of AI is also reshaping military education, with institutions
such as the Military University of Technology in Warsaw integrating AI into curric-
ula and expanding cooperation with industry. At the same time, the Ministry of
National Defense is establishing partnerships with global technology companies—
including Microsoft and Oracle—to modernize training, strengthen cybersecurity,
and build cloud and AI infrastructure, ensuring long-term benefits for both de-
fense and the broader economy.
Poland’s defense-focused AI development stands in contrast to the broader
national AI ecosystem, which remains fragmented and dominated by multina-
tional corporations. Although domestic enterprises and startups are pursuing AI
solutions with both civilian and military applications, the country continues to rely
heavily on foreign technology providers. Without targeted policies and sufficient
resources to support domestic innovation and strengthen public-private coopera-
tion, this dependency is likely to persist for the foreseeable future.
The defense industry—especially state-owned enterprises—faces additional
structural challenges. Despite increasing demand for advanced technologies,
these companies remain heavily dependent on public procurement and are largely
absent from international markets. As Poland acquires major weapon systems from
foreign contractors, the need to automate production processes and integrate AI
into manufacturing becomes increasingly urgent, particularly given the country’s
demographic constraints.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 7

Poland continues to align its defense innovation agenda with broader trends
among NATO allies. Initiatives such as the Cyber LEGION program and strong
performance in international exercises like Locked Shields demonstrate the
country’s growing competence in cyber operations and its willingness to involve
civilian specialists in national defense. This also illustrates a pragmatic approach
that seeks to balance military requirements with the expertise of the wider techno-
logical community in Poland.
While Poland’s defense AI strategy remains in the early stages of implementation,
the direction taken by Polish decision-makers is promising. Success will depend on
the government’s ability to translate broad strategies into concrete policies, secure
sustained investment, and foster closer collaboration between the armed forces,
industry, and academia. If these conditions are met, Poland could emerge as a re-
gional leader in military AI integration and contribute significantly to strengthening
NATO’s eastern flank and the Alliance’s broader defense capabilities.
8 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

2 Thinking
About
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 9

2.1 Defense and Security Landscape –
Enormous Needs, Even Greater Challenges Ahead
The geostrategic situation is undoubtedly key to understanding Poland’s stance
on the implementation of AI-based technologies in the broader context of mili-
tary modernization efforts and the state’s overall security policy. Poland’s current
approach to security and defense can best be summarized by the ancient Latin
adage attributed to Vegetius, a Roman writer from the 4th century CE: “If you
want peace, prepare for war.”
After decades of neglect, the Polish government was compelled to rapidly rethink
its priorities following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in and, conse-
quently, to expand the nation’s military power through the large-scale acquisition
of a wide range of weapon systems. With a defense budget projected to reach
approximately PLN187bn (USD50bn)1 or 4.7 percent of GDP in 2025,2 more than
half of which is allocated to defense procurement,3 Poland continues to build up
its military with the ultimate goal of becoming the most capable land power in
Europe.4 Nonetheless, Poland’s military shopping spree is not limited to heavy
land-based equipment such as main battle tanks, artillery systems, missile launch-
ers, and various types of armored vehicles. It also includes the acquisition of state-
of-the-art combat aircraft, air defense systems, unmanned aerial systems (UAS), a
wide range of naval vessels, and numerous other advanced combat systems across
all branches of the Polish Armed Forces.5
Many of these weapon systems either already incorporate or are designed to be
integrated with AI technologies to varying degrees, especially in the areas of re-
al-time data processing, autonomous operation, and threat detection. All of this is
accompanied by structural reforms, personnel expansion, and a multitude of new
initiatives aimed at enhancing Poland’s defense capabilities and deterrence pos-
ture. The modernization and transformation effort is not only a response to con-
ventional military threats but also to a broader strategic shift toward an intense,
data-centric battlespace, in which decision-making requires greater automation.
Consequently, AI is emerging as a strategic enabler and an essential component
of the armed forces, allowing for optimization of human and material resources as
well as rapid reactions to counter emerging threats.
1 BasedontheaverageUSD/PLNexchangerateinearlyJune2025.ThePolish2025defensespendingisexpectedtoreach
approximatelyPLN187blnin2025.
2 “Odpowiedzialny,alehojny–budżetna2025rokprzyjęty”[ResponsiblebutGenerous–2025BudgetAdopted].
3 Dmitruk,“WydatkinaobronnośćPolskiwlatach2022-2025wedługMON”[Poland’sdefensespendingin2022–2025according
totheMinistryofNationalDefense].
4 Mader,“PolandonthewaytobecomingthestrongestarmyinEurope.”
5 Lipka/Czub,“Sivispacem,parabellum:TransformationofthePolishArmedForcesinResponsetoEmergingThreats.”
10 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

The threat lurking in the East is not purely military in nature, as Poland is also
facing numerous hybrid threats that challenge the security of its infrastructure,
energy supply, cyberspace, and even its physical borders. These broader security
challenges also create a need for AI-enhanced solutions.
Border security is a case in point as hostile policies of Minsk and Moscow have cre-
ated constant migratory pressure in recent years. The governments of Belarus and
Russia have been orchestrating an influx of migrants from less developed nations,
exploiting the vulnerability of these people and weaponizing their plight against
Poland, the Baltic states, and the entire European Union with the aim of creating
chaos and political instability. As a result, in late 2021, the Polish government
opted for the construction of a physical barrier along the Polish-Belarusian border,6
which is accompanied by electronic surveillance systems and other security meas-
ures that Poland continues to develop to date in order to reduce the probability
of illegal incursions into Polish territory.7 In , Poland’s Ministry of the
Interior and Administration announced the implementation of similar measures in
northeast Poland, along the 200 km-long Polish-Russian border.8
These migration-related issues should be viewed within the broader European
context of a continent-wide migrant crisis that has impacted numerous countries,
including Poland’s key ally, neighbor, and most important economic partner—
Germany. In autumn 2024, the government of the Federal Republic introduced
checks at all land borders, affecting the movement of people and goods between
Poland and Germany.9 Rising tensions between the two capitals, coupled with
fears of uncontrolled, illegal migration from Germany to Poland, led Warsaw to
implement similar measures in .10
The internal disorder triggered by migratory pressures highlights the vital im-
portance of initiatives aimed at strengthening the security of the EU’s external
borders—not only for the European Union and Poland, but also for NATO, given
the hybrid warfare tactics employed by Russia and Belarus. These tactics have
included deliberate acts of sabotage targeting infrastructure and businesses in
Poland. For instance, in , Polish prosecutors charged a Belarusian
citizen with orchestrating an arson attack that destroyed a large retail store in
Warsaw.11 Reports indicate that the individual acted in cooperation with Russian
intelligence and special services.12
6 Drabik,“Poland:Fenceintheswamp.”
7 “PolandEffectivelyProtectstheEUBorder.”
8 “Ruszyłabudowazaporyelektronicznejnagranicypolsko-rosyjskiej”[ConstructionoftheelectronicbarrieronthePolish-Rus-
sianborderhasbegun].
9 “ChecksatallGermanlandbordersstartonMonday.”
10 Doerries/Barth,“PolandimposeschecksonGermanandLithuanianbordersamidmigrationfears.”
11 “PolandchargesBelarusianwitharsononbehalfofRussianintelligence.”
12 Ibid.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 11

A series of arsons across Poland between early and mid-2025, affecting business-
es, residential buildings, and critical infrastructure, raises serious concerns about
the security situation on NATO’s eastern flank and the potential for ongoing hybrid
attacks by the Russian Federation.13 While these incidents may not appear directly
linked to the development and deployment of AI in the defense sector, their scale
and frequency have clearly influenced the thinking of Polish policymakers, prompt-
ing them to accelerate efforts to strengthen national security and the protection of
external borders.
In , the Polish government announced a new initiative codenamed “East
Shield,” aimed at enhancing Poland’s security and border defense from a strictly
military perspective.14 The National Deterrence and Defense Program – East Shield
is arguably one of the most comprehensive efforts of its kind in recent Polish
history. Its ultimate goal is to establish a system of fortifications, bunkers, trenches,
minefields, anti-tank barriers, and other critical infrastructure, all supported by ad-
vanced surveillance systems.15 The government emphasizes the defensive nature
of this initiative and hopes that such a system will serve as a powerful deterrent
against potential Russian aggression. The strategic importance of the program for
the EU’s overall defense capabilities was also recognized in the White Paper for
European Defense – Readiness 2030, published by the European Commission in
.16
It is worth noting that effective border protection requires the integration of vari-
ous types of sensors, which generate vast amounts of data necessitating real-time
analysis and rapid decision-making regarding appropriate countermeasures based
on the nature of the threat. These demands are among the key reasons for the
planned acquisition of advanced data management systems that make extensive
use of AI (Figure 1). Such systems have reportedly already been deployed to sup-
port the physical barrier along the Polish-Russian17 and the Polish- Belarusian bor-
der,18 with further implementation of even more sophisticated solutions planned
under the East Shield program.19
13 Krzysztoszek,“SeriesoffiresacrossPoland,Russiansabotagesuspected.”
14 “TarczaWschód”wzmocnibezpieczeństwoPolskiiwschodniejflankiNATO”[‘EasternShield’willstrengthenthesecurityof
PolandandNATO’seasternflank].
15 “NarodowyProgramOdstraszaniaiObrony–TarczaWschód”[NationalDeterrenceandDefenceProgramme–EastShield].
16 “WhitePaperforEuropeanDefence–Readiness2030.”
17 Bujak,Tomasz,InterviewbyGraf,Jędrzej,“PolskasztucznainteligencjadlaTarczyWschód”[Polishartificialintelligencefor
theEastShield].
18 Mężyński,Andrzej,“SztucznainteligencjanagranicyzBiałorusią.MSWiAzmodernizowało“zaporętechniczną”[Artificialintel-
ligenceontheborderwithBelarus:TheMinistryoftheInteriorandAdministrationhasmodernizedthe‘technicalbarrier’].
19 Thesesolutionswillincludethedeploymentofdronedetectionandtrackingsystems,incorporatingradars,thermalimaging,
andacousticmonitoring.Thesecapabilitieswillstrengthentheabilitytocounterunmannedaerialvehicles,whichhavebecome
increasinglyprevalentinrecentconflicts,asdemonstratedbythewarinUkraine.
programme/(lastaccessed5September2025).
12 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

Figure 1: Overview of the Selected Components of the East Shield Program20
AI-Supported
Operational Centers
Effectors Sensors
Sensor-Equipped Masts Other Military Sensors,
Kinetic Non-kinetic Deployed Along the Border Including Satellites, AEW&C
(SIGINT, IMINT, Acoustic) Aircraft, UAS,
Reconnaissance Airships
Figure 1: Overview of the Selected Components of the East Shield Program20
2.2 Strategic Approach to the Implementation
of Defense AI
At the strategic level, Poland’s national AI development strategy is based on the
2020 Policy for the Development of Artificial Intelligence in Poland, the imple-
mentation of which is a consequence of the publication of numerous documents
related to Poland’s digitalization and development efforts. These include the
Public Data Opening Program, the Strategy for Responsible Development, the
From Paper to Digital Poland Program, the Dynamic Poland 2020 Strategy for
Innovation and Efficiency of the Economy, among others.21 The strategy also
takes into account the Coordinated Plan on Artificial Intelligence of the European
Commission, as well as other strategic recommendations and AI-related guidelines
published by the European Union and the Organization for Economic Co-opera-
tion and Development (OECD).
20 BasedonthePresentationoftheGeneralStaffregardingtheimplementationoftheEastShieldProgram.
schod.wp.mil.pl/en/about-the-programme/(lastaccessed5September2025).
21 “PolicyfortheDevelopmentofArtificialIntelligenceinPolandfrom2020.AppendixtotheResolutionno.196oftheCouncilof
Ministersof28December2020(item23).”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 13

The policy deliberately excludes the defense and security dimensions of the state’s
activities, while emphasizing that the civilian sector is expected to cooperate with
the military in multiple areas, as outlined in the 2020 National Security Strategy of
the Republic of Poland. These include the need for development and implemen-
tation of new, highly innovative technologies, including “automated and robotized
weapon platforms using artificial intelligence.”22 However, the policy does refer-
ence the military and other key actors, including the Ministry of National Defense,
as major future users of AI-based solutions. For example, it identifies the Ministry
of National Defense as one of the key stakeholders in advancing AI development
in Poland, particularly in areas such as education, scientific research, and collabo-
ration with highly innovative enterprises. The strategy also emphasizes the need to
increase national investment in AI for defense and security purposes.23
Given the deterioration of the security situation on NATO’s eastern flank, a new
National Security Strategy is highly anticipated. The updated strategy will likely
address key challenges and outline development priorities across multiple areas,
including those related to AI. As of late , it remains unclear when the final
version of the document will be published, although the new Strategy was offi-
cially approved by the government on July 25, 2025.24 It is worth noting, however,
that the President’s Chancellery drafted its recommendations for the upcoming
strategy in , identifying the development of AI and autonomous systems
as top priorities, particularly in the field of education and research and develop-
ment (R&D).25
In the defense context, the most important document concerning artificial intelli-
gence is Poland’s Ministerial Artificial Intelligence Strategy until 2039 (Resortowa
strategia sztucznej inteligencji do roku 2039)—hereafter referred to as Poland’s
Military AI Strategy 2024–2039—published in by the Ministry of
National Defense. The Strategy’s primary objective is to develop, integrate, and
implement AI in the areas of defense and security under the Ministry’s jurisdiction.
This includes the creation of dedicated structures responsible for:
1. Coordinating all AI-related initiatives at the Ministry level;
2. Conducting research and development, as well as testing and implementing
selected solutions provided by partner institutions;
3. Maintaining and operating deployed systems.26
22 NationalSecurityStrategyOfTheRepublicOfPoland.
23 Ibid.
24 “StrategiaBezpieczeństwaNarodowegoRzeczypospolitejPolskiej”[NationalSecurityStrategyoftheRepublicofPoland].
25 “RekomendacjedoStrategiiBezpieczeństwaNarodowegoRzeczypospolitejPolskiej”[RecommendationsfortheNational
SecurityStrategyoftheRepublicofPoland].
26 “Resortowastrategiasztucznejinteligencjidoroku2039”[Poland’sMinisterialArtificialIntelligenceStrategyuntil2039].
14 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

The document presents a holistic approach to defense-related applications of AI
by highlighting the strategic context for the development of such technologies,
analyzing the Ministry’s current level of readiness for AI implementation and outlin-
ing a vision for the advancement of military AI in Poland. Moreover, it is assessing
opportunities and threats, identifying key future directions and objectives for the
Ministry, and recommending actions that need to be taken. The Strategy explicitly
mentions the role of AI for data analytics to support decision making, for instance
in the context of targeting and intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR)
operations. Advancements in AI technologies are also emphasized in the context
of improving cybersecurity and developing autonomous weapon systems, includ-
ing the deployment of drone swarms. The strategy further highlights the use of
such technologies in information warfare, while noting that AI can pose a signif-
icant threat in the hands of non-state actors, including terrorist organizations, as
well as state actors that may use it to conduct various forms of hybrid operations,
such as disinformation campaigns.
According to the authors, the implementation of advanced technologies—
including AI—is a prerequisite for maintaining capable Armed Forces with a strong
deterrence posture. By 2039, AI-based technologies are expected to be widely
deployed in the following areas:
1. Autonomous weapon systems used in both offensive and defensive oper-
ations. These systems will be capable of operating fully autonomously or
supporting operators in navigation or decision-making, thereby enhancing
operational effectiveness and reducing risks to military personnel.
2. Data collection and analytics in intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
(ISR) operations. AI will enable the effective processing of large volumes of
data to anticipate and assess adversary actions, and to support planning and
execution of military operations. The automation is expected to significantly
reduce the workload of military personnel, as well as increase the effectiveness
of target detection and identification.
3. Military logistics, including planning, resource management, transportation,
maintenance, repair and operations (MRO), and supply chain management.
The implementation of AI technologies is expected to significantly reduce risks
related to human error and improve cost-effectiveness of logistics operations.
4. Cyber operations, by increasing the effectiveness of both defensive and offen-
sive actions in cyberspace.
5. Personnel training, through more efficient, adaptive, personalized and data-
driven approaches.
6. Military decision-making, particularly in enhancing data analytics and situation-
al awareness to support tactical, operational and strategic-level judgments by
providing accurate assessments and recommendations.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 15

Besides threats such as hostile cyber operations against military AI systems as
well as potential malfunctions and errors, among others, the strategy highlights
the importance of legal and moral aspects of developing and deploying AI-based
solutions for the military purpose.
Developing AI, automation and autonomous systems is a key topic of the Re-
search Priorities of the Ministry of National Defense for 2021–2035 (Priorytetowe
kierunki badań naukowych w resorcie obrony narodowej w latach 2021-2035),
introduced by Ministerial Decision No. 2/DIn on 10 .27 This document
has undoubtedly influenced the final shape of Poland’s Military AI Strategy. Its
main objective is to identify the critical technologies that must be developed and
implemented within the Polish Armed Forces to ensure the country possesses
the necessary defensive capabilities by the mid-2030s. The document places the
development of AI and related technologies at the top of the Ministry’s extensive
list of R&D priorities. The authors highlight several potential applications of AI,
including its integration into Command, Control, Communications, Computers, In-
telligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) systems. AI is also envisioned
as a key enabler in training programs and simulators using virtual and augmented
reality (VR/AR) technologies, offering a cost-effective way to enhance soldiers’
combat readiness and improve competencies related to maintaining advanced
weapon systems. Other applications include, among others, space technologies
such as satellite systems, and innovations in combat medicine.
The broad vision for AI implementation in the Polish military—though vague in
some areas or left unspecified due to the classified nature of many applications—
is best summarized by the words of the Polish Minister of National Defense,
Władysław Kosiniak-Kamysz:
We are not only building cybersecurity, but we also aim to stay ahead of our
adversaries and competitors, while simultaneously becoming a leader of an
alliance of nations of good will – countries that allocate their spending toward
innovative and effective solutions. We are a NATO record-holder in terms of
spending on transformation. Transformation is not just about purchasing equip-
ment – it is an investment in digital security and the implementation of artificial
intelligence. In a few years, there will be no military capable of functioning
without artificial intelligence. We are fully aware of this – perhaps more so than
some other countries in this part of Europe and the world. We know that without
the implementation of artificial intelligence, it will be impossible to train soldiers,
make logistical decisions, conduct operations, or manage the battlefield.28
27 “Priorytetowekierunkibadańnaukowychwresorcieobronynarodowejwlatach2021-2035”[Prioritydirectionsofscientific
researchintheMinistryofNationalDefensefor2021–2035].
28 “WicepremierW.Kosiniak–Kamysz:niemadziśważniejszejsprawyniżbezpieczeństwoPolaków”[DeputyPrimeMinisterW.
Kosiniak-Kamysz:ThereisnomoreimportantissuetodaythanthesecurityofPoles].
16 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

Last but not least, it is worth noting that the application of AI is one of the key
components of Poland’s highly anticipated Digitalization Strategy 2035. Based on
the publicly available draft, the Strategy is unlikely to address the defense-related
aspects of AI implementation, as its primary focus lies on the economic and in-
dustrial implications of adopting advanced digital technologies. Nonetheless, the
Strategy clearly emphasizes the importance of applying AI in areas such as cyber-
security and public administration, while also encouraging collaboration between
the civilian and military sectors due to the dual-use nature of these technologies.29
2.3 Preparing for the Implementation of AI
for Defense and Security Purposes
Government documents—particularly Poland’s Military AI Strategy 2024–2039—
place strong emphasis on the readiness of the Ministry of National Defense and
the Armed Forces to deploy various technologies utilizing AI, as outlined in
the Operational Goal no 1: Preparation for fielding artificial intelligence in the
Ministry. The Ministry’s approach is largely based on the concept of human-ma-
chine teaming (HMT) “in order to multiply the existing capabilities, combining
human’s cognitive abilities and creativity with machines’ analytical capabilities
and speed.”30 This highlights the supportive role of AI within the Ministry and the
Polish Armed Forces, with humans remaining the ultimate decision-makers and
bearing full responsibility for the consequences of employing such technologies.
Paradoxically, one of the greatest challenges facing the government in this area
is the availability of a skilled civilian workforce and military personnel—including
both the competencies of current Ministry staff and the government’s ability to
attract highly skilled and knowledgeable talent. The Strategy addresses these
issues by presenting a set of actions aimed at enhancing personnel competencies
across technical, operational, ethical, and legal dimensions of AI implementation.
Regarding the latter, the Ministry has recognized the need to review existing
legislation and operational procedures to ensure they are adapted for the integra-
tion of AI—particularly in situations where certain aspects of command and control
(C2) may be delegated to such systems. The document also outlines measures to
retain specialists and recruit staff with the necessary skills and expertise, recom-
mending that the employment practices be aligned with those applied in the field
of cybersecurity. It is worth noting that, for the time being, the Ministry of National
Defense can capitalize on the growing interest in voluntary military service and
29 “Strategiacyfryzacjipaństwa”[NationalDigitalizationStrategy].
30 “Resortowastrategiasztucznejinteligencjidoroku2039”[Poland’sMinisterialArtificialIntelligenceStrategyuntil2039].
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 17

the public’s heightened engagement with defense and security matters driven by
the ongoing conflict in Ukraine. Over the past two years, the Ministry has seen a
significant increase in applications, prompting the government to increase yearly
recruitment limits.31 However, it remains unclear whether these developments will
positively impact efforts to recruit specialists in the field of AI.32
Given the ambitious plans to deploy AI in multiple domains simultaneously, the
Ministry of National Defense will also need to update its ICT (Information and
Communication Technology) infrastructure to ensure adequate computing power
for both current and future needs. This includes adopting cloud-based services,
developing classified on-premise systems, and establishing new procedures to
safeguard data security. The latter is particularly important as the development of
AI solutions for the Ministry will involve research institutes and private companies
that will require access to highly sensitive and classified information. This will pose
a significant challenge in the near future, especially given that the anonymized and
secure databases required for developing specific AI systems reportedly do not
exist.33
Significant attention has been given to the organizational preparedness of the
Ministry and the Armed Forces. The Ministry has drafted a plan to establish
dedicated departments within its organizational structure, including the General
Staff, to effectively coordinate AI-related projects—particularly those requiring
collaboration with other ministries and international partners. Simultaneously, the
Strategy introduces the concept of creating an AI Implementation Center, which
would be responsible for the technical and technological aspects of deploying AI
in the defense sector, as well as for coordinating R&D efforts in this field.
Although the Strategy repeatedly emphasizes the importance of adhering to
national and international law—including International Humanitarian Law—as
well as ethical norms in the operation of AI-enabled military systems, it provides
little detail on specific considerations in this regard. The document explicitly
acknowledges ethical challenges related to delegating decision-making authority
to combat systems, particularly in the use of kinetic measures to destroy selected
targets. Nonetheless, it reaffirms that the development and implementation of
AI in the military will comply with the provisions of the 2023 Political Declaration
on Responsible Military Use of Artificial Intelligence and Autonomy, which Poland
31 “MONzwiększanatenroklimitdlaochotnikówwDZSWiobniżaw2025r.”[TheMinistryofNationalDefenseincreasesthe
limitforvolunteersintheVoluntaryBasicMilitaryServiceforthisyearandlowersitin2025].
32 On13August2025,MGKarolMolendastated:“ThroughoutPoland,underthepatronageoftheCyberCommand,weestab-
lisheduniformedITclasses.Wealsoincreasedthenumberofstudentsatmilitaryuniversities.Wefocusedonlong-termdevel-
opment.Nowwecanseetangibleresults.Today,Ihadtheopportunitytowelcomeover130secondlieutenants,graduatesof
cybersecurity-relatedprograms,toourranks.”Quotedbasedon:
(lastaccessed5September2025).
33 “OsztucznejinteligencjinaseminariumnaukowymwCDISSZ”[OnArtificialIntelligenceattheScientificSeminarintheCDISSZ].
18 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

ultimately endorsed34 following cross-ministerial consultations—despite the gov-
ernment’s initial reluctance to sign due to the reportedly unclear implications of
endorsement.35
It is also important to note that Poland has yet to enact a dedicated AI law that
would fully align national regulations with the EU Artificial Intelligence Act of 2024,
although existing legislation is being gradually adapted.36 A draft of Poland’s AI
Law was published in late 2024 for public consultation, which concluded in Febru-
ary 2025.37 As of , a revised draft has been released, providing for the
establishment of an AI Development and Security Authority.38
34 “PoliticalDeclarationonResponsibleMilitaryUseofArtificialIntelligenceandAutonomy.”
35 Palczewski,“Wojsko:deklaracjaoużyciuAI.BrakujePolski;MSZwyjaśnia.”[Military:DeclarationontheUseofAI.Poland
Missing;ForeignMinistryExplains].
36 Dudkowiak,“AILawinPoland.”
37 “ProjektUstawyosystemachsztucznejinteligencjizezmianamipokonsultacjachspołecznych”[DraftActonArtificialIntelli-
genceSystemswithAmendmentsFollowingPublicConsultations].
38 Ciechoński,“RządowepracenadustawąwdrażającąAIActnaostatniejprose”[GovernmentWorkontheLawImplementingthe
AIActintheFinalStretch].
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 19

3 Developing
Defense AI
20 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

The Ministry’s concept of developing and implementing AI is primarily based on
the scalability of adopted solutions, as outlined in the Operational Goal no 2: Scal-
able Implementation of Artificial Intelligence.39 Given the innovative and rapidly
evolving nature of AI technologies—as well as the need for collaboration between
the Ministry and various entities, including other ministries and the industry—a
learning-by-doing approach is considered optimal in the context of changing
capabilities and potential future applications. The authors place significant empha-
sis on the need to establish procedures for testing, verification, and validation of
machine learning algorithms, which will require the active involvement of devel-
opers. Considering these factors, the Ministry intends to promote a systematic,
yet incremental and evolutionary approach to developing new solutions through
experimentation with less sophisticated models. This hybrid approach—combining
on-premise systems with commercial AI solutions, such as those utilizing cloud
architecture—is expected to effectively stimulate the growth of AI innovation
within the defense sector. Furthermore, the government plans to engage all key
stakeholders in this process, including developers, procurement entities, and
future system operators. This will involve applying DevSecOps (development,
security, and operations) principles throughout the development and implementa-
tion lifecycle.
Poland’s efforts to accelerate the AI implementation process build on the experi-
ence gained from the establishment of the Cyberspace Defense Forces in 2022,
following the Minister’s decision issued in 2019.40 Moreover, the aforementioned
Artificial Intelligence Implementation Center—whose formation began in 2025—
will operate within the structure of the Cyberspace Defense Forces Component
Command, which is capable of ensuring access to specialists with required exper-
tise, at least during the Center’s initial phase of operations.41 Its primary objective
will be to implement AI technologies in key areas of military operations, including:
Analysis of intelligence and reconnaissance data,
Development of autonomous combat systems,
Decision-making support and logistics optimization,
Verification and implementation of available AI technologies for military
applications.
Given the unit’s capabilities to conduct the full spectrum of cyber operations
and its ability to attract highly qualified talent, the government’s plans appear
well-founded and appropriately tailored to Poland’s needs, while significantly
39 “Resortowastrategiasztucznejinteligencjidoroku2039”[Poland’sMinisterialArtificialIntelligenceStrategyuntil2039].
40 “2022–rok,wktórympowstałyWojskaObronyCyberprzestrzeni”[2022–theyearinwhichtheCyberspaceDefenseForces
wereestablished].
41 BasedonthedataprovidedbytheCyberspaceDefenseForcesComponentCommand,followingtheauthors’requestfor
information.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 21

reducing the risks associated with establishing such an organization within the
armed forces. This also demonstrates the awareness of Polish decision-makers
regarding recent trends among leading NATO member states in the fields of
digitalization and AI. For example, dedicated AI development and implementation
centers have been established in countries such as the United States,42 the United
Kingdom,43 and many others.44
3.1 R&D Priorities
Prior to the publication of Poland’s Military AI Strategy 2024–2039—which pro-
vides a primary road map outlining the government’s policy on developing and
adopting AI in the Polish Armed Forces and the Ministry of National Defense—the
National Center for Research and Development launched the PERUN program
in .45 The main objective of this initiative is to support develop-
ment of innovative projects through collaboration between the industry, research
institutes, and academia in the field of defense and security, as outlined in the
Research Priorities of the Ministry of National Defense for 2021–2035. Notewor-
thy is the fact that six of the program’s thematic areas are directly connected to the
development of AI-based technologies and the automation of defense systems.
These include applications in cybersecurity, intelligence, surveillance, and recon-
naissance, drone swarms, and the so-called manned-unmanned teaming, which
aims to enhance the effectiveness of cooperation between human-operated plat-
forms and autonomous systems.46 Expected outcomes of these projects include,
among others:
1. The implementation of AI in automating security-related processes within ICT
systems;
2. Countering disinformation through the analysis of digital data to detect Deep-
fake content;
3. Automation of ISR data analysis;
4. The development of AI-enabled communication protocols for drone swarms
operating in coordination with manned systems.
42 “ChiefDigital&ArtificialIntelligenceOfficeCelebratesFirstYear”
43 Formore,see:
2025).
44 Borchert,“TheVeryLongGameofDefenseAIAdoption:Introduction,”pp.18-20.
45 “Czasnarealizacjęprojektówwzakresiebadańnaukowychipracrozwojowychnarzeczobronnościibezpieczeństwapaństwa
–ruszyłProgramNCBRpk.PERUN”[Timetoimplementprojectsinthefieldofscientificresearchanddevelopmentworkfor
nationaldefenseandsecurity–theNCBRprogramcode-namedPERUNhasbeenlaunched].
46 “Załączniknr2doRegulaminuKonkursu1/PERUN/2023”[AppendixNo.2totheRulesofCompetition1/PERUN/2023].
22 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

The implementation of the PERUN program reflects an evolutionary and incremen-
tal approach to advancing innovative defense technologies in Poland. This marks
a considerable improvement over the previous program of such kind, codenamed
SZAFIR,47 which ended in 2022 and was considered rather outdated, failing to ac-
count for rapid technological advancements and insights drawn from the ongoing
conflict in Ukraine.
It is important to emphasize that the need for a state-funded program aimed at
accelerating the development of domestic high-tech innovations arises from limited
R&D funding opportunities in Poland, a highly competitive international environment,
and the constraints imposed by similar international initiatives, all of which present
serious challenges to many Polish companies. This is particularly relevant in the case
of Polish state-owned defense enterprises, which are heavily dependent on public
procurement and—with very few exceptions, such as Mesko, the producer of the
GROM/PIORUN man-portable air-defense systems48—remain virtually absent from
international markets due to competition from much larger and more technologically
advanced counterparts.49 Therefore, the establishment of such programs is essential
to stimulate the development of domestic solutions, thereby enhancing the industry’s
competitiveness and its capacity to generate innovations in the long term.
It is worth noting that almost 200 projects have been positively evaluated under
the formal requirements of the PERUN program. Given the classified nature of
these endeavors, it is currently difficult to determine the exact number of submit-
ted AI-related applications. However, the range of applicants—comprising both
leaders and members of participating consortia—includes universities, R&D institu-
tions, and private as well as state-owned companies, with a significant number of
applications submitted by public military universities acting as project leaders.50
While the PERUN program is intended to support various R&D projects through
2033, its scope and content do not fully reflect the strategic, long-term research
priorities of the Ministry of National Defense. These long-term plans for the
development and implementation of AI are outlined in the Research Priorities of
the Ministry of National Defense for 2021–2035. The most important components
of this plan, along with their anticipated impact on the functioning of the Polish
Armed Forces, are presented in Table 1.
47 “4/SZAFIR/2021.”
48 “PIORUNMANPADS.”
49 Comparedtodatafor2022,thevalueofactualexportsandintra-EUtransfersofarmsandmilitaryequipmentin2023in-
creasedbyover€572M,reaching€1,753M.Intermsofvalue,Ukrainianentitiesrankedfirstforrecipientsofproductsexported
fromPolandin2023(approximately81%ofexportvalue),followedbytheUnitedStates(7%),Spain,andGermany(1%each).
Formore,see:
accessed5September2025).
50 “Listawnioskówpozytywnieocenionychpodwzględemformalnym(Konkursnr1/PERUN/2023)”[ListofApplicationsPositively
EvaluatedinTermsofFormalCriteria(CompetitionNo.1/PERUN/2023)].
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 23

Table 1: Selected Research Priorities of the Ministry of National Defense for
2021–2035 in the field of AI51
Field of Impact on the Armed Forces Approach to Due
Research R&D Financing Date
1. Cognitive AI Establishingefficientmechanismsformachine Nationaland 2035
learning international
Developingnewalgorithmsandproceduresfor R&Dprograms
effectivedecision-making
Creatingautomatedsoftwaresolutionsfor
detectingandcounteringcyberthreats
2. Data Science Usingbigdataanalyticstouncoverhidden Nationaland 2033
relationshipsbetweendatasets international
Improvingtheefficiencyofidentifyingsolutions R&Dprograms
tooperationalneedsandchallenges
2.1. Command Supportingcommandandcontrolprocesses Nationaland 2035
and Control Streamlininglogistics international
Reducingoveralloperationalcosts R&Dprograms
2.2. Cyberse- Safeguardingoperationsinthecyberdomain NationalR&D 2035
curity Enhancingtheefficiencyofcyberthreatdetec- programs
tion
Automatingcountermeasurestocyberthreats
Ensuringtheeffectivenessofbothoffensive
anddefensivecyberoperations
Strengtheningthecapacitytodevelopnewsolu-
tionsbasedoncollecteddataandoperational
experience
2.3. ISR Reducingthetimerequiredforimagerydata NationalR&D 2030
(Intelligence, analysis programs
Surveillance, Increasingtheeffectivenessofthreatdetection
and Reconnais- systems
sance) Enablingcontentanalysisofaudioandtextdata
toenhancesystemcapabilities
51 Basedon:“Priorytetowekierunkibadańnaukowychwresorcieobronynarodowejwlatach2021-2035”[Prioritydirectionsof
scientificresearchintheMinistryofNationalDefensefor2021–2035].
24 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

Field of Impact on the Armed Forces Approach to Due
Research R&D Financing Date
3. Development Improvingsituationalawarenessforcommand- Programsofthe 2028
of an Efficient ersoverseeingunitscomposedofbothsoldiers NationalCenter
Human- andunmannedplatforms forResearchand
Machine Enablingeffectivehuman-machinecooperation Development
Interface (HMI) Enhancingtheergonomicsofsystemsusedto
controlunmannedplatforms
4. Development Reducingoperationalrisksrelatedtohuman Programsofthe 2028
of Autonomous error NationalCenter
Platforms Increasingtheefficiencyoflogisticsandmedi- forResearchand
calevacuationfromcombatzones Development
Enhancingreconnaissancecapabilities andthrough
Improvingthesafetyofmilitarypersonnel international
duringoperations consortiawithin
theframeworks
oftheEuropean
DefenseAgency
(EDA)and
theEuropean
DefenseFund
(EDF)
Table 1 demonstrates that most of Poland’s R&D priorities related to artificial intel-
ligence were projected to rely primarily on national sources of funding, although
participation in international frameworks such as the European Defense Agency
and the European Defense Fund is also anticipated. It is worth noting that Polish
state-owned companies have faced significant challenges in the past when apply-
ing for dedicated EU funds. For example, under the Act in Support of Ammunition
Production (ASAP), only one Polish company—Dezamet—succeeded in securing
modest funding to expand its manufacturing base.52
Although Polish entities are generally interested in participating in EDF-funded
projects, most past participants have been research and development institutes,
52 Król,“MONwyjaśniaaferęzgrantaminaamunicję”[DefenseMinistryAddressesAmmunitionGrantScandal].
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 25

universities, and private companies involved in large consortia as subcontractors.53
The absence of Polish companies in consortia conducting AI-related R&D projects
within the EDF framework in 2024 is concerning. However, it is worth noting that
two Polish entities—WB Electronics and the Military University of Technology—are
taking part in the 2023 Artificial Intelligence Deployable Agent (AIDA) project of
the European Defense Fund.54 This highlights both the growing awareness among
Polish companies of the opportunities related to EDF’s support for innovative
projects and the capacity of the private sector and academia to successfully secure
such funding.
3.2 Overview of Poland’s Defense AI Ecosystem
Current efforts to develop AI-based solutions in Poland appear to focus primarily
on Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance,
and Reconnaissance (C4ISR), as well as the automation of related processes—al-
though other innovations, such as the development of AI-supported autonomous
systems, are also being pursued. The broader AI ecosystem (Figure 1) remains
relatively diverse, encompassing both defense companies and firms focused on
dual-use technologies, along with startups and other entities established to stimu-
late the growth of such innovations in Poland. Collaboration between state-owned
companies within the Polish Armaments Group (PGZ, Polska Grupa Zbrojeniowa)
and startups has also been observed—suggesting that the development and
implementation of AI in the defense and security sectors may provide emerging
Polish businesses with new opportunities.
The Ministry of National Defense’s perspective on the development of Poland’s
AI ecosystem is best captured by Brig. Gen. Marcin Górka, head of the Ministry’s
Innovation Department:
Our goal is to build an innovation ecosystem that responds to the military’s
needs and supports technology development in collaboration with the de-
fense industry. Stability and inclusiveness are important to us – the Ministry
of Defense’s doors are open to civilian technologies that can be adapted to
enhance national security. The IDA program demonstrates that we are ready
to collaborate with innovators and that we want them to better understand the
needs of the armed forces.55
53 Palowski,“MiliardzUEnatechnologieobronne.Skorzystapolskiprzemysł?”[ABillionfromtheEUforDefenseTechnologies.
WillPolishIndustryBenefit?].
54 “ArtificialIntelligenceDeployableAgent.”
55 “IDADemoDay2024:Polskietechnologiedual-usedlabezpieczeństwairozwojusektoraobronnego”[IDABootcamp2025–
PFRseeksinnovativesolutionsfordefense].
26 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

Figure 2: Poland’s AI Ecosystem According to the Policy for the Development of Ai in
Poland from 2020
AI Entrepreneurs
SMEs, Large Companies,
International Investors
AI Research and
Science
Public Sector
Universities, NCBR,
Ministries, PFR, PAiHetc.
National Science Center
Data
etc.
Management
Minister in charge
Funding of computerization Research
Coordination of the AI Policy
AI Customers
SOEs, Government & Its Infrastructure AI Education
Agencies, Public Sector,
Armed Forces
Companies
This section will concentrate primarily on Polish entities or on enterprises with a
strong connection to the Polish market—whether through their founders’ back-
grounds, their origins, or the scale of their operations in Poland. Nonetheless, it is
important to note that the Polish government cooperates with numerous multi-
national technology companies and other global entities that undeniably shape
the overall picture of the Polish defense AI ecosystem. Such cooperation agree-
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 27

ments have been signed to date with Google,56 Microsoft,57 Oracle,58 and Intel.59
AI-based services with potential applications in administration and other public
services are also promoted by major consulting firms, including Accenture.60
Other notable examples include international defense contractors that not only
integrate AI into their combat platforms61 but also transform the manufacturing of
defense systems by implementing smart factory technologies.62 These examples
illustrate why mapping a complete picture of the AI ecosystem is so challenging:
an ever-growing number of companies are adopting such technologies to varying
degrees across a wide range of applications. This trend, in turn, directly influences
the perspective of Polish decision-makers and local entities, which must contend
with fierce competition from multinational companies firmly established in global
markets. At the same time, it also creates opportunities for new frameworks of
cooperation that could benefit the Polish Armed Forces and support the trans-
formation of the domestic defense industry through well-designed procurement
programs and offset agreements.
A key example of a domestically developed solution is the Legion Battle Manage-
ment System (BMS), currently being introduced into operational service. It was
developed by the previously mentioned Cyberspace Defense Forces Component
Command, a specialized unit of the Polish Armed Forces responsible for cyber-
security and AI implementation.63 Additionally, AI has reportedly been integrated
into the EyeQ Air and EyeQ Land systems, developed by WB Group—one of
Poland’s most successful private defense companies, known particularly for its un-
manned aerial systems. These systems are designed to automate the processes of
target identification, classification, tracking, and threat assessment, thereby signif-
icantly enhancing operators’ situational awareness while reducing their workload.
They are reportedly ready for integration with fire control and battle management
systems operated by the Polish Armed Forces.64 It is also worth noting that WB
Group is said to be the only Polish company participating in the AIDA (Artificial
Intelligence Deployable Agent) project, which is funded by the European Defence
Fund.65
56 “GoogleInvestsBillionsinPoland’sDigitalFuture.”
57 “MicrosoftInvestsPLN3BillioninaNewDataCenterinPoland.”
58 “WspółpracaDKWOCzOraclewobszarzecyberbezpieczeństwa”[DKWOC’sCooperationwithOracleintheFieldofCybersecu-
rity].
59 “AIforIndustry–rozwójkompetencjiAIwpolskimprzemyśle.PorozumienieMRiT-Intelpodpisane”[AIforIndustry–Develop-
ingAICompetenciesinPolishIndustry.MRiT–IntelAgreementSigned].
60 “Accenturezasilanegeneratywnąsztucznąinteligencją”[AccenturePoweredbyGenerativeArtificialIntelligence].
61 “Alreadyintheglobaldefenseindustry,unmannedandartificialintelligence(AI)arebecomingessentialelementsofweapons
development.”
62 “SmartFactoriesTransitionfromAutomationtoIntelligence.”
63 “SIBMSLegion.”
64 “AISystems.”
65 “WBGROUPintheAIDAproject.”
28 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

The AI race has attracted numerous startups that either fully specialize in devel-
oping such solutions or operate at the intersection of AI and other technologies.
Poland reflects this trend, with various entities either originating in the country or
choosing to establish offices in major Polish cities to strengthen their presence in
the European market. As a result, the startup scene in Poland appears particularly
dynamic, especially considering that AI is classified as a dual-use technology—of-
fering both a high return on investment and diverse applications across military
and civilian sectors.66
One such company is Digica, which maintains offices in Germany, the United
Kingdom, the United States, and Poland. The company provides a wide range of
AI-based services across multiple sectors, including healthcare and defense. Its
solutions are reportedly being implemented in several NATO member states. In
2024, Digica was awarded a contract by PIT-RADWAR, a subsidiary of the Polish
Armaments Group, to develop AI solutions aimed at enhancing the capabilities of
PIT-RADWAR’s hardware, including its radar systems.67
DataWalk is another company with Polish origins, which currently runs its offices in
both Poland and the United States. The company portrays itself as an alternative
to the famous American company Palantir, and even if it is less known than its
US-based competitor, the company has achieved numerous successes by receiv-
ing contracts for the development of solutions for the U.S. Department of Justice
Money Laundering and Asset Recovery Section (MLARS), U.S. Department of De-
fense, U.S. Department of State, as well as numerous disclosed and undisclosed
businesses and public institutions from Europe, Asia, Africa, and Americas.68 The
company specializes in “revealing patterns, relationships, and anomalies for large-
scale, multi-source intelligence investigations and data analysis”, with a potential
application in supporting decision making in the military.69
AI and machine learning are also among the key technologies used in the SKYctrl
anti-drone system developed by the Polish company Advanced Protection Sys-
tems (APS).70 The SKYctrl system integrates, among other components, 3D MIMO
radars, tracking and identification systems supported by AI, as well as jammers,
and is reportedly ready for integration with hard-kill systems. It is worth noting that
the system has been battle-tested in Ukraine as early as 2022.71 This milestone
has contributed to the adoption of the company’s products not only by Poland
but also by the armed forces of Saudi Arabia, the UAE, and Qatar.72 Although the
66 “NavigatingDual-UseTechnologies:AFounder’sHandbooktoOpportunitiesandChallenges.”
67 “PIT-RADWARS.A.podpisałumowęzfirmąDigica”[PIT-RADWARS.A.signedacontractwithDigica].
68 “Formore,see:
69 Formore,see:
70 “SKYctrlComprehensiveanti-dronesystem.”
71 Kushnikov,“TheUkrainianmilitaryreceivedtheSKYCTRLanti-dronesystem.”
72 “FIELDctrlUltraprecise3DMIMOradars.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 29

military application of SKYctrl has garnered the most attention, the system can
also be deployed to protect various types of critical infrastructure, such as airports,
power plants, and government buildings, with many additional potential use cases
where hostile drones may pose a threat.73
The development and implementation of AI in the defense and security sectors
is not solely the domain of relatively new companies and startups. A growing
number of well-established Polish tech firms are also investing in such technolo-
gies. For instance, the Polish company TELBUD, founded in 1987, has developed
and successfully commercialized a family of PSIM-class (Physical Security Infor-
mation Management) systems under the ARGUS brand.74 One publicly disclosed
application of this technology is the integration of various protection and security
systems along the Polish-Russian and Polish-Belarusian borders. The system has
also been adopted by the Polish Air Navigation Services Agency, which is respon-
sible for managing air traffic in Poland.75 The list of companies developing such
solutions in Poland is considerably longer and likely includes numerous well-estab-
lished technology firms and startups offering a variety of products and services at
different stages of development and commercialization. However, due to limited
access to information, the examples mentioned above should be regarded as
reference points for the Polish defense AI ecosystem rather than as a complete list
of businesses active in this field. It is also important to note that certain AI technol-
ogies currently under development may have dual-use applications in the future,
and a much broader market analysis would therefore be required to fully assess
the potential of domestic firms in this regard. Given that a growing number of
specialized defense companies in Poland are likely to join this trend in the coming
years—particularly with the development of new technologies and solutions by
relatively small firms capable of partnering with both private and state-owned en-
terprises—the emergence of these players highlights the need for a better under-
standing of other non-business entities that contribute to the sector’s growth.
73 Formore,see:
74 “Formore,see:
75 Bujak,Tomasz,InterviewbyGraf,Jędrzej,“PolskasztucznainteligencjadlaTarczyWschód”[Polishartificialintelligencefor
theEastShield].
30 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

Figure 3: Types of Dual Use Technologies76
Space
Data and AI Technologies
Technologies
Cybersecurity
Human-machine
Interface Solutions
Types of Dual-use
Technologies
Autonomous
Energy Systems
Technologies
Biosecurity Advanced
Technologies Materials
Communications
Technologies
Figure 2: Types of Dual Use Technologies76
Research and Technology Organizations
In the context of Poland’s defense R&D ecosystem, it is crucial to highlight the
role of the National Center for Research and Development (Narodowe Centrum
Badań i Rozwoju, NCBR), an executive agency of the Polish government operating
under the direct supervision of the Minister of Science and Higher Education.
The NCBR is responsible for fostering cooperation between scientific institutions
and businesses, as well as providing funding for relevant R&D projects, including
those related to defense and national security—such as the previously mentioned
PERUN program.
76 Basedon:
nologies(lastaccessed5September2025).
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 31

The Łukasiewicz Research Network, which encompasses more than 20 specialized
research institutes across Poland, is a prominent example of a public entity es-
tablished to stimulate innovation and technological advancement in the country.
Research and development in defense and national security is identified as a top
priority among the various areas in which the network operates.77 In mid-2025,
the Łukasiewicz – AI Institute was officially inaugurated in Katowice, Silesia, as a
specialized branch of the network responsible for coordinating R&D projects in AI
and cybersecurity.78 Although the institute is expected to focus primarily on imple-
menting AI in the broader economy while supporting the digitalization of Polish
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), its creation demonstrates that public
institutions recognize the importance of fostering the AI ecosystem and driving
business transformation in Poland.
Additional research activities address the development of Explainable AI, aimed
at creating algorithms whose decision-making processes are fully transparent and
easily understandable to human users.79 Researchers at the Military University of
Technology in Warsaw (WAT) are currently working on implementing such solutions
in medicine to enhance diagnostics, which could increase the efficiency of the
healthcare system and potentially enable further advances in combat medicine.
These technologies could not only have a tangible impact across a broad range of
medical fields but also improve the reliability of AI-based solutions and strengthen
trust in them.80 Other research projects conducted by WAT scientists include AI
algorithms for analyzing satellite imagery,81 designing road traffic management
solutions,82 creating AI-supported techniques to detect deepfake content,83 and
building automated cybersecurity solutions aimed at improving threat detection
efficiency.84
Two new institutes will be key for future research and development on defense AI.
First, the Council of Ministers under the joint supervision of the Minister of Digital-
ization and the Minister of National Defense have launched the IDEAS Institute in
.85 The Institute will conduct research in AI, with a primary focus on
applications in healthcare, defense, and public administration. However, as noted
during the legislative process, the legal status of a research institute entails certain
77 Formore,see:
78 “Łukasiewicz–AIoficjalnieotwarty.Rozwójsztucznejinteligencjiicyfryzacjabiznesutonaszepriorytety”[Łukasiewicz–AI
officiallyopened.Thedevelopmentofartificialintelligenceandbusinessdigitalizationareourpriorities].
79 Naruszko,“Sztucznainteligencjaskrócikolejkidolekarza?”[WillArtificialIntelligenceShortenWaitTimesforDoctors?].
80 Ibid.
81 Wrzos,“NaukowcyzWATopracowalialgorytmdoocenywysokościbudynków”[ScientistsfromWATHaveDevelopedan
AlgorithmforAssessingBuildingHeights].
82 Wrzos,“Sztucznainteligencjazredukujekorkinadrogach“[ArtificialIntelligenceWillReduceTrafficJams].
83 Ołowniuk,“Deepfake–jakrozpoznaćfałszywetreści?”[Deepfake–HowtoRecognizeFakeContent?].
84 “WojskowaAkademiaTechnicznastworzyłanarzędzieAIdowykrywaniacyberataków”[TheMilitaryUniversityofTechnology
HasDevelopedanAIToolforDetectingCyberattacks].
85 “RozporządzenieRadyMinistrówzdnia25lutego2025r.wsprawieutworzeniaInstytutuBadawczegoIDEAS”[Regulationof
theCouncilofMinistersofFebruary25,2025,ontheEstablishmentoftheIDEASResearchInstitute].
32 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

risks and operational challenges. In addition, the level of public funding allocated
for its first year poses a substantial obstacle.
Second, the Artificial Intelligence Implementation Center (CISI) has been tasked to
coordinate R&D projects, facilitating collaboration between the military, academia,
and industry, and, finally, evaluating commercial products and services available on
the market to advance defense AI.86 According to Maj. Gen. Karol Molenda, com-
mander of the Polish Cyber Command, the Center is not intended to function as
another R&D hub; instead, it will focus primarily on the development and practical
application of technologies created by other entities, which should considerably
shorten the time needed to bring such solutions into operational service.87 The
Center will also integrate data from various manned and unmanned combat plat-
forms of the Polish Armed Forces to enhance operational awareness.88
The establishment of the Center could potentially address one of the key chal-
lenges related to conducting R&D projects in Poland. Although R&D spending in
Poland remains relatively low compared to other leading European countries—
for instance, in 2023 Poland allocated only 1.56 percent of GDP to R&D, while
countries such as Sweden, Belgium, Austria, Germany, and Finland spent over 3
percent—the main obstacle lies in the efficient use of funding and the commercial-
ization of scientific projects.89 The structural problems contributing to this situation
are beyond the scope of this report; however, it is important to note that the
existence of the Center could significantly increase the proportion of projects that
are successfully implemented rather than ending up among the many solutions
that never find practical application.
Additional Ecosystem Elements
It is noteworthy that Poland is also actively involved in allied initiatives such as
DIANA (Defence Innovation Accelerator for the North Atlantic). In 2024, Kraków
Technology Park (KPT) and the AGH University of Science and Technology an-
nounced the establishment of the FORT Kraków, which will operate in close collab-
oration with the Innovations Department of the Ministry of National Defense.90 The
creation of the FORT Kraków marks a significant milestone in the development
of Poland’s AI ecosystem, given its focus on supporting startups specializing in
86 “WWojskuPolskimpowstajeCentrumImplementacjiSztucznejInteligencji”[AnArtificialIntelligenceImplementationCenteris
beingestablishedinthePolishArmedForces].
87 Molenda,Karol,InterviewbyOkulska,Inez,“PiątyżywiołwstarciuzAI”[TheFifthElementinConfrontationwithAI].
88 “Gen.Molenda:14kwietniaruszaCentrumImplementacjiSztucznejInteligencji”[Gen.Molenda:TheArtificialIntelligence
ImplementationCenterwilllaunchonApril14].
89 “Grossdomesticexpenditureonresearchanddevelopmentin2023.”
90 “KrakówDIANA–ruszapolskiakceleratorinnowacjiobronnychNATO”[KrakówDIANA–LaunchofthePolishNATOdefense
innovationaccelerator].
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 33

innovative dual-use technologies—including AI—that could substantially enhance
the defense capabilities and resilience of NATO member states.91
These institutions will provide startups with business development expertise and
technological acceleration, leveraging AGH’s advanced R&D infrastructure. In
addition to the accelerator site in Kraków, Poland hosts seven dedicated DIANA
test centers—including the Center for Geospatial and Satellite Analysis (CENA-
GIS), the Industrial Research Institute for Automation and Measurements PIAP
(Łukasiewicz – PIAP), Łukasiewicz – EMAG, and the Poznań Supercomputing and
Networking Center (PSNC)—available to innovators participating in the DIANA
program. These sites offer not only the infrastructure required to evaluate new
technologies but also the specialized expertise of their personnel.92 For instance,
PSNC operates an aerospace laboratory featuring a hangar, research facilities,
and a training ground for testing technologies such as unmanned aerial and
ground vehicles, AI applications, as well as cybersecurity and quantum computing
solutions. Łukasiewicz PIAP, on the other hand, specializes in AI-driven robotics
and unmanned systems, among other areas. Besides the institutions mentioned
above, it is also worth emphasizing the role of organizations such as the Military
Institute of Engineer Technology (Wojskowy Instytut Techniki Inżynieryjnej, WITI),
the Military Institute of Armored and Automotive Technology (Wojskowy Instytut
Techniki Pancernej i Samochodowej, WITPiS), and the Military University of Tech-
nology, which will serve as key end-users of AI technologies. All institutions within
the DIANA network bring significant experience in supporting such initiatives and
maintain diverse networks of business and institutional partners, including both
Polish and international defense companies and public agencies.93
Initiatives such as DIANA are also complemented by programs launched by other
institutions, including the Polish Development Fund (Polski Fundusz Rozwoju,
PFR), a state-owned company focused on providing financial and expert assistance
to Polish entrepreneurs, as well as investing in large-scale development projects.
One such initiative is the Investments Dual-use Adaptation (IDA) program, which
aims to accelerate the growth of domestic innovations.
The program enables participating innovators to assess whether their solutions
could have dual-use applications and to obtain expert guidance on how to ad-
vance their technology to meet military requirements. Through the program,
companies gain direct access to potential end-users of their technologies, in-
cluding the military, defense contractors, defense experts, and representatives of
the Ministry of National Defense. Beyond its technical aspects, the program also
91 “AboutKrakowDIANAAccelerator.”
92 “DIANAispartneringwithmorethan180testcentresfromacrosstheNATOAlliance.”
93 “TestingServicesforDIANAStartups:Capabilitiesof7PolishTestCentersinNATODIANANetwork.”
34 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

emphasizes the value of networking, offering participants opportunities to connect
with potential investors, such as representatives of venture capital (VC) funds.94
The 2025 edition of the IDA program is supported by Palantir, Iceye, WB Group,
and Polish Armaments Group, among others.95
The construction of Poland’s first AI factories—Cyfronet AGH in Kraków and PI-
AST-AI in Poznań—marks an essential and long-awaited investment in the national
AI ecosystem. PIAST-AI is designed to serve as an innovation hub, providing the
services and infrastructure needed to drive advancements in IT and cybersecurity,
healthcare and life sciences, the public sector, space technologies, robotics, and
cross-sector sustainable development.96 At the same time, the Ministry of Digital
Affairs is pursuing participation in the European Commission’s initiative to establish
five AI Gigafactories across the EU. Under this program, the Ministry plans an in-
vestment of PLN5bn (approximately €1.15bn), including PLN2bn (around €0.47bn)
from the state budget, to acquire 30,000 graphics processing units (GPUs) for a
cluster of five leading research centers in Poland by 2029.97
Preliminary Insights from Ukraine
The battlefields of Ukraine offer valuable insights into the use of AI for military pur-
poses and provide opportunities to test a wide range of combat systems supplied
by Kyiv’s allies and partners.98 This is also true for Polish defense companies and
the Armed Forces, whose systems have been transferred to Ukraine. The Rus-
so-Ukrainian conflict has seen the deployment of unmanned systems supported by
AI on an unprecedented scale, particularly in geospatial and imagery intelligence
as well as the use of AI in BMS to support planning, in fire control systems, to
monitor and detect disinformation, and data analysis99 AI-enhanced assets help
Ukraine withstand relentless Russian attacks while inflicting significant damage on
Moscow’s military capabilities and critical infrastructure.100
These developments have been closely monitored and analyzed by Polish deci-
sion-makers. The Ministry of National Defense places strong emphasis on expand-
ing the Armed Forces’ capabilities in unmanned aerial systems (UAS), acquiring
significant numbers of tactical and operational drones across all branches of
94 “IDA–Inwestycjeiadaptacjatechnologiipodwójnegozastosowania”[IDA–Investmentsandadaptationofdual-usetechnologies].
95 “IDABootcamp2025–PFRszukainnowacyjnychrozwiązańdlaobronności”[IDABootcamp2025–PFRseeksinnovative
solutionsfordefense].
96 “TheLaunchoftheFirstPolishAIFactory–PIAST-AI.”
97 “PolskamazamiardołączyćdoprogramuGigafabrykAI”[PolandintendstojointheAIGigafactoryProgram].
98 Bondar,UnderstandingtheMilitaryAIEcosystemofUkraine.
99 Goncharuk,SurvivaloftheSmartest?DefenseAIinUkraine;Bendett,“RolesandImplicationsofAIintheRussian-Ukrainian
Conflict.”
100 PardoDeSantayana,“ArtificialintelligenceandthewarinUkraine.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 35

the military. In late , to address the demand for relatively inexpensive,
mass-produced mini-UAS and loitering munitions, the Ministry announced several
key initiatives.
First, the government unveiled plans to establish a dedicated Drone Center based
on the infrastructure of the Air Force Institute of Technology (Instytut Techniczny
Wojsk Lotniczych, ITWL) and supported by joint scientific efforts of all military
research institutes operating under the direct supervision of the Innovations
Department of the Ministry of National Defense. These include Military Institute
of Armored and Automotive Technology (Wojskowy Instytut Techniki Pancernej i
Samochodowej, WITPiS), Military Institute of Armament Technology (Wojskowy
Instytut Techniczny Uzbrojenia, WITU), Military Institute of Engineer Technology
(Wojskowy Instytut Techniki Inżynieryjnej, WITI), and the Military Institute of Chem-
istry and Radiometry (Wojskowy Instytut Chemii i Radiometrii, WIChiR). This hub
will serve as a testing ground for unmanned land, sea, and aerial systems, while
also supporting their development and integration into operational service.101 The
Drone Center is expected to foster collaboration across all branches of the Armed
Forces, military R&D institutes, and industry, as well as with specialized units such
as the Cyberspace Defense Forces and the AI Implementation Center, given that
these two entities, in particular, will play a central role in integrating AI technolo-
gies into combat platforms operated by the Armed Forces, including unmanned
systems.
Second, to accelerate innovation and facilitate the deployment of unmanned
systems, the Ministry has also begun establishing specialized drone laboratories
within selected military units, including Poland’s Special Forces and Territorial
Defense Forces. These laboratories will enable the testing of technologies, tactics,
and procedures related to the deployment of UAS under the program codenamed
“Szerszeń” (Hornet).
Finally, to enable the mass deployment of drones, the Ministry is reportedly
preparing special procurement regulations that will allow commanders to acquire
certified unmanned systems or components from a ministerial list of secure and
trusted suppliers under simplified procedures.102
101 “RewolucjadronowawSiłachZbrojnychRP”[DroneRevolutioninthePolishArmedForces].
102 “Szerszeńizielonalinia,czylizaczątekdronizacjiarmii”[HornetandGreenLine,thebeginningoftheArmedForces’Droniza-
tion].
36 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

3.3 AI in Transformation of the Defense Industry
Considering the scale of Poland’s military procurement, the need to establish sus-
tainable mass production of combat equipment, and the government’s ambition
to allocate a substantial share of orders to the domestic industry, AI is emerging
both as a challenge and an opportunity for Polish defense contractors. Although
this issue extends beyond the direct application of AI in the military, the impor-
tance of such technologies in production automation and robotics is undeniable.
According to a survey conducted by the Pulaski Foundation and KPBN, nearly 60
percent of Polish defense companies face a shortage of skilled workers—such as
technicians and engineers—highlighting the growing gap between the available
workforce and labor demand, driven by the country’s increasingly unfavorable
demographic situation.103 At the same time, the adoption of AI in Poland’s broad-
er economy remains very low compared to other industrialized nations, with
fewer than 6 percent of Polish companies using such technologies in 2024.104
Furthermore, research by the Pulaski Foundation indicates that only 40 percent of
surveyed defense companies positively assess their readiness to integrate AI into
their operations.
These findings are alarming given that leading European defense companies,
such as BAE Systems, are already implementing AI to boost competitiveness and
enhance operational efficiency.105 Since Poland’s defense industry is dominated by
large state-owned enterprises that are highly dependent on public procurement,
transformation of the sector will require not only substantial funding but also pro-
found changes in organizational culture and corporate governance. Such changes
are crucial in light of the country’s pressing needs in areas such as ammunition
production and the manufacturing of drones and heavy equipment for the Land
Forces.
The strategic documents discussed in this report omit the issue of industry trans-
formation, as a dedicated Defense Industry Strategy is anticipated in late 2025.
Nonetheless, it is clear that incorporating AI into this process will be essential.
Without the ability to meet the government’s requirements for both quality and
delivery timelines, the Polish defense industry will be unable to fully capitalize on
growing defense spending. Automation of production and other business pro-
cesses will still require significant investment and knowledge transfer, which could
potentially be facilitated through ongoing procurement programs, with foreign
partners serving as providers of both technology and expertise.
103 “DefenseandResilience:ProspectsofCompaniesDevelopment.”
104 Kolasa,“InnowacyjnośćPolski.Zestawienie–grudzień2024”[Poland’sInnovation.Report–December2024].
105 “InternationalDefenseInsightReport,Securingstrategicadvantagefordefensecompanies.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 37

4 Organizing
Defense AI
38 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

Prior to the publication of Poland’s Military AI Strategy, the government’s efforts
aimed primarily to enhance the effectiveness of public institutions and their
services, as well as to drive the digital transformation of companies across mul-
tiple industries—excluding the defense sector and the Armed Forces. However,
in recent years, a more centralized and comprehensive approach has begun to
take shape, involving the direct collaboration among numerous ministries. This
approach has created a complex organizational framework, in which the Ministry
of National Defense serves as a key actor responsible for coordinating AI-related
initiatives within the defense sector.
The establishment of the Artificial Intelligence Implementation Center at the
Cyberspace Defense Forces Component Command reflects this evolving dynamic
and a growing recognition of the need to centralize the state’s efforts in integrat-
ing AI and other advanced technologies into the Armed Forces. The decision
to leverage the organizational and technological capabilities of the Cyberspace
Defense Forces was deliberate. Modeled on structures used by the U.S. Armed
Forces, this unit has cooperated with its American counterparts on numerous
occasions, including joint exercises.106 The Cyber Command’s ability to conduct a
full spectrum of defensive and offensive operations, develop innovative solutions
to strengthen national cybersecurity, and maintain a proven record of collaboration
with other NATO members provides a solid foundation for expanding capabili-
ties through the integration of AI.107 Both Polish officials108 and foreign experts109
emphasize that Poland’s cybersecurity capabilities are among the most robust in
NATO, which directly influences the nation’s position in international rankings.110
As of mid-2025, it remains unclear when the AI Implementation Center will
become fully operational. Nonetheless, the establishment of a single institution
responsible for coordinating R&D projects, fostering collaboration with external
partners, and overseeing implementation efforts within the Polish Armed Forces
represents a significant step in the right direction. This approach is expected to
enhance efficiency within the Ministry and improve interoperability among the
various AI solutions introduced into the Armed Forces.
106 McGovern,“16thAirForcecontinuesPolandCyberCommandpartnershipwithfirst-evermalwareattackexercise.”
107 Kozłowski,“Polish“cyberclaws”.
108 “AIwpolskimwojsku.SzefMONzabieragłos”[AIinthePolishmilitary:MinisterofNationalDefencespeaksout].
109 Sylvia,“EuropeanDigitalDefencePrioritiesinanUncertainWorld,”pp.18-22.
110 Forinstance,theNationalCyberSecurityIndex(NCSI)ranksPolandfifthglobally,despiteitsrelativelylowoveralllevelof
digitaldevelopment,whileMIT’sCyberDefenseIndex2022/23placedPolandsixthamongthetop20countrieswiththemost
advancedcybersecurityassets.ItisalsoworthemphasizingthattheteamfromtheCyberspaceDefenseForceshasranked
amongtheleadingparticipantsinLocked Shields 2025,theannualexerciseorganizedsince2010bytheNATO’sCooperative
CyberDefenseCentreofExcellence(CCDCOE).Formore,see:
September2025),“TheCyberDefenseIndex2022/23;”“PolacyporazkolejnynapodiumzawodówLockedShields”[Poles
onceagainonthepodiumattheLockedShieldscompetition].
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 39

Given that the Cyberspace Defense Forces Component Command has already
developed its own battle management system and reportedly employs a range
of AI-supported tools in cybersecurity, among others, the AI Implementation
Center—backed by its experienced staff—should be well positioned to manage
complex projects and identify commercial solutions adaptable to military require-
ments. Above all, the presence of such an entity within the military could ensure
that AI integration is both well-coordinated and more consistent across all branch-
es of the Armed Forces.
This centralized approach should help prevent the inefficiencies and lack of
coordination seen in past procurement programs, where the Ministry of National
Defense acquired multiple combat platforms with similar specifications simulta-
neously. While some of these acquisitions were fully justified—driven by growing
tensions on NATO’s eastern flank and Poland’s substantial donations of military
equipment to Ukraine, particularly heavy systems such as main battle tanks and ar-
tillery—in other cases, the decisions appeared questionable. They inflated logistics
costs, complicated maintenance, and significantly increased life-cycle expenses.
With the AI Implementation Center in place, such costly redundancies are far more
likely to be avoided.
Despite the Ministry of National Defense’s reluctance to provide a detailed plan
for the AI Implementation Center’s future operations, certain aspects of its upcom-
ing activities have been publicly disclosed. The AI Implementation Center began
recruiting specialists in mid-. According to Maj. Gen. Karol Molenda,
Commander of the Cyberspace Defense Forces, one of its first priorities will be
enhancing the Armed Forces’ operational awareness by integrating and analyzing
data from various sensors operated by the Polish Armed Forces using AI-support-
ed systems.111 To achieve this, the military will need to develop its own secure
infrastructure to process and effectively utilize large volumes of classified data. The
AI Implementation Center will also need to address numerous challenges related
to data processing, storage, and oversight mechanisms, as well as establish unified
procedures in the areas of data management, security, and privacy.
In , the Cyberspace Defense Forces launched the program Cyber
LEGION. Its official name—Program for Consolidating the Polish Cyber Commu-
nity Around the Polish Armed Forces and Cyberspace Defense Forces – Cyber
LEGION—reflects its underlying concept. The initiative’s primary goal is to allow
cybersecurity professionals to contribute to military activities in a flexible way that
does not require them to abandon their civilian careers.112
111 “Gen.Molenda:14kwietniaruszaCentrumImplementacjiSztucznejInteligencji”[Gen.Molenda:TheArtificialIntelligence
ImplementationCenterwilllaunchonApril14].
112 “Zostańcyberlegionistą!Wojskoruszaznowymprogramem”[Becomeacyberlegionnaire!Themilitarylaunchesanew
program].
40 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

5 Funding
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 41

The true scale of Poland’s defense AI spending is shrouded in secrecy, making
it impossible to draw definitive conclusions from ongoing and planned modern-
ization programs. Some of these costs are likely embedded within large-scale
procurement efforts—such as those involving UAS for the Land Forces and other
combat systems across all branches of the Polish Armed Forces. Given that
Poland’s defense spending is projected to rise from 4.7 percent of GDP in 2025
to 5 percent in 2026 and that the nation continues to devote more than half of its
total military expenditure to procuring advanced weapon systems, it is likely that
the budget for developing and acquiring AI technologies will also grow, even if, at
present, it remains relatively modest in the context of overall military spending.113
As of mid-2025, it remains difficult to estimate expenditures on the acquisition
of AI-enabled weapon systems. However, the Ministry of National Defense has
been more forthcoming about general spending related to the structural changes
in the Armed Forces required to implement scalable AI technologies. In , Cezary Tomczyk, Secretary of State in the Ministry of National Defense,
announced that the Ministry had allocated PLN100M (approximately €23M) for
the development of AI technologies and the establishment of the Artificial Intelli-
gence Implementation Center within the Cyberspace Defense Forces Component
Command.114 At the same time, the Polish government is developing a plan to
establish a Defense and Security Fund by fall 2025, with an estimated budget of
PLN25–26bn (approximately €6bn). The fund will draw on financial resources from
the EU’s recovery funds115 and will be overseen by a Coordinating Committee
comprising the Ministry of Development Funds and Regional Policy, the Ministry
of National Defense, the Ministry of State Assets, the Ministry of Digital Affairs, the
Ministry of the Interior and Administration, the Ministry of Economic Development
and Technology, and the Ministry of Infrastructure.116 The fund’s beneficiaries will
include both state-owned and private companies, particularly those involved in
manufacturing heavy equipment for the Armed Forces.117
The Coordinating Committee responsible for implementing the Fund began its work
in , with one of its first tasks being to define a list of priority investments
requiring financial support. Although publicly available information does not explic-
itly identify AI as one of the investment areas, it is worth noting that current plans
include funding for dual-use infrastructure—such as cybersecurity systems for critical
113 Miłosz,“TylePolskawydanaobronnośćw2026roku.Idziemynarekord”[ThisishowmuchPolandwillspendondefensein
2026:weareheadingforarecord].
114 Palczewski,“NowajednostkawWojskuPolskim.InwestycjeMONwstrategicznyobszar”[AnewunitinthePolishArmed
Forces:MinistryofNationalDefenceinvestsinastrategicarea].
115 “FunduszBezpieczeństwaiObronnościwesprzeinwestycjesamorządowe”[TheSecurityandDefenseFundwillsupportlocal
governmentinvestments],MinisterstwoFunduszyiPolitykiRegionalnej.
116 “ŚrodkizKPOzasiląFunduszBezpieczeństwaiObronności”[FundsfromtheNationalRecoveryPlan(KPO)willbeallocated
totheSecurityandDefenseFund].
117 FunduszBezpieczeństwaiObronnościwesprzeinwestycjesamorządowe”[TheSecurityandDefenseFundwillsupportlocal
governmentinvestments].
42 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

infrastructure and data centers—both of which will likely involve the application of
AI technologies. Preliminary plans allocate approximately PLN11–12bn (€2.6–2.8bn)
to enhancing the security of dual-use infrastructure, with an additional PLN4bn
(€0.94bn) earmarked for modernizing industry and supporting R&D projects in the
field of dual-use technologies. This funding is also expected to support startups
developing innovations for defense and security purposes.118
Despite the classified nature of most information, it is worth noting that Poland
has numerous instruments for financing the development of AI-based dual-use
technologies. These special funds are included in neither the Ministry of National
Defense’s budget nor the Armed Forces Support Fund, both of which provide the
vast majority of financial resources for military procurement and modernization.
Considering that AI is a dual-use technology—originating from R&D programs in
the civilian sector and now being implemented in the military—the Polish gov-
ernment appears well aware of the synergistic effects that arise from developing
such technologies for both civilian and defense applications. It also recognizes the
opportunities for the Polish economy, particularly through the growth of domestic
enterprises specializing in AI. Therefore, to maximize the overall economic impact
and stimulate innovation for defense and security purposes, most initiatives aimed
at creating special AI funds in Poland involve a broad range of stakeholders.
One such initiative is the ongoing establishment of the Artificial Intelligence Fund,
whose operations will be overseen by the Ministry of Digital Affairs, the Ministry
of National Defense, the Ministry of Science and Higher Education, the National
Center for Research and Development (NCBR), the Polish Development Fund
(Polski Fundusz Rozwoju, PFR), Bank Gospodarstwa Krajowego (BGK), and the Na-
tional Science Center.119 The Artificial Intelligence Fund is intended to support the
development of innovative AI technologies and their future commercialization by
providing expertise and assistance in business development.120 In 2025, the Min-
istry of Digital Affairs plans to allocate PLN4.5bn (over €1bn) to digitalization and
the development of AI and cloud services. This funding will enable the National
Center for Research and Development to launch several AI-related programs, such
as Ścieżka SMART, dedicated to large companies seeking cooperation with SMEs
and conducting R&D projects in areas identified within the National Intelligence
Specializations. The SMART program also offers additional opportunities for com-
panies, including funding for R&D infrastructure development, digitalization, and
expansion into foreign markets.121
118 Dmitruk,“PierwsześrodkizFunduszuBezpieczeństwaiObronnościw2026roku”[ThefirstfundsfromtheSecurityand
DefenceFundwillbeavailablein2026].
119 “NCBRczęściąFunduszuSztucznejInteligencji”[TheNCBRwillbepartoftheArtificialIntelligenceFund].
120 “PFRpodpisałlistintencyjnywsprawieFunduszuSztucznejInteligencji–nowemożliwościdlarozwojupolskiejgospodarki”[PFR
SignedaLetterofIntentontheArtificialIntelligenceFund–NewOpportunitiesfortheDevelopmentofthePolishEconomy].
121 “ŚcieżkaSMARTnabórFENG.01.01-IP.01-001/24.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 43

The National Center for Research and Development (NCBR) is also preparing the
8th edition of the INFOSTRATEG program, with a budget of PLN500M (approx-
imately €115M), aimed at advancing AI and blockchain solutions in Poland.122
Additionally, the Center coordinates the STEP (Strategic Technologies for Europe
Platform) program—an EU financial instrument designed to support R&D initi-
atives across the Union—with a budget of PLN300M (€70M) allocated for deep
tech development.123 Concurrently, NCBR continues implementing the previously
mentioned PERUN program, with a total budget of PLN3bn (€0.7bn) dedicated to
innovations in defense and security.124
The list of potential sources for defense AI funding is not limited to national and
EU instruments, as Poland is witnessing growing interest from private financial
institutions—such as venture capital (VC) funds—in investing in innovative dual-use
technologies, including AI. To streamline collaboration between venture capital
funds and innovators, and to increase the likelihood of commercializing new
technologies, the Polish Development Fund launched the PFR Deep Tech program
with a dedicated budget of PLN300M (approximately €70M).125 The program,
developed in cooperation with the Ministry of Finance, is modeled on similar
initiatives in other NATO member states, including France, the United Kingdom,
and the United States.126 The active involvement of the Polish Ministry of National
Defense is anticipated at a later stage. The PFR’s financial resources will be used
to support joint investments with selected specialized venture capital funds in
dual-use technologies such as:
Artificial Intelligence
Quantum Computing
Advanced Defense Systems
Robotics
Space Exploration and Technology
Broad-spectrum Cybersecurity.127
The total amount of funds—combining PFR’s resources with those provided by
participating VC funds—is estimated at PLN600M (€141M), which should be suffi-
cient to support the development of approximately 50 to 80 innovative projects.128
122 Lewkowicz,“MC:4,5mldzłnarozwójcyfryzacjiw2025r.wramachFunduszuAI”[MinistryofDigitalAffairs:PLN4.5Billion
forDigitalizationDevelopmentin2025UndertheAIFund].
123 “Platformakonkursowa”[CompetitionPlatform],NarodoweCentrumBadańiRozwoju.
124 “Czasnarealizacjęprojektówwzakresiebadańnaukowychipracrozwojowychnarzeczobronnościibezpieczeństwapańst-
wa–ruszyłProgramNCBRpk.PERUN.”
125 “IDA–Inwestycjeiadaptacjatechnologiipodwójnegozastosowania.”
126 Ibid.
127 Ibid.
128 “PFRDeepTech:600mlnPLNnainwestycjewzaawansowanetechnologie”[PFRDeepTech:PLN600millionforinvestments
inadvancedtechnologies].
44 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

6 Fielding and
Operating
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 45

6.1 Command, Control, Communications, Computers,
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR)
The current status of defense AI system implementation in the Polish Armed
Forces remains largely unknown due to the classified nature of most information
related to such plans. Little is known about the systems developed to date that
have entered operational service, although certain specific applications have been
publicly disclosed by the Ministry of National Defense.
The most prominent example is the previously mentioned BMS Legion, developed
by the Cyberspace Defense Forces Component Command. The decision to rely
on in-house expertise and programming capabilities was driven by the vulnerabil-
ities of commercial solutions, which could be compromised by the enemy. While
this approach may pose challenges in ensuring compatibility with systems used
by other NATO member states, its advantages—particularly regarding system
security—outweigh its drawbacks.129 The successful development of the BMS also
demonstrates the intellectual and organizational capabilities of the Cyberspace
Defense Forces Component, which has succeeded in attracting highly skilled IT
experts and now employs approximately 6,500 military and civilian personnel.130
This highlights the organization’s strong effectiveness, a quality particularly impor-
tant for establishing and ensuring the efficient operation of the AI Implementation
Center.
The target configuration of the BMS Legion is expected to significantly enhance
battlefield awareness at the tactical level through the following capabilities:
1. Monitoring the positions of friendly forces;
2. Providing information on the location and movement of enemy forces;
3. Offering a dedicated tactical chat to streamline the flow of information and
warnings between units in real time;
4. Supporting the decision-making process;
5. Operating sensors on combat platforms;
6. Supporting logistics of the combat platforms;
7. Facilitating the exchange of information related to the use of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD).131
129 Molenda,Karol,InterviewbyOkulska,Inez,“PiątyżywiołwstarciuzAI.”
130 “CentrumImplementacjiSztucznejInteligencjimawystartowaćwtymroku.Polskiewojskocorazszerzejkorzystaztej
technologii”[TheArtificialIntelligenceImplementationCenterissettolaunchthisyear,asthePolishmilitaryincreasingly
adoptsthistechnology].
131 “SIBMSLegion.”
46 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

As of mid-2025, the primary function of the BMS Legion is the automated analysis
of imagery data from unmanned aerial systems. Publicly available information
suggests that the system is primarily intended to extend the capabilities of various
platforms operated by the Land Forces132 and to provide tactical information to
JASMINE, the network centric Headquarters Management System developed
by TELDAT,133 a Polish company specializing in defense ICT systems.134 In early
, the Polish Armed Forces confirmed integrating the BMS Legion
with Poland’s K2 main battle tanks (MBTs).135 This could indicate that most modern
land combat platforms—including MBTs, infantry fighting vehicles (IFVs), and other
heavy vehicles—will be equipped with the system in the future.
According to Maj. Gen. Karol Molenda, commander of the Polish Cyber Com-
mand, the AI Implementation Center plans to extend the application of the BMS
Legion and integrate it with the Integrated Multi-Level Information System of
the Ministry of National Defense (Zintegrowany Wieloszczeblowy System Infor-
matyczny Resortu Obrony Narodowej, ZWSI RON). The ZWSI RON system com-
prises four dedicated modules focusing on financial resources, human resources,
organizational structures, and logistics.136 The latter module is expected to be
integrated with the BMS Legion to streamline the flow of information on logistical
processes and equipment within the Polish Armed Forces.137 The Polish Armed
Forces reportedly tested certain AI technologies within its battle management
system for friend-or-foe identification during the Anakonda-23 exercises in 2023.138
6.2 Cybersecurity
Possibly one of the most advanced applications of AI in the Polish Armed Forces
to date is in the field of cybersecurity. AI has reportedly been deployed by the
Cyberspace Defense Forces to support the detection of anomalies and software
vulnerabilities in defense ICT systems, which are particularly exposed to opera-
tions carried out by so-called APT (Advanced Persistent Threat) groups.
An APT can be defined as an attack conducted by well-organized groups using so-
phisticated methods to penetrate networks and gain access to specific information
132 “Zanami‘Warsztatydotyczącewizjinowoczesnejłączności’”[The“WorkshopsontheVisionofModernCommunications”are
behindus],WojskoPolskie.
133 “HMSJASMINE-HeadquartersManagementSystemforOperationalandTacticalLevel,”Teldat.
134 “Zanami‘Warsztatydotyczącewizjinowoczesnejłączności’,”WojskoPolskie.
135 Ibid.
136 Stańczyk,“IntegratedMulti-levelInformationSystemoftheMinistryofNationalDefenceasanITSystemsupportingthe
managementofmilitaryresources,”pp.734-751.
137 Molenda,Karol,InterviewbyOkulska,Inez,“PiątyżywiołwstarciuzAI,”HAIMagazine.
138 Palczewski,“WojskoRProśnie.GenerałMolendaszczerzeopotencjalePolski”[ThePolishArmedForcesaregrowing:Gener-
alMolendaspeakscandidlyaboutPoland’spotential].
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 47

or carry out acts of cyber sabotage.139 Although the term originally did not specify
the type of actors involved, in this context it refers to cybercriminal organizations
linked to state actors—Russian special services in particular. Given the scope and
scale of military and civilian ICT infrastructure and the large number of users,
AI-based technologies are essential for instantly detecting potential threats to the
security of the armed forces and the state’s critical infrastructure.140 Senior military
officials in Poland maintain that the country is already engaged in an ongoing
conflict in cyberspace, with personnel of the Polish Cyberspace Defense Forces
intervening on average every two hours.141 This is unsurprising, considering that
Poland ranks third in Europe among the most targeted countries by state-spon-
sored cyberattacks.142
6.3 Other Applications
Little is known about other specific applications of AI technologies in the Polish
military, although the Ministry of National Defense has acknowledged that large
language models (LLMs) are used to varying degrees to automate processes,
analyze images and voice data, perform real-time translations and transcriptions,
and support decision-making.143
Beyond their roles in C4ISR and cybersecurity, one of the most likely areas for
future AI application is personnel training—particularly in preparing personalized
educational materials, as well as in developing scenarios and conducting data
analysis for wargaming and simulations. Additionally, certain Polish-made combat
platforms—such as WB Group’s GLADIUS unmanned reconnaissance and strike
system, which includes both reconnaissance UAVs and loitering munitions144—
have reportedly been integrated with AI technologies. These capabilities enable
the systems to operate autonomously even in the presence of hostile electronic
warfare measures.145
The implementation of AI is also a key component of the ongoing East Shield
program, which aims to fortify Poland’s eastern borders with a complex system of
military infrastructure, including AI-supported operations centers and automated
139 Ahmad,“Strategically-motivatedadvancedpersistentthreat:Definition,process,tacticsandadisinformationmodelof
counterattack,”pp.402-418.
140 Molenda,Karol,InterviewbyOkulska,Inez,“PiątyżywiołwstarciuzAI,”HAIMagazine.
141 Palczewski,“Atakinapolskąinfrastrukturękrytyczną.DowódcaDKWOC:zmieniamypodejścieNATO”[AttacksonPolish
criticalinfrastructure:CommanderoftheCyberspaceDefenseForcesCommand–WearechangingNATO’sapproach].
142 Witcher,“Microsoft’sPolandInvestment:YourNextBigBreakinCybersecurity.”
143 “AIwsłużbieMON-u”[AIintheServiceoftheMinistryofNationalDefense].
144 “FirstGladiussystemdelivered.”
145 Maciejewski,“MSPO2023:kieleckapremierasystemuGladiusGrupyWB”[MSPO2023:KielcePremiereofWBGroup’s
GladiusSystem].
48 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

combat systems.146 Furthermore, under a contract signed in 2020, the Polish Air
Force is currently expecting the delivery of 32 F-35A TR-3 Block 4, with the first
aircraft scheduled to arrive in 2026.147 The acquisition of these stealth fighter jets is
perceived as a milestone in modernization and digitalization of the Polish Armed
Forces148 given their advanced armament, sensors, and the reportedly AI-enabled
architecture of the TR-3 Block 4.149
146 “EastShield,”GeneralStaffofthePolishArmedForces,27May2024.
147 “17.polskiF-35”[17thPolishF-35].
148 Palowski,“PolskieF-35:rewolucja,którątrzebawykorzystać”[PolishF-35s:ARevolutiontoCapitalizeOn].
149 Suciu,“TheF-35LightningIINewestUpgradeIsAlmostComplete.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 49

7 Training for
Defense AI
50 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

Training of military personnel has been identified as one of the most promising
applications of AI in the Polish Armed Forces, as outlined in Poland’s Military AI
Strategy 2024–2039. The authors of the Strategy perceive AI tools as revolution-
ary, particularly in e-learning given the possibility of personalizing materials and
adapting them to the specific needs of individual soldiers.150 The potential applica-
tions involve automating the training assessment process, creating tailored learn-
ing content, and supporting direct multilingual communication between trainers
and trainees.
The Strategy also highlights the role of AI algorithms in designing scenarios and
supporting the development of realistic simulations, such as those utilizing virtual
reality (VR), to create more intelligent and challenging adversaries. These simula-
tions could stimulate trainees to develop rapid decision-making skills in dynamic
combat environments at the tactical, operational, and political-strategic levels,
depending on the specific purpose of the training and the scenario. While such
tools cannot fully replace live training, AI-supported advanced simulators can
significantly reduce both the costs and risks associated with the training process.151
The growing importance of AI is directly influencing the operations of military
universities. For example, the Military University of Technology in Warsaw (WAT)
has introduced regulations governing the use of AI by both staff and students.
Machine learning and AI have also been integrated into the university’s IT studies
curriculum.152 At the same time, WAT actively seeks partnerships with business
entities—such as IBM—to accelerate research into AI applications in fields like
cybersecurity and logistics.153
The Ministry of National Defense is also seeking partnerships with multinational
corporations not only to foster innovation in groundbreaking defense technol-
ogies, but also to advance education and research in AI, cloud technologies,
and quantum computing. In the Ministry and Microsoft agreed
to expand the scope of their collaboration, particularly in cybersecurity.154 At the
same time, Microsoft signed a separate agreement with the Polish government to
invest PLN2.8bn (around €0.66bn) in cloud and AI infrastructure in Poland, with
completion expected by . This investment is anticipated to deliver nu-
merous benefits to the Polish economy and workforce, including providing training
150 “Resortowastrategiasztucznejinteligencjidoroku2039,”MinisterstwoObronyNarodowej,11October2024.
151 Krakowski,KrzysztofandSzewczyk,Kamil,“Systemysymulacjiwirtualnejwszkoleniubojowymżołnierzywojsklądowych–
stanobecnyiperspektywyrozwoju”[Virtualsimulationsystemsincombattrainingofgroundforcessoldiers–currentstatus
anddevelopmentperspectives].
152 “Załączniknr1douchwałySenatuWATnr103/WAT/2023zdnia22czerwca2023r.”[AnnexNo.1toResolutionNo.103/
WAT/2023oftheSenateoftheMilitaryUniversityofTechnologyofJune22,2023],WojskowaAkademiaTechniczna–Wyd-
ziałCybernetyki,22June2023.
153 “WATzacieśniawspółpracęzIBM-em”[WATStrengthensCooperationwithIBM].
154 “Nowetechnologie,pracebadawczo–rozwojowe,cyberbezpieczeństwo–WojskoPolskierozwijawspółpracęzMicrosoft”[New
Technologies,ResearchandDevelopment,Cybersecurity–ThePolishArmedForcesExpandCooperationwithMicrosoft].
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 51

opportunities, strengthening national cybersecurity, and supporting the education
sector and other institutions with dedicated AI solutions.155
In , the Cybersecurity Training Center for Excellence (Eksperckie
Centrum Szkolenia Cyberbezpieczeństwa, ECSC) at the Ministry of National De-
fense signed an agreement with Oracle to enhance the skills and competencies of
the Ministry’s military and civilian personnel in cyberspace, drawing on the exper-
tise and knowledge transfer provided by the American company. The initiative’s
primary objective is to modernize training programs and education in military ICT
infrastructure, cybersecurity, cloud computing, and AI.156 In , the
ECSC also partnered with Microsoft to incorporate Microsoft Academy courses
into its training programs. This collaboration established a certified Microsoft
training center, giving Ministry personnel access to cutting-edge AI and cloud
solutions, as well as the opportunity to acquire the skills needed to operate them
effectively in relevant operational contexts.157
It is also worth noting that AI and cybersecurity-related training modules and webi-
nars have been integrated into the curriculum for Polish civil servants. For instance,
in 2024, a program to train 400 civil servants included 32 hours of lectures cover-
ing available AI technologies and their practical applications, risks associated with
their implementation, relevant national and international regulations—particularly
the EU AI Act—as well as policies aimed at building Poland’s AI ecosystem.158
155 “MicrosoftannouncesaPLN2.8billioninvestmentincloudandAIinfrastructure,skillingandcybersecurityinPoland.”
156 “EksperckieCentrumSzkoleniaCyberbezpieczeństwaiOraclenarzeczmodernizacjiWojskaPolskiego”[ExpertCybersecurity
TrainingCenterandOraclefortheModernizationofthePolishArmedForces],EksperckieCentrumSzkoleniaCyberbezpiec-
zeństwaim.prof.ZdzisławaKrygowskiego,17September2024.
157 “EksperckieCentrumSzkoleniaCyberbezpieczeństwawpartnerstwiezMicrosofturuchamiaakademięrozwojukompetencji
narzeczcyberobronnościkraju”[TheExpertCybersecurityTrainingCenter,inPartnershipwithMicrosoft,LaunchesaCompe-
tencyDevelopmentAcademyfortheCountry’sCyberDefense].
158 Formoreinformationoncivilservantstrainingprograms,see:
nych-w-sluzbie-cywilnej-na-2024-r(lastaccessed5September2025).
52 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

Table 2: Selected Cooperation Initiatives between the Polish Armed Forces and the
Private Sector in Innovative Technologies
Partner Polish Entity Initiative/Agreement
Cisco CyberDefenseForces Apartnershipinthefieldofcybersecurity,including
ComponentCommand) theexchangeofknowledgeonthelatestcyber
threatsandjointeffortstostrengthentheprotection
ofcriticalinfrastructure.Cisco'sTalosunitprovides
informationondetectedthreats.
Microsoft CyberDefenseForces DKWOChasjoinedtheMicrosoftGovernment
ComponentCommandand SecurityProgram(GSP),whichprovidescontrolled
thePolishArmedForces accesstosourcecode,threatinformation,andtech-
nicalcontent.Aseparatecooperationagreement
wassignedtodeepencooperationinnewtechnol-
ogies,includingcloudcomputing,AI,andquantum
computing,tostrengthenthearmy'sresilience.
Oracle CyberDefenseForces Anagreementwassignedoncooperationinthe
ComponentCommand fieldofcybersecurity,AI,andcloudinfrastructure.
Thegoalistobuildjointtaskforcesfortheex-
changeofinformationonthreatsandthebuildingof
knowledge,whichistoincreasethecountry'scyber
resilience.
Google CyberDefenseForces Anagreementoncooperationinthefieldofcyberse-
ComponentCommand curityanddatastorageinthecloud,alsoincluding
plansforjointPolish-Americantraining.Theagree-
mentwassignedforatleastoneyear.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 53

8 Conclusion
54 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

Assessing Poland’s efforts to develop and implement AI in the defense sector
is undoubtedly a difficult task, given the numerous uncertainties surrounding
government plans in this area. Since the country is still at the very early stages of
deploying such technologies—and with only limited details regarding this policy
publicly available—a final judgment would certainly be premature. Nonetheless,
the overall picture of Poland’s endeavors is relatively optimistic.
The government has published a military AI strategy and has already begun imple-
menting it, for example, by establishing the Artificial Intelligence Implementation
Center. The decision to leverage the expertise and capabilities of the Cyberspace
Defense Forces in launching this initiative reflects a more centralized and sound
approach that could yield greater efficiency and foster synergistic effects through
cooperation among all key stakeholders, including the Ministry of National De-
fense, the Polish Armed Forces, industry, and the R&D sector. The competence
of the AI Implementation Center’s staff will be crucial in this regard. However, it is
equally important to note that the development of more detailed policies and reg-
ulations, as well as the creation of adaptable AI technologies for the military, will
require both substantial funding and highly skilled human resources. These factors
will remain significant challenges, despite Poland’s growing defense budget and
increasing public interest in military service.
While Poland’s efforts to implement AI within the military appear relatively cen-
tralized, the same cannot be said for the broader AI ecosystem, which remains
fragmented and dominated by multinational corporations. Although Polish
companies—ranging from established enterprises to startups—are pursuing
innovations with both civilian and military applications, Poland’s reliance on foreign
technology providers is undeniable. This situation is unlikely to change in the fore-
seeable future unless well-designed policies—accompanied by adequate fund-
ing—are introduced to support the growth of domestic technology and defense
firms.
Nonetheless, it is worth noting that Poland is making efforts to stimulate the
growth of the entire AI ecosystem, with particular emphasis on indigenous solu-
tions, by establishing a range of dedicated funds and policies aimed at fostering
innovation in domestic companies. These initiatives rely primarily on national
resources, supplemented to some extent by EU funding, although the latter’s
potential could be leveraged more effectively. This is especially evident in Poland’s
participation in EDF projects, where Polish entities often play only a subsidiary
role. It is also worth noting that opportunities to utilize such funds are recognized
mainly by private companies and universities, while state-owned enterprises make
use of them only to a very limited degree.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 55

Beyond strictly military applications of AI pursued by defense companies, great-
er emphasis should be placed on the development of dual-use technologies.
While interest in such technologies is growing and additional funds are being
established to support innovative projects, it remains crucial to create an effec-
tive system that fosters business cooperation among various entities—including
startups and private enterprises—to ensure the successful commercialization of
new solutions. This is particularly important for building a sustainable ecosystem
of domestic firms and R&D institutions, which in the long term will reduce Poland’s
dependence on foreign suppliers. The rationale for such policies is both economic
and security driven as adopting domestic solutions could strengthen Poland’s
technological autonomy while stimulating the growth of local businesses. In turn,
this would help reorient the economy toward more innovative, high value-added
production, generating better-paid jobs, expanding the tax base, and fostering
long-term economic resilience.
Promising prospects notwithstanding, the modernization and transformation of
Poland’s defense industry—particularly its state-owned enterprises—also remains
uncertain, especially as the country continues to acquire numerous weapon
systems, mostly from foreign defense contractors. The automation of production,
along with the implementation of AI (for example, through smart factories), is
undeniably necessary given the needs of the military and the nation’s deteriorat-
ing demographic situation. While this issue lies beyond the scope of this report,
further research in this area is essential to fully grasp the importance of AI in the
modern defense sector, particularly in the context of the mass production of
military equipment.
56 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

Literature
“17.polskiF-35”[17thPolishF-35],AgencjaLotnicza “AIwpolskimwojsku.SzefMONzabieragłos”[AI
ALTAIR,16June2025, inthePolishmilitary:MinisterofNationalDefence
view?news_id=46241(lastaccessed5September2025). speaksout],PolskaAgencjaPrasowa,3March2025,

“2022–rok,wktórympowstałyWojskaObro- skim-powstaje-centrum-implementacji-sztucznej-inteli-
nyCyberprzestrzeni”[2022–theyearinwhichthe gencji(lastaccessed5September2025).
CyberspaceDefenseForceswereestablished],Wojsko
Polskie,undated, “AIwsłużbieMON-u”[AIintheServiceofthe
articles/aktualnosci-w/2022-rok-w-ktorym-powsta- MinistryofNationalDefense],PolskaZbrojna,16
ly-wojska-obrony-cyberprzestrzeni(lastaccessed5 May2025,
September2025). show/43843?t=AI-w-sluzbie-MON-u(lastaccessed5
September2025).
“4/SZAFIR/2021,”NarodoweCentrumBadańi
Rozwoju,31August2021 “Alreadyintheglobaldefenseindustry,unmanned
ncbr/4szafir2021(lastaccessed5September2025). andartificialintelligence(AI)arebecomingessential
elementsofweaponsdevelopment,”MaeilBusiness
“AboutDataWalk,”DataWalk, Newspaper,14January2025,
company(lastaccessed5September2025). business/11217061(lastaccessed5September2025).
“AboutKrakowDIANAAccelerator,”KrakowDIANA “ArtificialIntelligenceDeployableAgent,”European
Accelerator, DefenceFundundated,
September2025). ec.europa.eu/document/download/f1aa1eeb-a368-
41ab-be91-54728c24ccba_en?filename=EDF-2023-DA-
“Accenturezasilanegeneratywnąsztucznąinteli- CYBER-DAAI%20AIDA.pdf(lastaccessed5September
gencją”[AccenturePoweredbyGenerativeArtificial 2025).
Intelligence],Microsoft,10July2023,
microsoft.com/pl-pl/features/accenture-zasilane-gen- “CentrumImplementacjiSztucznejInteligencjima
eratywna-sztuczna-inteligencja(lastaccessed5 wystartowaćwtymroku.Polskiewojskocorazszerzej
September2025). korzystaztejtechnologii”[TheArtificialIntelligence
ImplementationCenterissettolaunchthisyear,as
“AIforIndustry–rozwójkompetencjiAIwpolskim thePolishmilitaryincreasinglyadoptsthistechnol-
przemyśle.PorozumienieMRiT-Intelpodpisane”[AI ogy],PortalMundurowy,15January2025,https://
forIndustry–DevelopingAICompetenciesinPolish portal-mundurowy.pl/index.php/innowacje-i-biznes/
Industry.MRiT–IntelAgreementSigned],Ministerstwo centrum-implementacji-sztucznej-inteligencji-ma-wystar-
RozwojuiTechnologii,27June2025, towac-w-tym-roku-polskie-wojsko-coraz-szerzej-korzys-
pl/web/rozwoj-technologia/ai-for-industry--rozwoj-kom- ta-z-tej-technologii(lastaccessed5September2025).
petencji-ai-w-polskim-przemysle-porozumienie-mrit-in-
tel-podpisane(lastaccessed5September2025). “ChecksatallGermanlandbordersstarton
Monday,”FederalMinistryoftheInterioroftheFederal
“AIforSecurity,”NCBRIDEAS,undated, RepublicofGermany,15September2024,https://
as-ncbr.pl/en/research/ai-for-security(lastaccessed5 
September2025). EN/2024/09/binnengrenzkontrollen_pm2-en.html(last
accessed5September2025).
“AISystems,”WBGroup,undated,
wbgroup.pl/en/kategoria-produktow/ai-systems(last “ChiefDigital&ArtificialIntelligenceOffice
accessed5September2025). CelebratesFirstYear,”U.S.DepartmentofDefense,19
July2023,
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 57

Release/Article/3464012/chief-digital-artificial-intel- nia-cyberbezpieczenstwa-i-oracle-na-rzecz-modernizac-
ligence-office-celebrates-first-year(lastaccessed5 ji-wojska-polskiego(lastaccessed5September2025).
September2025).
“EksperckieCentrumSzkoleniaCyberbezpieczeńst-
“CyberwojskaifirmaGoogle”[CyberspaceDefense wawpartnerstwiezMicrosofturuchamiaakademię
ForcesandGoogle],PolskaZbrojna,5October2023, rozwojukompetencjinarzeczcyberobronnościkraju”
 [TheExpertCybersecurityTrainingCenter,inPartnership
Cyberwojska-i-firma-Google(lastaccessed5September withMicrosoft,LaunchesaCompetencyDevelopment
2025). AcademyfortheCountry’sCyberDefense],Microsoft
News,21May2025,
“Czasnarealizacjęprojektówwzakresiebadań pl-pl/2025/05/21/eksperckie-centrum-szkolenia-cy-
naukowychipracrozwojowychnarzeczobronnościi berbezpieczenstwa-w-partnerstwie-z-microsoft-uru-
bezpieczeństwapaństwa–ruszyłProgramNCBRpk. chamia-akademie-rozwoju-kompetencji-na-rzecz-cybero-
PERUN”[Timetoimplementprojectsinthefieldof bronnosci-kraju(lastaccessed5September2025).
scientificresearchanddevelopmentworkfornational
defenseandsecurity–theNCBRprogramcode-named “FIELDctrlUltraprecise3DMIMOradars,”APS,
PERUNhasbeenlaunched],NarodoweCentrumBadańi undated,
Rozwoju,24November2023, cise-3d-mimo-radars(lastaccessed5September2025).
ncbr/czas-na-realizacje-projektow-w-zakresie-badan-
naukowych-i-prac-rozwojowych-na-rzecz-obronnosci-i- “FirstGladiussystemdelivered,”WBGroup,15
bezpieczenstwa-panstwa--ruszyl-program-ncbr-pk-perun December2022,
(lastaccessed5September2025). nosci/first-gladius-system-delivered(lastaccessed5
September20252025).
“DefenseandResilience:ProspectsofCompanies
Development,”KPBN2025, “FunduszBezpieczeństwaiObronnościwesprze
alnosci/premiera-raportu-obronnosc-i-odpornosc---per- inwestycjesamorządowe”[TheSecurityandDefense
spektywy-rozwoju-przedsiebiorstw(lastaccessed5 Fundwillsupportlocalgovernmentinvestments],Min-
September2025). isterstwoFunduszyiPolitykiRegionalnej,30May2025,

“DIANAispartneringwithmorethan180testcentres pieczenstwa-i-obronnosci-wesprze-inwestycje-samorza-
fromacrosstheNATOAlliance,”DIANANATO,undated, dowe(lastaccessed5September2025).

accessed5September2025). “FunduszBezpieczeństwaiObronnościwesprze
inwestycjesamorządowe”[TheSecurityandDefense
“DKWOCwłączonedoprogramuMicrosoftGovern- Fundwillsupportlocalgovernmentinvestments],Min-
mentSecurityProgram”[DKWOCjoinstheMicrosoft isterstwoFunduszyiPolitykiRegionalnej,30May2025,
GovernmentSecurityProgram],WojskoPolskie,undated, 
 pieczenstwa-i-obronnosci-wesprze-inwestycje-samorza-
nosci-w/dkwoc-wlaczone-do-programu-microsoft-gov- dowe(lastaccessed5September2025).
ernment-security-program(lastaccessed5September
2025). “Gen.Molenda:14kwietniaruszaCentrumImple-
mentacjiSztucznejInteligencji”[Gen.Molenda:The
“EastShield,”GeneralStaffofthePolishArmed ArtificialIntelligenceImplementationCenterwilllaunch
Forces,27May2024, onApril14],PortalSamorządowy,2April2025,https://
pl/u/59/0f/590f9be9-9609-4a9a-ab5d-fb5371503b5a/ 
tarcza_wschod_prezentacja_sgwp_27052024.pdf(last gen-molenda-14-kwietnia-rusza-centrum-implementac-
accessed5September2025). ji-sztucznej-inteligencji,605209.html(lastaccessed5
September2025).
“EksperckieCentrumSzkoleniaCyberbezpieczeńst-
waiOraclenarzeczmodernizacjiWojskaPolskiego” “GoogleInvestsBillionsinPoland’sDigitalFuture,”
[ExpertCybersecurityTrainingCenterandOracleforthe ChancelleryofthePrimeMinister,13February2025
ModernizationofthePolishArmedForces],Eksperckie 
CentrumSzkoleniaCyberbezpieczeństwaim.prof.Zd- vests-billions-in-polands-digital-future(lastaccessed5
zisławaKrygowskiego,17September2024, September2025).
mil.pl/komunikaty-prasowe/eksperckie-centrum-szkole-
58 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

“Grossdomesticexpenditureonresearchand ji-i-cyfryzacja-biznesu-to-nasze-priorytety(lastaccessed
developmentin2023,”Eurostat,December2024,https:// 5September2025).
ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?-
title=R%26D_expenditure(lastaccessed5September “Markets,”APS,undated,
2025). markets(lastaccessed5September2025).
“HMSJASMINE-HeadquartersManagement “MicrosoftannouncesaPLN2.8billioninvestment
SystemforOperationalandTacticalLevel,”Teldat, incloudandAIinfrastructure,skillingandcybersecurity
undated, inPoland,”MicrosoftNews,17February2025,https://
systems/166-hms-jasmine.html(lastaccessed5Sep- news.microsoft.com/pl-pl/2025/02/17/microsoft-an-
tember2025). nounces-a-pln-2-8-billion-investment-in-cloud-and-ai-in-
frastructure-skilling-and-cybersecurity-in-poland(last
“IDA–Inwestycjeiadaptacjatechnologiipodwój- accessed5September2025).
negozastosowania”[IDA–Investmentsandadaptation
ofdual-usetechnologies],GrupaPFR,undated,https:// “MicrosoftInvestsPLN3BillioninaNewData
grupapfr.pl/program/ida-inwestycje-i-adaptacja-tech- CenterinPoland,”ChancelleryofthePrimeMinister,17
nologii-podwojnego-zastosowania(lastaccessed5 February2025,
September2025). microsoft-invests-pln-3-billion-in-a-new-data-center-in-
poland(lastaccessed5September2025).
“IDABootcamp2025–PFRszukainnowacyjnych
rozwiązańdlaobronności”[IDABootcamp2025– “MONzwiększanatenroklimitdlaochotników
PFRseeksinnovativesolutionsfordefense],Polski wDZSWiobniżaw2025r.”[TheMinistryofNational
FunduszRozwoju,26May2025, DefenseincreasesthelimitforvolunteersintheVolun-
ida-bootcamp-2025-pfr-szuka-innowacyjnych-rozwi- taryBasicMilitaryServiceforthisyearandlowersitin
azan-dla-obronnosci#(lastaccessed5September 2025],PortalMundurowy,20December2024,https://
2025). 
zwieksza-na-ten-rok-limit-dla-ochotnikow-w-dzsw-i-ob-
InternationalDefenseInsightReport,Securing niza-w-2025-r(lastaccessed5September2025).
strategicadvantagefordefensecompanies(nolocation:
Accenture,2024), “NarodowyProgramOdstraszaniaiObrony–Tarcza
dam/accenture/final/industry/aerospace-and-defense/ Wschód”[NationalDeterrenceandDefenceProgramme
document/Securing-Strategic-Advantage-Defense-Com- –EastShield],MinisterstwoObronyNarodowej,https://
panies.pdf(lastaccessed5September2025). tarczawschod.wp.mil.pl/u/9b/2b/9b2b06d2-f368-4eae-
bde1-b3d2664c01ec/tarcza_wschod_-_ulotka.pdf(last
“KrakówDIANA–ruszapolskiakceleratorinnowacji accessed5September2025).
obronnychNATO”[KrakówDIANA–LaunchofthePolish
NATOdefenseinnovationaccelerator],MILMAG,16 “NationalCyberSecurityIndex,”e-Governance
March2024, AcademyFoundation,
ski-akcelerator-innowacji-obronnych-nato(lastaccessed /?order=-ncsi(lastaccessed5September2025).
5September2025).
“NavigatingDual-UseTechnologies:AFounder’s
“Listawnioskówpozytywnieocenionychpod HandbooktoOpportunitiesandChallenges,”Balnord&
względemformalnym(Konkursnr1/PERUN/2023)”[List PolskiFunduszRozwoju,15December2024,https://
ofApplicationsPositivelyEvaluatedinTermsofFormal 
Criteria(CompetitionNo.1/PERUN/2023)],Narodowe use-tech-handbook-for-deep-tech-companies(last
CentrumBadańiRozwoju, accessed5September2025).
ment/7d8b059d-4f73-4f4a-808d-d08087166c7b(last
accessed5September2025). “NCBRczęściąFunduszuSztucznejInteligencji”
[TheNCBRwillbepartoftheArtificialIntelligenceFund],
“Łukasiewicz–AIoficjalnieotwarty.Rozwój NarodoweCentrumBadańiRozwoju,18November
sztucznejinteligencjiicyfryzacjabiznesutonasze 2025,
priorytety”[Łukasiewicz–AIofficiallyopened.The duszu-sztucznej-inteligencji(lastaccessed5September
developmentofartificialintelligenceandbusiness 2025).
digitalizationareourpriorities],SiećBadawczaŁukasie-
wicz,4July2025, “Nowetechnologie,pracebadawczo–rozwo-
wicz-ai-oficjalnie-otwarty-rozwoj-sztucznej-inteligenc- jowe,cyberbezpieczeństwo–WojskoPolskierozwija
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 59

współpracęzMicrosoft”[NewTechnologies,Re- “PIT-RADWARS.A.podpisałumowęzfirmąDigica”
searchandDevelopment,Cybersecurity–ThePolish [PIT-RADWARS.A.signedacontractwithDigica],
ArmedForcesExpandCooperationwithMicrosoft], PIT-RADWAR,30April2024,
MinisterstwoObronyNarodowej,17February2025, com/a/2065,pit-radwar-s-a-podpisal-umowe-z-firma-digi-
 ca#(lastaccessed5September2025).
nologie-prace-badawczo--rozwojowe-cyberbezpiec-
zenstwo--wojsko-polskie-rozwija-wspolprace-z-microsoft “Platformakonkursowa”[CompetitionPlatform],Nar-
(lastaccessed5September2025). odoweCentrumBadańiRozwoju,undated,
gov.pl/web/ncbr/platforma-konkursowa#/ncbr?sort=an-
“Osztucznejinteligencjinaseminariumnaukowym nouncementDate,desc&description=step&current-
wCDISSZ”[OnArtificialIntelligenceattheScientific Page=0&limit=10(lastaccessed5September2025).
SeminarintheCDISSZ],CentrumDoktryniSzkolenia
SiłZbrojnychim.gen.broniWładysławaSikorskiego, “PolacyporazkolejnynapodiumzawodówLocked
19March2025, Shields”[PolesonceagainonthepodiumattheLocked
ci-2025/o-sztucznej-inteligencji-na-seminarium-nau- Shieldscompetition],WojskoPolskie,undated,https://
kowym-w-cdis-sz(lastaccessed5September2025). 
acy-po-raz-kolejny-na-podium-zawodow-locked-shields/
“Odpowiedzialny,alehojny–budżetna2025rok (lastaccessed5September2025).
przyjęty”[ResponsiblebutGenerous–2025Budget
Adopted],KancelariaPrezesaRadyMinistrów,28August “PolandchargesBelarusianwitharsononbehalfof
2024, Russianintelligence,”Reuters,12March2025,https://
ale-hojny--budzet-na-2025-rok-przyjety(lastaccessed5 
September2025). sian-with-arson-behalf-russian-intelligence-2025-03-12
(lastaccessed5September2025).
“Ourareasofactivity,”ŁukasiewiczResearch
Network,undated, “PolandEffectivelyProtectstheEUBorder,”Chan-
know-us(lastaccessed5September2025). celleryofthePrimeMinisteroftheRepublicofPoland,
22March2025,
“OurCustomers,”DataWalk,undated, poland-effectively-protects-the-eu-border(lastaccessed
walk.com/company/our-customers(lastaccessed5 5September2025).
September2025).
“PolicyfortheDevelopmentofArtificialIntelligence
“Ouroriginsdatebackto1987,”Telbud,undated, inPolandfrom2020.AppendixtotheResolutionno.
 196oftheCouncilofMinistersof28December2020
5September2025). (item23),”TheCouncilofMinistersoftheRepublicof
Poland,
“PFRDeepTech:600mlnPLNnainwestycjew ju-sztucznej-inteligencji-w-polsce-od-roku-2020(last
zaawansowanetechnologie”[PFRDeepTech:PLN600 accessed5September2025).
millionforinvestmentsinadvancedtechnologies],Min-
isterstwoAktywówPaństwowych,6May2025,https:// “PoliticalDeclarationonResponsibleMilitaryUseof
 ArtificialIntelligenceandAutonomy,”OfficialWebsite
mln-pln-na-inwestycje-w-zaawansowane-technologie oftheUnitedStatesGovernment,
(lastaccessed5September2025). gov/bureau-of-arms-control-deterrence-and-stability/
political-declaration-on-responsible-military-use-of-ar-
“PFRpodpisałlistintencyjnywsprawieFunduszu tificial-intelligence-and-autonomy(lastaccessed5
SztucznejInteligencji–nowemożliwościdlarozwoju September2025).
polskiejgospodarki”[PFRSignedaLetterofIntenton
theArtificialIntelligenceFund–NewOpportunitiesfor “PolskamazamiardołączyćdoprogramuGigafabryk
theDevelopmentofthePolishEconomy],PolskiFundusz AI”[PolandintendstojointheAIGigafactoryProgram],
Rozwoju,15November2024, PolskaAgencjaPrasowa,12June2025,
pfr-podpisal-list-intencyjny-w-sprawie-funduszu-sz- pap.pl/wiadomosci/gry-i-technologie/polska-ma-zam-
tucznej-inteligencji(lastaccessed5September2025). iar-dolaczyc-do-programu-gigafabryk-ai-opis(last
accessed5September2025).
“PIORUNMANPADS,”Mesko,undated,https://
 “Priorytetowekierunkibadańnaukowychwresorcie
accessed5September2025). obronynarodowejwlatach2021-2035”[Prioritydirec-
60 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

tionsofscientificresearchintheMinistryofNational pl/web/ncbr/sciezka-smart-nabor-feng0101-ip01-00124
Defensefor2021–2035],MinisterstwoObronyNaro- (lastaccessed5September2025).
dowej,
4c03-8714-148d0e2a6899(lastaccessed5September “SIBMSLegion,”RegionalneCentrumInformatyki
2025). Olsztyn,22April2024,
aktualnosci/si-bms-legion(lastaccessed5September
“ProjektUstawyosystemachsztucznejinteligencji 2025).
zezmianamipokonsultacjachspołecznych”[DraftAct
onArtificialIntelligenceSystemswithAmendmentsFol- “SKYctrlComprehensiveanti-dronesystem,”APS,
lowingPublicConsultations],MinisterstwoCyfryzacji,11 undated,
February2025, hensive-anti-drone-system(lastaccessed5September
jekt-ustawy-o-systemach-sztucznej-inteligencji-ze-zmi- 2025).
anami-po-konsultacjach-spolecznych(lastaccessed5
September2025). “SmartFactoriesTransitionfromAutomationto
Intelligence,”Hanwha,15September2017,https://
“RekomendacjedoStrategiiBezpieczeństwaNaro- 
dowegoRzeczypospolitejPolskiej”[Recommendations smart-factories-transition-from-automation-to-intelli-
fortheNationalSecurityStrategyoftheRepublicof gence.do(lastaccessed5September2025).
Poland],TheOfficialWebsiteofthePresidentoftheRe-
publicofPoland,4July2024, “ŚrodkizKPOzasiląFunduszBezpieczeństwai
storage/file/core_files/2024/7/4/7fa9f08052b51758d- Obronności”[FundsfromtheNationalRecoveryPlan
6ed4e9a11a9d32d/REKOMENDACJE%20SBNRP%20 (KPO)willbeallocatedtotheSecurityandDefense
4%20lipca%202024.pdf(lastaccessed5September Fund],MinisterstwoObronyNarodowej,4April2025,
2025). 
ki-z-kpo-zasila-fundusz-bezpieczenstwa-i-obronnosci
“Resortowastrategiasztucznejinteligencjidoroku (lastaccessed5September2025).
2039”[Poland’sMinisterialArtificialIntelligenceStrate-
gyuntil2039],MinisterstwoObronyNarodowej,11Oc- “StrategiaBezpieczeństwaNarodowegoRzeczy-
tober2024, pospolitejPolskiej”[NationalSecurityStrategyofthe
resortowa-strategia-sztucznej-inteligencji-do-roku-2039 RepublicofPoland],KancelariaPrezesaRadyMinistrów,
(lastaccessed5September2025). 25July2025,
gia-bezpieczenstwa-narodowego-rzeczypospolitej-polsk-
“RewolucjadronowawSiłachZbrojnychRP”[Drone iej(lastaccessed5September2025).
RevolutioninthePolishArmedForces],Ministerstwo
ObronyNarodowej,22July2025, “Strategiacyfryzacjipaństwa”[NationalDigital-
pl/web/obrona-narodowa/rewolucja-dronowa-w-si- izationStrategy],MinisterstwoCyfryzacji,undated,
lach-zbrojnych-rp(lastaccessed5September2025). 
ji-panstwa---20-czerwca-br-na-pge-narodowym(last
“RozporządzenieRadyMinistrówzdnia25lutego accessed5September2025).
2025r.wsprawieutworzeniaInstytutuBadawczegoIDE-
AS”[RegulationoftheCouncilofMinistersofFebruary “Szerszeńizielonalinia,czylizaczątekdronizacji
25,2025,ontheEstablishmentoftheIDEASResearch armii”[HornetandGreenLine,thebeginningofthe
Institute],SejmRP, ArmedForces’Dronization],DziennikZbrojny,24
DocDetails.xsp?id=WDU20250000238(lastaccessed5 July2025,
September2025). news,1,12167,aktualnosci-z-polski,szerszen-i-zielo-
na-linia-czyli-zaczatek-dronizacji-armii(lastaccessed5
“Ruszyłabudowazaporyelektronicznejnagranicy September2025).
polsko-rosyjskiej”[Constructionoftheelectronicbarrier
onthePolish-Russianborderhasbegun],Ministerstwo “TarczaWschód”wzmocnibezpieczeństwoPolskii
SprawWewnętrznychiAdministracji,18April2023, wschodniejflankiNATO”[‘EasternShield’willstrength-
 enthesecurityofPolandandNATO’seasternflank],
ry-elektronicznej-na-granicy-polsko-rosyjskiej(last MinisterstwoObronyNarodowej,27May2025,https://
accessed5September2025). 
mocni-bezpieczenstwo-polski-i-wschodniej-flanki-nato
“ŚcieżkaSMARTnabórFENG.01.01-IP.01-001/24,” (lastaccessed5September2025).
NarodoweCentrumBadańiRozwoju,
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 61

“TestingServicesforDIANAStartups:Capabilitiesof jne/bottropnowe-narzedzie-do-wykrywania-cyberatakow
7PolishTestCentersinNATODIANANetwork,”Krakow (lastaccessed5September2025).
DIANAAccelerator,undated,
home/diana.krakow/prezentacje/Polish_DIANA_Test_ “WspółpracaDKWOCzOraclewobszarzecyberbez-
Centers_Services.pdf(lastaccessed5September pieczeństwa”[DKWOC’sCooperationwithOracleinthe
2025). FieldofCybersecurity],MinisterstwoObronyNarodowej,
1April2025,
“TheCyberDefenseIndex2022/23,”MITTechnol- wspolpraca-dkwoc-z-oracle-w-obszarze-cyberbezpiec-
ogyReview,undated, zenstwa(lastaccessed5September2025).
com/2022/11/15/1063189/the-cyber-defense-in-
dex-2022-23(lastaccessed5September2025). “Zanami‘Warsztatydotyczącewizjinowoczesnej
łączności’”[The“WorkshopsontheVisionofModern
“TheLaunchoftheFirstPolishAIFactory–PI- Communications”arebehindus],WojskoPolskie,
AST-AI,”PCSS,23June2025, undated,
piast-ai(lastaccessed5September2025). aktualnosci-w/warsztaty-dotyczace-wizji-nowocz-
esnej-lacznosci(lastaccessed5September2025).
“WWojskuPolskimpowstajeCentrumImplemen-
tacjiSztucznejInteligencji”[AnArtificialIntelligence “Załączniknr1douchwałySenatuWATnr103/
ImplementationCenterisbeingestablishedinthePolish WAT/2023zdnia22czerwca2023r.”[AnnexNo.1to
ArmedForces],MinisterstwoObronyNarodowej,3 ResolutionNo.103/WAT/2023oftheSenateofthe
March2025, MilitaryUniversityofTechnologyofJune22,2023],
/w-wojsku-polskim-powstaje-centrum-implementacji-sz- WojskowaAkademiaTechniczna–WydziałCybernetyki,
tucznej-inteligencji(lastaccessed5September2025). 22June2023,
edukacja/programy-studiow/2023-2024/wcy/wcy_infor-
“WATzacieśniawspółpracęzIBM-em”[WAT matyka_i_st_stacjon_uchwala_nr_103-wat-2023.pdf(last
StrengthensCooperationwithIBM],PolskaZbrojna,26 accessed5September2025).
May2023,
cleshow/39628?t=WAT-zaciesnia-wspolprace-z-IBM-em “Załączniknr2doRegulaminuKonkursu1/
(lastaccessed5September2025). PERUN/2023”[AppendixNo.2totheRulesof
Competition1/PERUN/2023],NarodoweCentrum
“WBGROUPintheAIDAproject,”WGGroup,28 BadańiRozwoju,
October2024 ment/82729c5e-4b6e-420b-95c0-ed4f32743c0d(last
wb-group-in-the-aida-project(lastaccessed5September accessed5September2025).
2025).
“Zostańcyberlegionistą!Wojskoruszaznowym
“WhitePaperforEuropeanDefence–Readiness programem”[Becomeacyberlegionnaire!Themilitary
2030,”EuropeanCommission,19March2025,https:// launchesanewprogram],PolskaZbrojna,9May2025,
commission.europa.eu/document/download/e6d5db69- 
e0ab-4bec-9dc0-3867b4373019_en?filename=White%20 tle=Zostan-cyberlegionista-Wojsko-rusza-z-nowym-pro-
paper%20for%20European%20defence%20 gramem(lastaccessed5September2025)
%E2%80%93%20Readiness%202030.pdf(lastaccessed
5September2025). Ahmad,Atifetal.,“Strategically-motivatedadvanced
persistentthreat:Definition,process,tacticsanda
“WojskacybernetyczneiOraclebędąwspółpracow- disinformationmodelofcounterattack,”Computers
aćm.in.wzakresiesztucznejinteligencji”[TheCyber & Security,86(September2019,pp.402-418,https://
ForcesandOraclewillcooperate,amongotherareas,in doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2019.07.001(lastaccessed5
artificialintelligence],PolskaAgencjaPrasowa,1April September2025).
2025,
gie/wojska-cybernetyczne-i-oracle-beda-wspolpracow- Bendett,Sam,“RolesandImplicationsofAIin
ac-min-w-zakresie(lastaccessed5September2025). theRussian-UkrainianConflict,”Russia Matters,20
July2023,
“WojskowaAkademiaTechnicznastworzyła roles-and-implications-ai-russian-ukrainian-conflict(last
narzędzieAIdowykrywaniacyberataków”[TheMilitary accessed5September202519August2025).
UniversityofTechnologyHasDevelopedanAIToolfor
DetectingCyberattacks],Defence24,2September2021, Bondar,Kateryna,UnderstandingtheMilitaryAI
 EcosystemofUkraine(Washington,DC:CSIS,2024),
62 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

 Dudkowiak,Michał,“AILawinPoland,”10July2025,
standing_the_Military_AI_Ecosystem_of_Ukraine.pdf(19 
August2025).
Goncharuk,Vitaliy,SurvivaloftheSmartest?Defense
Borchert,Heiko,“TheVeryLongGameofDefense AIinUkraine(Hamburg:DefenseAIObservatory,2024),
AIAdoption:Introduction,”inHeikoBorchert,Torben 
Schütz,andJosephVerbovszky(eds.),TheVeryLong daio_study2422_survival_of_the_smartest_vitaliy_gon-
Game.25CaseStudiesontheGlobalStateofDefense charuk.pdf(lastaccessed5September2025).
AI(Cham:Springer,2024),pp.1-38,
com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-58649-1_1(last Kolasa,Michał,“InnowacyjnośćPolski.Zestaw-
accessed5September2025). ienie–grudzień2024”[Poland’sInnovation.Report
–December2024],PolskiFunduszRozwoju,13De-
Bujak,Tomasz,InterviewbyGraf,Jędrzej,“Polska cember2024
sztucznainteligencjadlaTarczyWschód”[Polishartifi- ski-grudzien-2024-r(lastaccessed5September2025).
cialintelligencefortheEastShield],Defence24,3March
2025, Kozłowski,Andrzej,“Polish“cyberclaws”.Building
na-inteligencja-dla-tarczy-wschod-wywiad(lastaccessed ofthecyberarmyoftherisingmilitarypowerinEurope,”
5September2025). CasimirPulaskiFoundation,26June2023,
laski.pl/en/polish-cyberclaws-building-of-the-cyberarmy-
Ciechoński,Tomasz,“Rządowepracenadustawą of-the-rising-military-power-in-europe(lastaccessed5
wdrażającąAIActnaostatniejprostej”[Government September2025).
WorkontheLawImplementingtheAIActintheFinal
Stretch],Prawo.pl,22August2025, Krakowski,KrzysztofandSzewczyk,Kamil,“Systemy
pl/biznes/projekt-ustawy-o-systemach-ai-przyjety-przez- symulacjiwirtualnejwszkoleniubojowymżołnierzy
komitet,534550.html(lastaccessed5September2025). wojsklądowych–stanobecnyiperspektywyrozwo-
ju”[Virtualsimulationsystemsincombattrainingof
Dmitruk,Tomasz,“PierwsześrodkizFunduszuBez- groundforcessoldiers–currentstatusanddevelop-
pieczeństwaiObronnościw2026roku”[Thefirstfunds mentperspectives],Wiedza Obronna,291/2(2025),
fromtheSecurityandDefenceFundwillbeavailablein 
2026],DziennikZbrojny,13July2025, view/355/327(lastaccessed5September2025).
brojny.pl/aktualnosci/news,1,12165,aktualnosci-z-pol-
ski,pierwsze-srodki-z-funduszu-bezpieczenstwa-i-obron- Król,Tomasz,“MONwyjaśniaaferęzgrantamina
nosci-w-2026-roku(lastaccessed5September2025). amunicję”[DefenseMinistryAddressesAmmunition
GrantScandal].INFOR,16March2024,
Dmitruk,Tomasz,“WydatkinaobronnośćPolski infor.pl/prawo/nowosci-prawne/6543488,mon-wy-
wlatach2022-2025wedługMON”[Poland’sdefense jasnia-afere-z-grantami-na-amunicje.html(lastaccessed
spendingin2022–2025accordingtotheMinistryof 5September2025).
NationalDefense],DziennikZbrojny,7December2024,
 Krzysztoszek,Aleksandra,“SeriesoffiresacrossPo-
tualnosci-z-polski,wydatki-na-obronnosc-polski-w-lat- land,Russiansabotagesuspected,”EURACTIV,15July
ach-2022-2025-wedlug-mon(lastaccessed5September 2025,
2025). series-of-fires-across-poland-russian-sabotage-suspect-
ed(lastaccessed5September2025).
Doerries,ClaudiaandBarth,Oliver,“Poland
imposeschecksonGermanandLithuanianborders Kushnikov,Vadim,“TheUkrainianmilitaryreceived
amidmigrationfears,”Reuters,7July2025,https:// theSKYCTRLanti-dronesystem,”Militarnyi,2October
 2022,
es-checks-german-lithuanian-borders-amid-migra- military-received-the-sky-ctrl-anti-drone-system(last
tion-fears-2025-07-07/(lastaccessed5September accessed5September2025).
2025).
Lewkowicz,Monika,“MC:4,5mldzłnarozwój
DrabikPiotr,“Poland:Fenceintheswamp,”Balkan cyfryzacjiw2025r.wramachFunduszuAI”[Ministry
Insight,29February2029, ofDigitalAffairs:PLN4.5BillionforDigitalizationDe-
com/2024/02/29/poland-fence-in-the-swamp/(last velopmentin2025UndertheAIFund],NaukawPolsce,
accessed5September2025). 13January2025,
news%2C106169%2Cmc-45-mld-zl-na-rozwoj-cyfryzacji-
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 63

w-2025-r-w-ramach-funduszu-ai.html(lastaccessed18 da-na-obronnosc-w-2026-roku-idziemy-na-rekord(last
September2025). accessed5September2025).
Lipka,RafałandCzub,Sebastian,“Sivispacem, Molenda,Karol,InterviewbyOkulska,Inez,“Piąty
parabellum:TransformationofthePolishArmedForces żywiołwstarciuzAI”[TheFifthElementinConfron-
inResponsetoEmergingThreats,”CasimirPulaski tationwithAI],HAIMagazine,31March2025,https://
Foundation,15November2024, haimagazine.com/pl/hai-magazine/numer-4/piaty-zywi-
si-vis-pacem-para-bellum-transformation-of-the-polish- ol-w-starciu-z-ai(lastaccessed5September2025).
armed-forces-in-response-to-emerging-threats(last
accessed5September2025). Naruszko,Dominika,“Sztucznainteligencjaskróci
kolejkidolekarza?”[WillArtificialIntelligenceShorten
Maciejewski,Adam,“MSPO2023:kieleckapremiera WaitTimesforDoctors?],GłosAkademicki,nr3(334)
systemuGladiusGrupyWB”[MSPO2023:Kielce marzec2024,ROKXXVIIIISSN1507-9988,Wojskowa
PremiereofWBGroup’sGladiusSystem],ZBiAM,5 AkademiaTechniczna,
September2023, wp-content/uploads/2024/05/ga-3-334-marzec-2024.
premiera-systemu-galdius-grupy-wb(lastaccessed5 pdf(lastaccessed5September2025).
September2025).
National Security Strategy Of The Republic Of Poland
Mader,Georg,“Polandonthewaytobecomingthe (2020),(Warsaw,Poland:NationalSecurityBureau,
strongestarmyinEurope,”MilitärAktuell,26March 2020),
2025, al_Security_Strategy_of_the_Republic_of_Poland_2020.
becoming-the-strongest-army-in-europe(lastaccessed5 pdf(15August2025).
September2025).
Ołowniuk,Julia,“Deepfake–jakrozpoznaćfałszywe
Marszycki,Mikołaj,“DKWOCiCiscopodpisałyporo- treści?”[Deepfake–HowtoRecognizeFakeContent?],
zumienieowspółpracywzakresiecyberbezpieczeńst- WATDziałPromocjiiKomunikacji,3February2025,
wa”[DKWOCandCiscosignedacooperationagreement 
inthefieldofcybersecurity],ITWIZ,28October2022, rozpoznac-falszywe-tresci(lastaccessed5September
 2025).
ienie-o-wspolpracy-w-zakresie-cyberbezpieczenstwa/
(lastaccessed5September2025). Palczewski,Szymon,“Atakinapolskąinfrastrukturę
krytyczną.DowódcaDKWOC:zmieniamypodejście
McGovern,Matthew,“16thAirForcecontinues NATO”[AttacksonPolishcriticalinfrastructure:Com-
PolandCyberCommandpartnershipwithfirst-ever manderoftheCyberspaceDefenseForcesCommand
malwareattackexercise,”AirCombatCommand,4De- –WearechangingNATO’sapproach],Defence24,6
cember2024, May2025,
play/Article/3987296/16th-air-force-continues-poland- ataki-na-polska-infrastrukture-krytyczna-dowod-
cyber-command-partnership-with-first-ever-malwa(last ca-dkwoc-zmieniamy-podejscie-nato(lastaccessed5
accessed5September2025). September2025).
Mężyński,Andrzej,“Sztucznainteligencjana Palczewski,Szymon,“NowajednostkawWojsku
granicyzBiałorusią.MSWiAzmodernizowało“zaporę Polskim.InwestycjeMONwstrategicznyobszar”[Anew
techniczną”[Artificialintelligenceontheborderwith unitinthePolishArmedForces:MinistryofNational
Belarus:TheMinistryoftheInteriorandAdministration Defenceinvestsinastrategicarea],Defence24,3March
hasmodernizedthe‘technicalbarrier’],Forsal.pl,30 2025,
March2025, wa-jednostka-w-wojsku-polskim-inwestycje-mon-w-stra-
artykuly/9767361,sztuczna-inteligencja-na-granicy-z-bi- tegiczny-obszar(lastaccessed5September2025).
alorusia-mswia-zmodernizowalo-z.html(lastaccessed5
September2025). Palczewski,Szymon,“WojskoRProśnie.GenerałMo-
lendaszczerzeopotencjalePolski”[ThePolishArmed
Miłosz,Maciej,“TylePolskawydanaobronność Forcesaregrowing:GeneralMolendaspeakscandidly
w2026roku.Idziemynarekord”[Thisishowmuch aboutPoland’spotential],Defence24,25March2024,
Polandwillspendondefensein2026:weareheading 
forarecord],Rzeczpospolita,20February2025,https:// nie-general-molenda-szczerze-o-potencjale-polski(last
 accessed5September2025).
64 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

Palczewski,Szymon,“Wojsko:deklaracjaoużyciu Witcher,Rob,“Microsoft’sPolandInvestment:Your
AI.BrakujePolski;MSZwyjaśnia”[Military:Declaration NextBigBreakinCybersecurity,”DestinationCertifica-
ontheUseofAI.PolandMissing;ForeignMinistry tion,6June2025,
Explains],Defence24,14November2023,https:// crosoft-poland-investment(lastaccessed5September
cyberdefence24.pl/armia-i-sluzby/wojsko-deklarac- 2025).
ja-o-uzyciu-ai-brakuje-polski-aktualizacja(lastaccessed
5September2025). Wrzos,Marcin,“NaukowcyzWATopracowali
algorytmdoocenywysokościbudynków”[Scientists
Palowski,Jakub,“MiliardzUEnatechnologie fromWATHaveDevelopedanAlgorithmforAssessing
obronne.Skorzystapolskiprzemysł?”[ABillionfromthe BuildingHeights],WATDziałPromocjiiKomunikacji,
EUforDefenseTechnologies.WillPolishIndustryBene- 25November2024,
fit?],Defence24,10February2025, nauka-i-technologia/sztuczna-inteligencja-oszacu-
przemysl/miliard-z-ue-na-technologie-obronne-skorzys- je-wysokosc-budynkow(lastaccessed5September
ta-polski-przemysl(lastaccessed5September2025). 2025).
Palowski,Jakub,“PolskieF-35:rewolucja,którą Wrzos,Marcin,“Sztucznainteligencjazredukujekor-
trzebawykorzystać,”[PolishF-35s:ARevolutionto kinadrogach“[ArtificialIntelligenceWillReduceTraffic
CapitalizeOn],Defence24,28August2024, Jams],WATDziałPromocjiiKomunikacji,10January
fence24.pl/sily-zbrojne/polskie-f-35-rewolucja-ktora-tr- 2024,
zeba-wykorzystac(lastaccessed5September2025). sztuczna-inteligencja-zredukuje-korki-na-drogach(last
accessed5September2025).
PardoDeSantayana,José,Artificialintelligence
andthewarinUkraine(Madrid:InstitutoEspanolde
EstudiosEstratégicos,2024),
es/documents/2073105/2278118/la_inteligencia_arti-
ficial_y_la_guerra_de_ucrania_2024_dieeea81_eng.pdf
(lastaccessed5September2025).
Stańczyk,Konrad,“IntegratedMulti-levelInformation
SystemoftheMinistryofNationalDefenceasanITSys-
temsupportingthemanagementofmilitaryresources,”
Journal of Modern Science,53:4(2023),pp.734-751,

September2025).
Suciu,Peter,“TheF-35LightningIINewestUpgrade
IsAlmostComplete,”TheNationalInterest,18June
2025,
lightning-ii-newest-upgrade-is-almost-complete(last
accessed5September2025).
Sylvia,Noah,EuropeanDigitalDefencePriorities
inanUncertainWorld(London:RoyalUnitedServices
InstituteforDefenceandSecurityStudies,2025),

ties-march-2025.pdf(lastaccessed5September2025).
WicepremierW.Kosiniak–Kamysz:niemadziś
ważniejszejsprawyniżbezpieczeństwoPolaków”
[DeputyPrimeMinisterW.Kosiniak-Kamysz:Thereisno
moreimportantissuetodaythanthesecurityofPoles],
MinisterstwoObronyNarodowej,29February2024,

w-kosiniak--kamysz-nie-ma-dzis-wazniejszej-sprawy-niz-
bezpieczenstwo-polakow(lastaccessed5September
2025).
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 65

66 GUARDING THE ALLIANCE’S EASTERN FRONTIERS

Defense AI Observatory Studies
25|28 Umaima Ali, An Underdeveloped Strategic Necessity. Defence AI in Pakistan
25|27 Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber, and Jeronimo Dzaack, Thinking Before Sinking.
Red and Blue AI Tactics for Naval Combat
24|26 Heiko Borchert and Christian Brandlhuber, His Hands Can’t Hit What His Eyes Can’t See.
Emergent AI Tactics for Successful Operations in the Air Littoral
24|25 Mahmoud Javadi, Heavy Thunder, No Rain: Defense AI in Iran
24|24 Kitsch Liao, Intelligent National Defense Amid Strategic Ambiguity? Defense AI in Taiwan
24|23 Motohiro Tsuchiya, Overcoming the Long Shadow of the Past. Defense AI in Japan
24|22 Vitaliy Goncharuk, Survival of the Smartest? Defense AI in Ukraine
24|21 Youngwook Park, Wil the One Ring Hold? Defense AI in South Korea
23|20 Tomas Jermalivičius, Caught Between Today and Tomorrow. Defence AI in Estonia
23|19 Nikolaos Karampekios, Konstantinos Sakalis, and Iraklis Oikonomou, Harnessing the Potential.
Defense AI in Greece
23|18 Andreas Graae, Servers Before Tanks? Defence AI in Denmark
23|17 Kévin Martin and Lucie Liversain, A Winding Road Before Scaling-Up? Defense AI in France
23|16 Sami O. Järvinen, Cautious Data-Driven Evolution. Defence AI in Finland
23|15 Inbar Dolinko and Liran Antebi, Embracing the Organized Mess. Defense AI in Israel
23|14 Alastair Finlan, A Fertile Soil for AI? Defense AI in Sweden
23|13 John Lee, “Overtaking on the Curve?” Defense AI in China
23|12 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, and Joseph Verbovszky, Master and Servant. Defense AI in
Germany
23|11 Katarzyna Zysk, High Hopes Amid Hard Realities. Defense AI in Russia
23|10 Yvonne Hofstetter and Joseph Verbovzsky, How AI Learns the Bundeswehr’s
“Innere Führung.” Value-Based Engineering with IEEE7000™-2021
23|09 Robert C Engen, When the Teeth Eat the Tail: A Review of Canada’s Defence Artificial
Intelligence
23|08 Çağlar Kurç, Enabling Technology of Future Warfare. Defense AI in Turkey
23|07 Lauren A. Kahn, Risky Incrementalism. Defense AI in the United States
22|06 Yvonne Hofstetter, Wie KI Innere Führung lernt. Wertbasierte Technik mit IEEE7000™-2021
22|05 Andrea Gilli, Mauro Gilli, and Ivan Zaccagnini, Exploring the Benefits of a New Force Enabler:
Defense AI in Italy
22|04 Kenneth Payne, Bright Prospects – Big Challenges. Defense AI in the United Kingdom
22|03 Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber, Armin Brandstetter, and Gary S. Schaal, Free Jazz on the
Battlefield. How GhostPlay’s AI Approach Enhances Air Defense
22|02 Peter Layton, Evolution not Revolution. Australia’s Defence AI Pathway
21|01 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, Joseph Verbovszky, Beware the Hype. What Military Conflicts in
Ukraine, Syria, Libya, and Nagorno-Karabakh (Don’t) Tell Us About the Future of War