Issue Brief
HAI Policy & Society
DigiChina

Beyond DeepSeek: Key Takeaways
After years of lagging behind, Chinese
China’s Diverse AI models — especially open-weight
LLMs — seem to have caught up
or even pulled ahead of their global
counterparts in advanced AI model
Open-Weight capabilities and adoption.
We profile and compare the
AI Ecosystem and
capabilities and distinct features of
four notable Chinese open-weight
language model families, highlighting
Its Policy Implications that China’s ecosystem of open-
weight LLMs is driven by a wide
range of actors who are prioritizing
the development of computationally
efficient models optimized for flexible
downstream deployment.
Caroline Meinhardt, Sabina Nong, Graham Webster,
Tatsunori Hashimoto, Christopher D. Manning
Diverse commercial strategies for
translating open-weight model
adoption into business success are
Introduction emerging, yet their long-term viability
remains uncertain.
In 2022, China’s AI developer community faced dual shocks from the
United States. In October, the U.S. government imposed unilateral export The Chinese government’s support of
open-weight model development —
controls on semiconductor manufacturing equipment and the most
while not the sole determinant of its
powerful chips for large language model (LLM) training. The following success — has played a substantial
month, OpenAI brought state-of-the-art LLM technology to broad public role, though there is no guarantee it
will continue.
attention with the launch of ChatGPT. Chinese commentators, noting the
government launched a comprehensive plan for AI development five years
earlier, asked why breakthroughs were not happening in China, and how The widespread global adoption of
Chinese open-weight models may
Chinese developers could compete with the United States.
reshape global technology access
and reliance patterns, and impact AI
As Chinese labs scrambled to develop and release their own models, open- governance, safety, and competition.
Policymakers should ground their policy
weight LLMs quickly took center stage. Initially, many labs built their models on
actions in a granular understanding of
top of Meta’s open-weight Llama model and its architecture. But China’s state real-world deployment.

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
of the art would not be reliant on U.S.-trained models
for long. A little more than two years after ChatGPT
Today, Chinese-made
took many in China by surprise, a Hangzhou-based
startup called DeepSeek released its R1 reasoning open-weight models are
model, demonstrating capability and efficiency that
unavoidable in the global
shocked global investors and caused the AI chip
leader Nvidia to suffer the biggest single-day loss competitive AI landscape.
of any company in U.S. stock market history. While
keen analysts had monitored DeepSeek’s early
development, and some of its methods were known
to AI scientists around the world, the broader U.S.
discourse did not see the lab’s success coming.
Now the strength of Chinese developers in open-
weight language models is more widely recognized.
DeepSeek has upgraded its models and promises
might consider going forward. We focus on language
further releases. Alibaba’s Qwen models, which were
models but note the strong performance of other kinds
in development long before DeepSeek’s breakout
of open-weight AI such as speech, visual, or video
moment, are widely used by developers around the
models, which some developers integrate with their
world. Another Chinese tech giant, Baidu, which had
leading language models.
been pursuing a closed-model strategy, has turned to
releasing the weights of some of its flagship models
openly. Today, Chinese-made open-weight models are
unavoidable in the global competitive AI landscape.
Free to Deploy and
This brief analyzes China’s diverse open-model Customize: Chinese
ecosystem, looking beyond DeepSeek. At a moment
Open-Weight Models Are
when Chinese models are increasingly being adopted
around the world, including in the United States, and
Diffusing Around the World
when policymakers are weighing measures to restrict
who can build at AI’s cutting edge, we pause to give
context to the technical and commercial realities of Developers of products and services with LLMs can
leading Chinese AI labs against a constantly evolving choose from dozens of models on which to build.
geopolitical backdrop. We then dive deeper into Numerous factors enter the equation, but near the top
the implications of Chinese open-weight model of the list — alongside performance on relevant tasks
diffusion for technological development and policy — is whether the model is “open” or “closed.”
interests in China, the United States, and the rest of
the world — implications that raise a series of policy Openness in the context of AI models can mean a lot
issues that policymakers, scholars, and AI developers of different things. Model release can be thought of on

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
a gradient ranging from models that are fully closed
(i.e., not available to anyone outside of the developer
Chinese models now appear to
organization) to those made publicly available for
download under a variety of licensing terms. Many be pulling ahead of their U.S.
have argued that sharing training data and pre- and
counterparts when it comes to
post-training code is necessary to achieve true “open-
source” AI, but this level of openness is uncommon.
their downstream reach, though
The “open” or “open-weight” models we discuss in this
brief refer to those whose weights — the parameters measuring model adoption is
within the model that determine its output in response
inherently hard.
to an input — are free to download, use, and modify.
This enables anyone to run the models autonomously
outside the bounds of the developer’s app or application
programming interface (API) and to adapt them for new
use cases. Developers from bedroom tinkerers to large
global firms are able to modify and deploy models while
maintaining ownership of their data environments.
For many applications, openness offers practical
advantages (e.g., reproducibility and efficiency in low- For example, in Alibaba’s Qwen
resource environments) that can outweigh marginal model family surpassed Llama to become the most
gains in raw performance. Thus, when DeepSeek R1 downloaded LLM family on Hugging Face (see Figure
and V3 were released, users found them appealing not 1). Between and , Chinese
because they were the best-performing models for open-model developers made up 17.1% of all Hugging
every purpose, but because they were free to use and Face downloads, slightly surpassing U.S. developers,
adapt, engineered for relatively low-cost deployment, who accounted for 15.8% of downloads. Since January
and good enough for many use cases. 2025, derivative model uploads based on open
models released by Alibaba and DeepSeek have been
Chinese open models now appear to be pulling ahead outpacing derivative models based on major U.S. and
of their U.S. counterparts when it comes to their European models (see Figure 2). And in September
downstream reach, though measuring model adoption 2025, Chinese fine-tuned or derivative models made up
is inherently hard. Because users can put open models 63% of all new fine-tuned or derivative models released
to work on any sufficiently resourced infrastructure, on Hugging Face (see Figure 3). Combined with
no central data source has the full picture of their anecdotal stories about adoption, these data points
diffusion. Available indicators include model download suggest a wide variety of contexts and geographies
counts and the number of derivative models published where Chinese models have been adopted.
on platforms hosting open models like Hugging Face
or GitHub, as well as usage statistics from cloud
inference services such as OpenRouter.

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
Figure 1: Cumulative downloads of major open-weight LLMs on Hugging Face ( – )
Source: Hugging Face via the ATOM Project
Llama Qwen Mistral DeepSeek
400M
350M
300M
250M
200M
150M
100M Figure 8.4: OpenRouter Completion Requests of Select Models Weeks After Release.
50M
8.3 Derivative Model Uploads
0M
Downstream dJeanv e'2l4oper cAopmr 'm24unitieJsu ol 'f2t4en formOc at 'r2o4und pJaarnt i'2c5ular opAepnr '-2w5eight Jmulo '2d5els, anOdc tt h'2e5ir
modifications and improvements often benefit the model’s initial developer and serve to further
entrench their offerings.
Figure 8.5 shows that as of , models derived from PRC developers’ base models that were
uploaded to Hugging Face now outnumber models derived from U.S. developers, driven primarily by
Figure 2: Monthly uploads of new fine-tuned or derivative models to Hugging Face, by base-model developer
gro(Swepthte imn bAelrib 2a0b2a4 a–n Sde pDteeempbSeere 2k0 2m5o) dels. Derivatives of Alibaba models now exceed those from Google,
Source: HuggingFace via the U.S. Center for AI Standards and Innovation
Meta, Microsoft, and OpenAI shared on Hugging Face combined.
Figure 8.5: Hugging Face Uploads of Derivative Models by Base-Model Developer.

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
Figure 3: Breakdown of new fine-tuned or derivative models published on Hugging Face, by region of the base
model ( — )
Source: Hugging Face via the ATOM Project
100%
75%
50%
25%
0%
Nov '23 Jan '24 Mar '24 May '24 Jul '24 Sep '24 Nov '24 Jan '25 Mar '25 May '25 Jul '25 Sep '25
United States EU China
The Technical Realities
of Chinese Open-Weight
We draw several conclusions from our review of these
four models and the broader open-weight model
Models
landscape in China.
After years of being seen as lagging behind in AI First, China’s open-model ecosystem is driven
model development, Chinese open-weight developers by a wide range of actors. While DeepSeek has
are catching up or, in some instances, overtaking their been attracting outsized attention since 2024 and is
U.S. counterparts in terms of model performance (see often seen as leading Chinese development of open,
). While a comprehensive mapping of China’s cutting-edge AI models, in reality the field is much
open-model ecosystem is beyond the scope of this deeper. More than a dozen Chinese organizations
brief, we profile and compare the capabilities and have developed and continue to develop and release
distinct features of four handpicked models on . powerful AI models openly. The four model families we
Selected to provide a curated yet insightful snapshot highlight, while among the most advanced and widely
of the ecosystem, these models represent a diverse adopted in this current moment, are only examples. In
range of model types, capabilities, and developers. a matter of months, the set of most advanced models
could easily change.

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
and Baidu on ChatBot Arena, but their performances
were so close that they are all listed as tied for first
More than a dozen Chinese
place, along with Anthropic’s top offering. If we look
organizations have developed and only at open models, 22 releases from five Chinese
labs bested the top-ranked open model from a U.S.
continue to develop and release
lab, OpenAI’s gpt-oss-120b, with only one other non-
Chinese open model developed by French company
powerful AI models openly.
Mistral featuring among the 25 top-scoring open
models (see Table 1).
In addition to the headline-grabbing startup DeepSeek
and the well-known large tech company Alibaba,
whose Qwen model family has become a household
name in global AI circles, there is a deep bench of
other Chinese developers pursuing open models.
These include rapidly growing startups, including
“tiger” AI unicorns (namely, Z.ai (formerly known
as Zhipu AI), Moonshot AI, MiniMax, Baichuan AI,
StepFun, and 01.AI); non-profit or university-based
research labs (e.g., the Beijing Academy of Artificial
Intelligence); and well-established large tech
companies (e.g., Tencent, Baidu, Huawei, ByteDance).
Second, Chinese open-weight models now perform
at near-state-of-the-art levels across major
benchmarks and leaderboards, spanning general
reasoning, coding, and tool use. On Chatbot Arena,
a prominent crowdsourced leaderboard where users
compare and rate outputs, not only do Chinese labs
produce the top open-weight models, but the best of
them barely trail the leading proprietary systems from
U.S. firms. As of December 4, 2025, top closed models
from Google DeepMind, xAI, and OpenAI edged out
the best from China’s Z.ai, Moonshot AI, Alibaba,

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
Table 1: Top-scoring open-weight models on ChatBot Arena
Source: OpenLM’s ChatBot Arena ranking, as of December 4, 2025
Rank Model Lab Country Elo Coding Vision AAII MMLU-
score* score score score Pro
score§
1 GLM-4.6 Z.ai China 1442 1458 56 83.5
1 Kimi-K2-Thinking Moonshot China 1438 1450 66 84.8
2 GLM-4.5 Z.ai China 1430 1448 54 83.5
2 Mistral Large 3 Mistral France 1429 1450 40 81
2 Qwen3-VL-235B-A22B-Instruct Alibaba China 1427 1457 1246 49 82.8
2 DeepSeek-R1-0528 DeepSeek China 1426 1436 57 84.9
2 DeepSeek-V3.2-Exp-Thinking DeepSeek China 1421 1438 58 85.1
2 LongCat-Flash-Chat Meituan China 1420 1460 49 82.7
2 Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct-2507 Alibaba China 1418 1457 49 82.8
2 DeepSeek-V3.2-Exp DeepSeek China 1418 1431 47 83.6
2 DeepSeek-V3.1 DeepSeek China 1418 1430 47 83.3
2 Qwen3-Next-80B-A3B-Instruct Alibaba China 1417 1456 57 82.4
2 DeepSeek-V3.1-Thinking DeepSeek China 1417 1437 58 85.1
2 Qwen3-235B-A22B-Think- Alibaba China 1416 1442 62 84.3
ing-2507
3 Qwen3-VL-235B-A22B-Thinking Alibaba China 1411 1432 1215 62 84.3
3 GLM-4.5-Air Z.ai China 1386 1410 47 81.5
3 Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 Alibaba China 1382 1425 44 77.7
3 Kimi-K2-0905-Preview Moonshot China 1382 1403 49 82.4
3 Qwen-VL-Max-2025-08-13 Alibaba China 1381 1440 1213
3 Kimi-K2-0711-Preview Moonshot China 1380 1402 47 82.4
3 DeepSeek-V3-0324 DeepSeek China 1377 1391 42 81.9
3 DeepSeek-R1 DeepSeek China 1373 1382 48 84.4
3 Qwen3-235B-A22B Alibaba China 1369 1394 46 82.8
3 gpt-oss-120b OpenAI US 1368 1398 59 80.8
3 Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-In- Alibaba China 1358 1406 43 78.8
struct
* Overarching score that determines a model’s ChatBot Arena ranking. It is based on an Elo rating system that is computed using 5M+
crowdsourced votes.
 Score from the Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index, which incorporates the results of 10 model evaluations.
§ Score from the enhanced version of the MMLU benchmark for language understanding.

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
The ChatBot Arena scores in Table 1 also demonstrate
that each model has distinct strengths: Alibaba’s
Benchmark performance should
Qwen3 series boasts particularly strong multimodal
and multilingual performance; DeepSeek’s R1 models [...] not be viewed as a definitive
excel in step-by-step reasoning; Moonshot AI’s Kimi
measurement of capability, yet it is
K2 models specialize in coding and tool use; and
Z.ai’s GLM-4.5 models integrate these capabilities
still a helpful tool when comparing
through multi-expert training to achieve balanced and
generalist capabilities. Chinese open-weight models to
their global counterparts.
However, it is important to note that leaderboards
such as Chatbot Arena are susceptible to leaderboard
gaming and other hidden dynamics that can distort
rankings. Moreover, the benchmark results used
for model comparison often rely on self-reported
performance by the developers and should therefore
be interpreted with caution. For example, the
Center for AI Standards and Innovation (CAISI) —
the U.S. government’s primary entity for AI testing
and evaluation — found that many leading models
perform differently under independent verification
than in their own reported results, though the degree
varies. More fundamentally, benchmarks vary widely
in quality, given their lack of standardization. They
often fail to measure exactly what they claim to
measure, and developers’ resulting interpretations
of model capabilities can be misleading. Benchmark
performance should therefore not be viewed as a
definitive measurement of capability, yet it is still a
helpful tool when comparing Chinese open-weight
models to their global counterparts. In particular,
indices that combine the results from many different
benchmarks, such as the Epoch Capabilities Index and
the Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index, can be helpful
for visualizing and comparing model performance
(see Figure 4 and Figure 5). Both of these show
Chinese models catching up with their U.S. and other
international counterparts.

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
Figure 4: AI model capabilities over time, by country and openness (2023 – 2025)
Source: EpochAI. Open-weight models (colored by country) vs. closed models (gray)

2023-07 2024-01 2024-07 2025-01 2025-07 2026-01
Release Date

erocS
xednI
seitilibapaC
IA
hcopE
China UAE UK/US
Country (Open Models)
France UK United States
Note: The Epoch Capabilities Index (ECI) combines the scores from 39 distinct AI benchmarks into one “general capability” scale.
Third, model architectures reveal that Chinese a particularly effective instantiation of a fine-grained,
AI developers are prioritizing the development of shared-experts architecture. Meanwhile, Chinese
computationally efficient open-weight models. developers have employed other techniques to
Many Chinese developers are releasing open models optimize for the use of the chips available in China.
that adopt the Mixture of Experts (MoE) architecture.
MoE’s appeal lies in its efficiency, squeezing better Still, variance among Chinese open-weight model
performance out of more limited computing resources release strategies reflects underlying differences
(known as “compute”) compared with earlier state- in organizational scale and infrastructure capacity.
of-the-art methods. This greater efficiency makes it Smaller or more specialized developers such as
faster to both train and use models with less in light DeepSeek, Moonshot AI, and Z.ai operate under
of the compute constraints Chinese developers face tighter compute and resource constraints, and
due to U.S. export controls on advanced AI chips. choose to focus their efforts on optimization within
While MoE had already been employed in models a single flagship model (such as DeepSeek-R1 or
outside of China, such as Mistral’s Mixtral, DeepSeek’s Kimi-K2) that maintains deployment stability at
 and releases introduced scale. In contrast, well-resourced companies such as

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
Alibaba, like their Big Tech counterparts in the United optimized for specific application scenarios. One
States, are supported by extensive in-house cloud family might offer variants that are lightweight enough
ecosystems, and can sustain diversified model families to run on a smartphone that does not rely on the
across multiple sizes and modalities to serve varied cloud (e.g., those that have around 1B parameters)
downstream needs efficiently. alongside flagship MoE models with more powerful
capabilities but that require powerful computers to
Fourth, Chinese open-weight developers are run (235B or even 1T parameters). In addition, Qwen3,
shifting toward more permissive licensing terms Kimi K2, and GLM-4.5 all introduced dual-reasoning
and diverse model variants, increasing flexibility modes, enabling users to toggle between step-by-
for those who adopt their models. This shift is step reasoning and direct-response modes within or
best demonstrated by comparing the terms of across model variants. This flexibility allows adopters
current releases with earlier releases from the same to balance compute efficiency and task complexity
companies. For example, the license Alibaba attached according to their operational needs. Moreover,
to its smallest 3B and largest 72B variants of 2024’s companies including Alibaba and Z.ai have introduced
Qwen 2.5 limited its use to research applications, and powerful multimodal or vision-reasoning branches,
DeepSeek’s V3, released in , limited alongside text-based variants specialized for domains
redistribution and large-scale commercial use. In such as code and math, thereby broadening their
contrast, 2025’s Qwen3 and DeepSeek R1, are both functional reach and allowing for more adaptable
more capable and were released with more permissive downstream integration.
licenses (Apache 2.0 and MIT License), allowing broad
use, modification, and redistribution. Together, these design and release choices feed an
increasingly flexible deployment ecosystem, where
From the perspective of the researchers at these labs, model users can optimize for efficiency and functional
releasing models openly can be an important way specialization in addition to or instead of seeking out
to gain credibility in the global AI community. Many the best benchmark performance.
also argue that enabling wider access to models for
fine-tuning and adoption is crucial for maintaining
and growing a vibrant open-source community that
can foster continued AI innovation and progress.
The success of open models with highly permissive
licensing has also created competitive pressure for
developers to release openly. Even tech giant Baidu,
whose CEO had been among the strongest voices in
China to laud the advantages of proprietary models,
made a U-turn in , when it released its Ernie
4.5 models openly.
At the same time, developers — especially big tech
developers — are introducing diverse model variants

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
Table 2: Summarized overview of four prominent Chinese open-weight model families
Source: Authors’ research. Information current as of December 4, 2025
Model Family Qwen3 DeepSeek-R1 Kimi-K2 GLM-4.5
Broadest and most versatile Chinese open-weight family, Reasoning-first open-weight models with strong math and Coding- and agentic-focused open-weight models, Balanced, generalist open-weight models with strong
Overview with strong multilingual and multimodal support, and dual- problem-solving performance and smaller distilled models. notable for efficient inference and fast non-thinking performance across reasoning, coding, agentic, and visual
reasoning modes. outputs. tasks, with dual-reasoning modes.
Alibaba Cloud (阿里云) DeepSeek (深度求索) Moonshot AI (月之暗面) Z.ai (智谱)
Big Tech Startup Startup Startup
Developer
Cloud computing subsidiary of publicly traded Alibaba Private startup spun out from and funded by hedge fund High- Private startup funded in part by big tech (e.g., Alibaba, Private startup with IPO plans spun out from Tsinghua
Group, which has a current market cap of ~$380B. Flyer. Speculatively valued at ~$15B, though estimates range Tencent). Valued at ~$4B. University and funded by big tech (e.g., Alibaba, Tencent)
from ~$1–$150B. and state entities. Valued at ~$5.6B.
Spans eight MoE1 and dense2 language models, ranging in Includes 671B-parameter MoE reasoning language models Includes 1T-parameter MoE language models (32B active) Includes the Air (106B, 12B active) and Base (355B,
size from 0.6–235B parameters. The largest has two efficient (37B active) in two variants: R1-Zero for raw, emergent with up to ~256K-token context, offered in Base and 32B active) MoE language model variants with up to
Model MoE variants featuring different active parameter sizes (3B reasoning and R1 for refined step-by-step reasoning. Also Instruct variants. ~128K-token context, alongside the multimodal GLM-4.5V
Collection and 22B active), and includes task-specialized versions fine- includes distilled Qwen, Qwen3, and LLaMA models ranging for vision reasoning.
Details tuned for math, coding, multimodal reasoning, and ranking, in size from 1.5–70B parameters, all supporting context lengths
supporting context lengths up to ~128K tokens. up to ~128K tokens.
Qwen3 First Release: April 29, 2025 DeepSeek-R1 First Release: January 20, 2025 Kimi-K2 First Release: July 11, 2025 GLM-4.5 First Release: July 28, 2025
Notable lab releases: Notable lab releases: Notable lab releases: Notable lab releases:
Tongyi Qianwen DeepSeek-V2 Moonlight-A3B / Moonlight-16B-A3B GLM-4
(April 11, 2023) (May 6, 2024) (February 22, 2025) (June 5, 2024)
Release Qwen2 DeepSeek-V3 Kimi-Audio-7B CodeGeeX4
Timeline (June 7, 2024) (December 26, 2024) (April 25, 2025) ()
Qwen2.5 DeepSeek-V3-0324 Kimi-VL-A3B GLM-Edge
(September 19, 2024) (March 24, 2025) () (November 29, 2024)
Qwen3-Omni DeepSeek-V3.2 GLM-4.6
(September 22, 2025) (December 1, 2025) (September 30, 2025)
Open weights, architecture, code. Open weights, architecture, code. Open weights, architecture, code. Open weights, architecture, code.
Technical reports released publicly for Qwen3 (2 weeks after Technical report released publicly (2 days after launch). Technical report released publicly (2.5 weeks after launch), Technical report released publicly (1.5 weeks after launch)
launch) and Qwen3-Omni (day of launch) featuring detailed Additional, peer-reviewed report published later that includes including a dedicated section on safety evaluations. featuring detailed benchmark performance.
Model benchmark performance. a 12-page safety report.
Openness License: Apache 2.0 License: MIT License License: Modified MIT License License: MIT License
A frequently used, highly permissive license that includes The most permissive license, frequently used but does not Permissive license, but includes attribution requirements The most permissive license, frequently used but does not
patent grants.3 include patent grants. for large-scale commercial deployments4 that some argue include patent grants.
counter the spirit of open source.
Focus on multilingual & multimodal performance: Focus on math & reasoning performance: Focus on coding & agentic performance: Focus on generalist performance: High self-reported
High self-reported scores, particularly in general knowledge High self-reported benchmark performance on competition- High self-reported results in software engineering and scores across reasoning, coding, agentic, and visual
tests, multilingual support (119 languages), and many style math exams and complex reasoning tasks. tool-use tasks, while also showing robust math reasoning. benchmarks.
audiovisual tasks (in its Omni variant).
Reasoning-first design: Cost-efficient architecture: Dual-reasoning modes:
Cost-efficient architecture: Trained to prioritize problem-solving, with outputs that expose Stabilized 1T-parameter training, while activating only 32B Supports both “thinking” (deliberative step-by-step) and
Its MoE models achieve high performance while emphasizing chains-of-thought for transparency and distillation. parameters per token aiming for fast, low-cost inference. “direct” (fast answer) modes in one model.
Notable efficient inference (e.g., the flagship model has a total of 235B
Features and parameters but only 22B activated ones per token). Distillation scalability: Agentic capabilities: Reliable agentic capabilities:
Capabilities R1’s reasoning behavior was distilled into smaller, dense Strengthened for planning and tool use, making the Trained with synthetic tool-use and long-context data,
Dual reasoning modes: models (1.5B–70B parameters) built on Qwen 2.5 and Llama 3 model well-suited for software engineering and complex aiming for more dependable function-calling and multistep
Supports both “thinking” (deliberative step-by-step) and base architectures that imitate R1-level reasoning while being problem-solving. planning.
“direct” (fast answer) modes in one model. cheaper to run.
Dual reasoning modes: Multistage expert training:
Offers fast, cost-efficient outputs by skipping explicit Trained specialized expert models for reasoning, coding,
reasoning traces when they are unnecessary. and agentic tasks, then unified them through self-distillation
to create a balanced generalist model.
1 Mixture of Expert (MoE) models are machine learning models that are pretrained much faster with far less computing resources than their dense counterpart models. See 
2 Dense models are machine learning models that use all their parameters to process every input. They are easier to train and understand but computationally expensive. See 
3 In an open-weight AI license, granting patents refers to the permission the licensor gives users to use any patented technology that is included in the model or its components without fear of being sued for patent infringement.
4 The license defines large-scale commercial deployment as having more than 100M monthly active users or generating a revenue of more than $20M per month. See 

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
Commercial Ambitions and security and compliance needs of these stakeholders.
According to one report, at least 72
Open Releases
local government agencies across the country had
integrated localized versions of DeepSeek models
into their governance systems. Chinese state media
The rapid adoption of Chinese open-weight models
reported that these systems were deployed and fine-
that are still, if only marginally, outperformed by closed
tuned with local data administrations and technical
models shows that user uptake does not depend
partners, while maintaining a feedback loop with
solely on benchmarks. Factors including usage costs,
DeepSeek’s model team for model iterations.
the ability to deploy on existing infrastructure, and
performance in specific relevant workflows also appear
It still remains to be seen just how lucrative these
to drive user decisions. How open-weight model
open-model commercial strategies will be. For now,
adoption may translate to business success for model
like their Western counterparts, Chinese open-weight
developers remains uncertain, however, and different
AI developers still rely on the indirect monetization
firms have different opportunities and strategies. The
of their models. By openly releasing models that are
following examples illustrate this diversity.
widely adopted around the world, they hope to create
large and diverse user bases that can be directed to
As China’s leading cloud provider, Alibaba markets
other paid products and services built on top of these
the integration of its models into enterprise and
models. Ultimately, these varying corporate strategies
government systems. The company promotes Qwen
show that AI diffusion both within China and outward
as an “AI operating system,” a core intelligence layer it
from China is taking place in a variety of ways and is
says can underpin a suite of business solutions, from
not dominated by a single firm or business model.
content generation and recommendation to enterprise
assistants. According to marketing materials, Alibaba
promises to adapt open-weight models into modular
components in an enterprise computing environment,
citing organizations such as HP and AstraZeneca as
The Chinese Government’s
their clients. Government adoption of Qwen models,
such as the recent decision by Singapore’s national AI Role in Open-Weight AI
program to build its flagship LLM on Qwen3, may also
Development
drive commercial traffic from across Southeast Asia to
Alibaba’s cloud platform.
Beyond the personal open-source inclinations of
DeepSeek and Z.ai, on the other hand, do not have
some prominent AI developers and commercial
their own cloud or large-scale compute infrastructure
interests, there are also political drivers behind
and appear to be pursuing collaborative deployment
Chinese developers’ prioritization of open-weight
strategies for clients operating across different cloud
model releases. The Chinese government has shown
and compute providers. For example, DeepSeek has
longstanding top-down support for open technology
reportedly provided on-premises deployments for
development, framing “open source” as crucial to
Chinese public sector clients, catering to the specific
both national innovation strategy and geopolitical

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
goals. Support for open-source AI can be traced at
least back to the government’s 2017 New Generation
The Chinese government frames
Artificial Intelligence Development Plan, which
championed “open source” and “open” collaboration its model of open collaboration
as a way to aggregate domestic strengths for national
in implicit but clear contrast to
advancement. The more specific goals are to unlock
the collective power of academia, industry, and U.S. export controls, supply chain
government and combine public data, infrastructure,
restrictions, and closed models.
and talent to support national development goals. The
language used to frame these goals is diverse and
often vague, but it signals support for open source
software and, now, models. For example, a recent
policy document that encourages AI adoption across
industries encouraged academic organizations —
which operate under state direction — to consider
open source contributions alongside other scholarly
performance metrics such as publications.
adoption of Chinese open-weight models using
Internationally, the Chinese government’s support Chinese-hosted infrastructure would also bring
of open-weight AI development is now part of its business opportunities and perhaps political influence.
self-portrayal as a global advocate for equitable and
inclusive technological development. The Ministry Although open source is a watchword of the
of Foreign Affairs’ Global AI Governance Initiative, Chinese government’s AI development initiatives,
announced in and the Global AI it is important to note that DeepSeek, once a low-
Governance Action Plan, released in , profile AI lab that spun out of a private hedge fund,
promote open-source AI and shared development appears to have achieved its success with limited
across borders, emphasizing global “equal rights — if any — direct state support. It was only after the
to develop and use AI.” The Chinese government company had attracted widespread attention in the
frames its model of open collaboration in implicit but AI community for its V3 release that it received major
clear contrast to U.S. export controls, supply chain political acknowledgment, with China’s no. 2 leader,
restrictions, and closed models, which it portrays as Premier Li Qiang, inviting DeepSeek founder Liang
barriers to the equitable distribution of the benefits of Wenfeng to join a high-level government symposium.
AI. This is part of China’s broad diplomatic approach. While AI companies have received various forms of
For example, Beijing has framed open-source model government support at the national and local level,
sharing and AI infrastructure support as tools for researchers have noted that support for open-weight
joint development and local AI development in the model development has primarily come in the form
context of the Forum on China–Africa Cooperation, of incentivizing an enabling environment rather than
a centerpiece of China’s South-South diplomacy. directly subsidizing open-weight AI developers.
Of course, for all the talk of openness, widespread However, some local governments are increasingly

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
providing tailored financial and policy support to Global access and dependencies: The wide
AI organizations and projects that are specifically availability of high-performing Chinese AI models
engaging with open-source communities. More opens new pathways for organizations and individuals
broadly, it is also worth noting that the Chinese in less computationally resourced parts of the world
government’s long-standing and targeted cultivation to access advanced AI, thereby shaping global AI
of top-notch engineering talent through education diffusion and cross-border technological reliance
policies and public AI research funding created a patterns. With model performance converging at the
deep, increasingly domestically educated AI talent frontier, AI adopters with limited resources to build
pool. This cohort has become the bedrock of Chinese advanced models themselves, especially in low- and
open-weight AI development while also being among middle-income countries, may prioritize affordable and
the leading forces in pushing global AI research. The dependable access to enable industrial upgrading and
state has also supported the build-out of computing other productivity gains. Chinese models that, at the
infrastructure that could be used for AI development. very least, are “good enough,” openly available under
highly permissive licenses, and competitive or superior
It is by no means guaranteed that the Chinese in terms of usage costs have certain advantages in
government will continue to support open-weight meeting this demand. The logic also applies in well-
AI model development. Government attention can resourced countries: U.S. companies, ranging from
be a double-edged sword, as evidenced by reports established large tech companies to some of the most
that DeepSeek has had some of its executives placed hyped AI startups, are widely adopting Chinese open-
under travel restrictions. The “crackdown” on Chinese weight models. The existence of open-weight Chinese
tech platforms that started in late 2020 shows that the models at the good-enough level may thus decrease
Chinese government is constantly trying to balance global actors’ reliance on U.S. companies providing
its desire to nurture an environment that enables models through APIs.
rapid innovation with its need to tightly control the
private tech sector and ensure ideological alignment. Open models do not necessarily mean users are
While there are no imminent signs of a policy shift, it free of dependency on the model maker. The
is possible that a major AI-related adverse event or history of Chinese IT infrastructure vendors such as
national security threat could cause the government Huawei and ZTE supplying connectivity and data-
to quickly constrain open-weight AI development, center projects in Global South markets gives them
especially amid policymakers’ growing concerns over experience offering technology solutions around the
the misuse risks of open models. world. Huawei, accordingly, has marketed DeepSeek
integration as part of its cloud offerings in countries
like South Africa and other parts of sub-Saharan Africa.
For those working toward “sovereign AI,” an open
Global Policy Implications
model provided through cloud services operated by
a foreign firm still poses concerns about long-term
China’s vibrant open-weight AI model ecosystem raises dependencies. The extent of these dependencies is
a variety of important policy questions. We highlight highly contingent on how many aspects of the tech
four areas that deserve particular attention below. stack (from the underlying hardware to the training

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
data and model architecture) are bundled together in AI safety: There is some evidence that Chinese
AI offerings. developers may be less focused than their U.S.
counterparts on the various risks under the rubric
AI governance: The rapid diffusion of Chinese open- of “AI safety.” An evaluation by CAISI, the U.S.
weight models around the world also raises concerns government’s AI testing center, found that DeepSeek
that adopting Chinese AI models could effectively models on average were 12 times more susceptible
spread Chinese political censorship or propaganda, to jailbreaking attacks than comparable U.S. models.
threaten data security, or open users to cybersecurity Other independent evaluations conducted by safety
risks. When Chinese developers produce models that researchers also demonstrate that DeepSeek’s
can legally be used in China, content restrictions and guardrails can easily be bypassed.
domestic standards and regulations (e.g., for model
registration) will shape their work — from collecting An in-depth evaluation of the security risks of open
and cleaning training data through model pre-training models is beyond the scope of this paper, as is a
and fine-tuning. Though various investigations have comprehensive review of the wide range of other
found that censorship guardrails can be removed fairly risks caused by the dual-use nature of open-weight
easily, and many adopters of open models, especially (and closed-weight) models. However, in the context
enterprise users, are not deterred by potential model of far-reaching global diffusion, it is important to note
censorship, the potential for Chinese state preferences that what happens — or does not happen — in China
to influence user experience around the world is real. regarding AI safety will not necessarily stay in China.
Policymakers and others who wish to understand
Although open-weight models by definition can risks or implement risk reduction measures cannot
be run outside of the creators’ infrastructure, in ignore and likely need to engage with Chinese labs
reality, many will use the apps, APIs, and integrated and regulators.
solutions offered by DeepSeek, Alibaba, and others.
This typically means user data is under the control Geopolitical competition and open-closed debates:
of these companies and may physically travel to Fears of Chinese AI “leadership” in AI remain front and
China, potentially exposing information to legal center in geopolitical competition discussions. China’s
or extralegal access by the Chinese government advances in open-weight AI model development
or corporate competitors. This risk is significantly are shaping how the United States approaches
mitigated by running the model locally, on a trusted open-weight AI development and AI competition
cloud provider, or via a trusted inference provider like more broadly. Until relatively recently, major U.S. AI
Hugging Face, but for end users relying on Chinese developers, from OpenAI to Google DeepMind, had
cloud or infrastructure providers, similar concerns prioritized releasing their most advanced language
remain. Finally, while there is no verified evidence of models as closed, proprietary models. Meanwhile,
deliberate backdoors for advanced AI systems, past the U.S. policy community had been focused on
cases involving Chinese technology, such as Hikvision debating the potential risks of openly released AI
equipment, will continue to fuel speculation that models. Yet following the global shock waves caused
Chinese developers could be brought into the service by the release of DeepSeek’s R1 model, U.S. policy
of the Chinese government in novel ways. thinking changed. Newly inaugurated President

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
Donald Trump referred to R1 as “a wake-up call” to
focus on AI competition, and his AI czar, David Sacks,
This calls for a continued effort
cited it as justification for pursuing a deregulatory
federal approach to AI development. Accordingly, to collect and share both
in , the White House released America’s
quantitative and qualitative data
AI Action Plan, which elevates open-weight models
as a strategic asset for U.S. innovation and security, about real-world deployments
while also emphasizing the need to strengthen export
of open-weight AI.
controls on foreign adversaries including China to
ensure the United States can “win” the “AI race.” The
following month, OpenAI — for the first time since
its open release of GPT-2 nearly six years prior —
released two open-weight models under the Apache
2.0 license. Several newer U.S. startups and academic
labs have since fully committed to open-weight AI
development.
It should be noted that some of these policy shifts
To understand policy implications in areas ranging
were already underway. Yet the DeepSeek moment
from data governance to economic competition
— and subsequent open-weight models released by
to national security, therefore, policymakers and
other Chinese AI labs — likely played a pivotal role in
researchers will need to move beyond the relatively
expanding the willingness to accept the risks related
basic data currently available from open-source
to open-weight model development to compete more
platforms such as Hugging Face and GitHub.
directly with China. It also helped foster an acute
Outcomes do not depend on downloads or derivative
recognition that leadership in AI now depends not only
model development alone; they rely on architecture
on proprietary systems but on the reach, adoption, and
and control of the hardware and software systems
normative influence of open-weight models worldwide.
that turn models into useful services. Moreover,
China’s current edge in open-weight AI adoption is
only a year old and may not last forever. This calls for a
continued effort to collect and share both quantitative
Conclusion
and qualitative data about real-world deployments of
open-weight AI. Such an interdisciplinary challenge
Each of the policy implications discussed above shares will at times require significant attention to technical
the mark of uncertainty. But questions about who is detail in various fields, as well as substantial industry
using which technologies, in what ways, with what and regional domain knowledge. As a first step,
architectures of independent control or reliance are researchers and citizens alike can make geopolitical
both answerable and urgent if policymakers, advocates, or industry narratives concrete and subject them to
and technologists are to make better choices. empirical scrutiny.

Issue Brief
Beyond DeepSeek: China’s Diverse
Open-Weight AI Ecosystem and
Its Policy Implications
Inevitably, some policy actions will be taken (or
foregone) in response to insufficient data and
uncertainty about future techno-social trends. The
evolving understanding of AI deployments and
effects calls for similarly evolving policy approaches.
Any policies designed to compete with China
or proactively spread U.S. alternatives should be
grounded in a maximally granular understanding of
how LLMs are actually being deployed and what local
needs and goals are driving AI adoption, and they
should maintain flexibility as the data and technology
evolve. Researchers will also need to look beyond
language models, as the implications will vary, for
example, in vision or code-assist models.
Finally, selective engagement with Chinese labs,
academics, and policymakers should not be avoided or
unnecessarily constrained, given the wide range of AI
governance and safety challenges Chinese actors face,
just as their U.S. and other global counterparts do. As
some have argued, focusing engagement with China
on nontechnical topics such as incident reporting
and risk management frameworks without leaking
sensitive technical insights is not only possible but
urgent. It is also worth considering that the very nature
of open-model releases enables better scrutiny of
models. There is space for academic collaboration with
Chinese counterparts to increase our understanding of
the risks of open-weight AI models and the efficacy of
various guardrails.

Stanford University’s Institute for Human-Centered
Caroline Meinhardt is a policy research
Artificial Intelligence (HAI) applies rigorous analysis
manager at the Stanford Institute for Human-
and research to pressing policy questions on artificial
Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI).
intelligence. A pillar of HAI is to inform policymakers,
industry leaders, and civil society by disseminating
scholarship to a wide audience. HAI is a nonpartisan
research institute, representing a range of voices. Sabina Nong is an AI governance researcher
and a research assistant at Stanford HAI.
The DigiChina Project, part of the Program on
Geopolitics, Technology, and Governance at
Stanford University’s Center for International
Graham Webster is a lecturer and research
Security and Cooperation, is a collaborative effort
scholar in the Program on Geopolitics,
to analyze Chinese technology policy through direct
Technology, and Governance at Stanford
engagement with primary sources, providing analysis,
University and editor-in-chief of the
context, translation, and expert opinion.
DigiChina Project.
The views expressed in this policy brief reflect the
views of the authors. For further information, please Tatsunori Hashimoto is an assistant professor
contact HAI-Policy@stanford.edu. of computer science at Stanford University and
a faculty affiliate at Stanford HAI.
Christopher D. Manning is a professor
of linguistics and of computer science at
Stanford University and an associate director
at Stanford HAI.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Kendra Schaefer, Daniel Zhang, Elena Cryst,
and participants of a closed-door roundtable on open-weight AI
models and regulation convened at Stanford University for their
valuable insights; and Irene Solaiman, Nathan Lambert, Florian
Brand, and the ATOM Project for sharing data and analysis.
Stanford HAI: 353 Jane Stanford Way, Stanford CA 94305-5008
T 650.725.4537 F 650.123.4567 E HAI-Policy@stanford.edu hai.stanford.edu