Industry Brief
An initiative of HAI Industry Programs & Partnerships
Sustainability
and AI

Industry Brief
Sustainability and AI
Introduction 3
Sustainability Activities on the Stanford Campus 6

Decarbonizing Energy Systems 7

Accelerating Sustainable Agriculture 11

Informing Environmental Policy 14

Managing the Built Environment 17

Engaging with our Environment through VR/AR 20
Industry Take 22
Philanthropy Take 24
Corporate Engagement 25
Appendix 28
AI Definitions 29
References 30
Author, Follow-up Requests,
and Acknowledgements 32

Industry Brief
Introduction
Our ability to prosper for generations to come depends before. As machine vision enables us to see our
on the condition of our biosphere, as human and world, we are able to detect problems, track them,
planetary health are intrinsically interconnected. and create targeted interventions. The knowledge
A sustainable world is one where we improve AI unlocks enables action, helping us measure and
the quality of our lives while protecting Earth’s achieve environmental, social, and governance (ESG)
ecosystems. However, we are still far from achieving goals. At the Stanford Institute for Human-Centered
sustainability and the challenges we face are Artificial Intelligence (HAI), we are focused on
significant. The world's population is projected to grow leveraging AI methods and solutions to improve the
from 8 billion in 2022 to 9.8 billion by 20501, increasing human condition, augment human capabilities, and
demand for energy, urban services, and animal protein. embed intelligence in our operations. In this brief, we
Access to resources changes drastically based on examine innovations by Stanford researchers that use
where in the world we are, with close to 193 million AI to shift our world from one that depletes resources
people acutely food insecure and in need of urgent to one that preserves them for the future. Since
assistance across 53 countries and territories2, while pursuing sustainability is a transdisciplinary challenge,
urban populations are projected to make up 68% of we view the role AI plays across disciplines, from
the world’s population by 20503. Extreme weather engineering to behavioral psychology.
events are occurring with unprecedented frequency
James Landay
and reshaping the world’s socioeconomic outlook.
Anand Rajaraman and Venky Harinarayan Professor,
We do, however, have the tools to build a sustainable School of Engineering, Professor of Computer
world. Recent developments in Artificial Intelligence Science, Stanford University; Vice-Director and
(AI) are helping us see issues that were hard to identify Faculty Director of Research, Stanford HAI
HAI’s mission is to advance AI research, education, policy and practice to improve
the human condition. To learn more about HAI, visit hai.stanford.edu
1 Future Population Growth, Our World in Data
2 Global Report on Food Crises, 2022, WFP
3 Urbanization, Our World in Data

Industry Brief
Scalable
Sustainability
Solutions
Pamela Matson, Sustainability challenges are highly complex. We need
Richard and solutions that can scale across borders. To achieve this,
Rhoda Goldman systems approaches and collaboration across disciplines
Professor of and sectors are essential. In pursuing sustainability, we
Environmental need to ask who participates and what policies, norms
and rules support or impede just and equitable well-being.
Studies and
AI technologies are helping us understand our complex
Senior Fellow
interdependent systems, accessing knowledge that was
at the Woods
previously invisible to the human eye. The promise of AI
Institute for the
to help us scale towards a sustainable future is becoming
Environment,
exponentially clearer.
Emerita

Satellite
Monitoring of
Development
AI-powered machine learning (ML) tools can help extract
Stefano Ermon
and assess important sustainability information and metrics
Associate
from satellite imagery—such as agricultural productivity,
Professor, urban population density, and rural economic activity, making
Department them an intriguing and valuable addition to the sustainable
of Computer development toolkit. Yet many questions remain. In particular,
Science, researchers need to better understand how well these models
Stanford can map satellite image inputs to sustainable development
University outcomes and what limits the models’ performance. Our paper
in Science, “Using Satellite Imagery to Understand and Promote
Sustainable Development,” outlines how researchers have used
ML models to estimate sustainable development outcomes,
assess methods for model training, examine the challenges
hindering models’ improvement, and consider models’ future
applications. We conclude by identifying current limitations
to these approaches and ways to respond. As the number of
non-military satellites in orbit continues to rapidly grow, we
continue to tailor and train our methods to the unprecedented
volumes of imagery in order to help measure and creatively use
existing and new sustainable development outcomes.

Industry Brief
Sustainability Activities
on the Stanford Campus
AI for Climate Change Bootcamp
Center for Ocean Solutions
Center for Sustainability Data Science
Center for Sustainable Development and Global Competitiveness
Doerr School of Sustainability
Environmental Change and Human Outcomes Lab
MineralX Initiative
Precourt Institute for Energy
Stanford Center for Earth Resources Forecasting
Stanford National Accelerator Laboratory
Stanford Urban Informatics Lab
StorageX Initiative
Sustainability and Artificial Intelligence Lab
The Natural Capital Project
The Regulation, Evaluation, and Governance Lab (RegLab)
TomKat Center for Sustainable Energy
Woods Institute for the Environment
Z-Energy

Industry Brief

Sustainability and AI
Decarbonizing Energy Systems
WHAT’S NEW?
Our world is in need of rapid decarbonization across all industries, and first and foremost,
in our energy systems. Stanford faculty are pioneering AI research in a range of fields
across this sector:
“To reach our net zero
Tracking Emissions
goals, we must create
Emissions from the consumption of traditional energy sources need to be monitored,
managed, and substantially reduced. thorough, complex plans.
This is challenging due to
• E lectricity: A real-time map tracking the United States' electricity emissions has been
introduced by Adjunct Professor Jacques de Chalendar using a physics-informed data the inherent uncertainty
reconciliation framework. This insight can inform policymakers, regulators, and large
and sequential nature of
consumers where to intervene to meet emissions goals. Interventions in this space
sustainability problems.
are essential as the world shifts to electrification. This work also shines a light on
environmental justice issues as high-emission-generating electricity does not benefit the For example, finding
communities most burdened from the air pollution it produces. minerals critical to our
• N atural Gas & Methane: Associate Professor Adam Brandt and professor Rob Jackson transition to clean energy
use infrared imagery and automated monitoring systems to track methane leaks
involves collecting data
from natural gas which fuels our electricity, enabling targeted interventions that can
through measurement
reduce such leaks by 80%. There is also work being done to track methane leaks from
all possible sources through METER-ML; a multi-sensor earth observation dataset campaigns that are
containing georeferenced images in the U.S. labeled for the presence or absence of six expensive and time-
methane source facilities.
consuming. In our research,
• R ig infrastructure: To further attribute energy emissions to sources on the ground, deep
we use intelligent agents
learning algorithms that leverage high-resolution aerial imagery have been applied to
to reduce uncertainty in
automatically detect oil and gas infrastructure worldwide.
mineral exploration by
optimizing the sequence
of measurements. The
results show a significant
improvement in predictions
and an increase in the
speed of discovery of
critical minerals.”
-Jef Caers, Professor
of Earth and Planetary
Science and Professor
(by courtesy) of
Geophysics,
Stanford University

Industry Brief

Sustainability and AI
Decarbonizing Energy Systems
Continued
Renewable Energy
To accelerate the adoption of wind and solar energy worldwide, Stanford researchers “We can't manage carbon
have developed models called DeepWind and DeepSolar. These models use satellite
if we can't measure it.
imagery to detect the location of wind turbines and solar panels, enabling grid
Decarbonization of
operators to integrate renewable energy sources into the grid. DeepSolar uses
high-accuracy machine learning models to predict solar adoption rates based on electricity generation
environmental and socioeconomic factors correlated to current deployment. To plan
and simultaneous
for fluctuation in available solar energy, Stanford has developed probabilistic models to
electrification of energy
forecast solar irradiance, thus optimizing solar energy utilization in the grid.
end use, including for
heating, cooling and
transportation, will have
big impacts on electricity
systems. Measuring
the carbon content
embodied in electricity
is increasingly important
and urgent to set goals
and monitor progress.
We have created
algorithms and software
to track energy and
associated emissions
and yield actionable
data and insights by
computing emissions
Material Design & Energy Storage
embodied in production,
Designing materials that can store and dispatch renewable energy where and when
trade and consumption
it is needed is key to creating carbon-neutral energy cycles. The Z-energy lab is using
machine learning-assisted, data-driven approaches to understand material systems for a in the US electricity
range of energy applications, including electrolysis for the production of hydrogen and sector.”
hydrogen peroxide. The Chueh lab by Associate Professor William Chueh is researching
-Jacques de Chalendar
how to optimize technologies such as batteries, fuel cells, electrolyzers, and novel
thermodynamic cycles. Using new high-resolution microscopy techniques, Chueh and Adjunct Professor,
his team analyzed atomic-scale images through AI to understand why batteries wear out, Energy Resources
with the ultimate aim of creating longer-lasting batteries. Increased demand in batteries
Engineering department,
and other clean energy infrastructure is boosting demand for critical minerals. Professor
Stanford University
Jef Caers is pioneering research using intelligent agents to extract Earth’s resources
more sustainably with a lower environmental footprint.

Industry Brief

Sustainability and AI
Decarbonizing Energy Systems
Continued
WHY DOES THIS Read more:
1 C limate Data for Action, Climate Watch Data
MATTER NOW?
2 F ossil Fuels, Environmental and Energy Study Institute
Energy use is the single biggest source of greenhouse gas (EESI)
emissions, contributing to 76% of the world’s emissions1. 3 A ccess to Energy, Our World in Data
We need to meet the challenge of providing power to our 4 S urging Weather-Related Power Outages and Surging
communities without polluting and warming the Earth. There Power Outages and Climate Change, Climate Central
is an energy revolution unfolding as we transition from coal, 5 C utting Methane Emissions Could Slow Global Warming
oil, and natural gas use to sustainable energy sources such as Rate by 30%, Environmental Defense Fund (EDF)
solar and wind. 6 T he Role of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions,
International Energy Agency (IEA)
However, fossil fuels still supply approximately 80% of the
world’s energy2. As we undergo this transition, it’s necessary
to recognize that different parts of the world have very
different energy landscapes. 13% of the world’s population has
no access to electricity and 40% has no access to clean fuels
for cooking3. It is necessary to create targeted solutions that
address equity and human health. For the portion of the world
with access to electricity, power outages due to weather
events have increased dramatically in the last 10 years. In
the United States, there has been a 78% increase in outages,
which are estimated to cost between 10 and 100 billion dollars
annually4. This is why it is essential to increase the resilience
of our grid.
Targeting solutions to address methane leaks specifically can
have an oversized impact on slowing warming. That’s because
the 1% of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions that come from
methane can heat the Earth more than the 99% from CO25.
As methane only lasts around 10 years in the atmosphere,
intervening today to eliminate methane leaks from natural gas
production would be one of the fastest ways to slow down
climate change.
The path toward clean energy requires the extraction of
critical minerals, such as lithium, cobalt, nickel, and copper.
The production of essential infrastructure, such as solar
panels, electric vehicles, and battery storage, requires more
minerals than traditional fossil fuel technologies6. This huge
spike in demand will change the landscape of global supply
chains.

Industry Brief

Sustainability and AI
Decarbonizing Energy Systems
Continued
EYE ON CAMPUS
• DeepSolar: A Machine Learning Framework to Efficiently • Correlative Image Learning of Chemo-Mechanics in
Construct a Solar Deployment Database in the United States Phase-Transforming Solids
• Short-Term Solar Irradiance Forecasting Using Calibrated • OGNet: Towards a Global Oil and Gas Infrastructure
Probabilistic Models Database Using Deep Learning on Remotely Sensed Imagery
• DeepWind: Weakly Supervised Localization of Wind • Tracking Emissions in the US Electricity System
Turbines in Satellite Imagery
• A Physics-Informed Data Reconciliation Framework for
• METER-ML: A Multi-Sensor Earth Observation Benchmark Real-Time Electricity and Emissions Tracking
for Automated Methane Source Mapping
• Chueh Lab
• Machine Vision for Natural Gas Methane Emissions
• Z-Energy Lab
Detection Using an Infrared Camera
• Intelligent Prospector v1.0: Geoscientific Model
Development and Prediction by Sequential Data Acquisition
Planning With Application to Mineral Exploration

Industry Brief

2 Sustainability and AI
Accelerating
Sustainable Agriculture
WHAT’S NEW?
Industrial agriculture has dominated food production in a way that is not sustainable, relying
on large monoculture farms that use chemical pesticides and fertilizers that damage our
soil, water, air, and climate. An alternative approach is one that enables farms of all sizes to
contribute to their local economies yet uses resources more efficiently, creates access to
“Nitrogen oxides are
healthy food for all, and prioritizes communities and soil health over short-term corporate
invisible to humans,
interests.
but new satellites
To achieve some of these goals, researchers at Stanford are developing AI algorithms that
have been able to map
use satellite imagery to:
• I dentify crop types, segment fields and understand and predict crop yield variation. them with incredibly
This information has traditionally been measured through low quality and low frequency high precision. Since
surveys.
we can also measure
• M easure soil moisture, plant moisture and plant health, thus optimizing water use.
crop production from
These measures have traditionally only been available through hardware sensors.
• M easure and correlate crop greenness and nitrogen oxides (NOx). The latter can directly space, this opened up
damage crop cells and indirectly affect growth by promoting ozone (O3) and aerosol the chance to rapidly
formation. Professor David Lobell and his team studied five major agricultural regions and
improve our knowledge
estimated that reducing NOx levels to the current fifth percentile would raise yields by
of how these gases
roughly 25% for certain regions and times of year.
These breakthroughs provide highly more cost-effective and scalable ways to manage crops affect agriculture in
and ensure efficiency in resource use like water. different regions. In
our recent Globally
Ubiquitous Negative
Effects of Nitrogen
Dioxide on Crop Growth
study, we reveal for the
first time how nitrogen
oxides—gases found
in car exhaust and
industrial emissions—
negatively affect crop
productivity.”
-David Lobell,
Earth System Science,
and Gloria and Richard
Kushel Director of the
Center on Food Security
and the Environment,
Stanford University

Industry Brief

2 Sustainability and AI
Accelerating
Sustainable Agriculture
Continued
To maintain a healthy supply of groundwater for drinking and agricultural practices,
strategies to treat water need to be developed. Professor Jef Caers uses intelligent
“Sustainable investment
agents to plan groundwater remediation strategies, optimizing the trade-off between
decisions take
information gathering and the performance of possible future scenarios. The results
yield much better groundwater remediation strategies than hand crafted heuristics and environmental, social,
optimization methods, hence enabling more sustainable management of this vital resource. and governance (ESG)
Livestock feeding operations contribute heavily to emissions and pollution. Stanford considerations into
is finding ways to tackle this issue by developing models that identify Concentrated account. As of today,
Animal Feeding Operations (CAFOs) and hold them accountable for regulation investment funds that use
violations - more on this in the 3rd section of this brief. These methods are expected to
ESG have more than $50
reduce regulatory violations and thereby lessen the impact of these feeding operations
trillion in capital. However,
on the health of the planet.
current ESG metrics lack
transparency and are
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW?
mostly about the internal
The food sector contributes over 20% of total GHG emissions, 60% of which comes
costs as well as impacts of
from meat, while the agri-food chain accounts for approximately 30% of the world’s
company operations. To
total energy demand1. Geopolitical and climatic events are impacting the food system’s
achieve societies’ goal of
resilience. It is estimated that 795 million people still live without an adequate food
supply2. By 2050, there will be 2 billion more people to feed3. Establishing sustainable ecological sustainability
food security for the future and ending hunger are primary goals in the United Nations’ and social justice, which is
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development4. The severity and number of people in crisis in the dream of stakeholder
2022 has increased3 due to persistent conflict, economic shocks, and weather extremes,
capitalism, new metrics of
which are predicted to worsen as the effects of climate change become more prevalent.
ESG must be developed
that involve consumers
in order to help them to
collaborate with ESG
goals, as well as external
ESG metrics that measure
the impact of companies
on the communities in
which they operate.”
-Alex Pentland, Visiting
Scholar, Stanford Digital
Economy Lab, Stanford
University, and Toshiba
Professor of Media,
Arts and Sciences,
Massachusetts Institute of
Technology

Industry Brief

2 Sustainability and AI
Accelerating
Sustainable Agriculture
Continued
Read more: EYE ON CAMPUS
1 “Energy-Smart” Food for People and Climate, FAO
• G lobally Ubiquitous Negative Effects of Nitrogen Dioxide on
2 The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2015, FAO
Crop Growth
3 The Water, Food, Energy and Climate Nexus: Challenges
• S atellite-Based Assessment of Yield Variation and Its
and an agenda for action
Determinants in Smallholder African Systems
4 Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
• D eep Gaussian Process for Crop Yield Prediction Based on
Development
Remote Sensing Data
Global Report on Food Crises, World Food Programme
• S emantic Segmentation of Crop Type in Africa: A Novel
Standards and Investments in Sustainable Agriculture, 2022, Dataset and Analysis of Deep Learning Methods
International Institute for Sustainable Development
• S atellite Imagery, AI and Efficiency in Agricultural Water Use
Sustainable Agriculture and Food Systems: Comparing
• A Sequential Decision-Making Framework With Uncertainty
Contrasting and Contested Versions, 2022, Chatham House
Quantification for Groundwater Management
The Rising Risk of a Global Food Crisis, 2022, McKinsey
• H igher Levels of No-Till Agriculture Associated With Lower
Sustainable Agriculture Market Intelligence Report, 2022, PM2.5 in the Corn Belt
GreenCape
• S atellites Reveal a Small Positive Yield Effect from
Conservation Tillage Across the US Corn Belt

Industry Brief

Sustainability and AI
Informing Environmental Policy
WHAT’S NEW?
Environmental monitoring is essential for enforcing regulations and creates a
new avenue for planning policy as it becomes evident where and what types of
interventions are needed. Advances in technology, such as deep learning neural
“Many of our
networks, have made it possible to train models to monitor our world using high
resolution satellite imagery and computer vision. For example, tracking methane environmental
emissions from all possible sources through METER-ML, as outlined in the 1st section institutions were built in
of this brief, can drive policy, as the efficacy of targeted interventions can now be
the 1970s. The mainstay
monitored and therefore enforced. Tracking emissions is also a pathway for policy
making in the field of AI itself. Peter Henderson has built a model that tracks emissions of environmental
of AI and suggests carbon reduction methods. monitoring has been
Partnering with agencies that can create and enforce environmental law is key to self-reporting by
creating lasting change. Researchers Dan Ho and Jenny Suckle are collaborating with
facilities or physical
the EPA to develop machine learning methods for environmental monitoring. Professor
Ho’s work detects Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations (CAFOs) and monitors inspections that might
Clean Water Act1 violations, such as dumping highly polluting manure into water occur once every few
sources, in near real-time. Another example is the identification of brick kilns, a highly
years. The sharp growth
polluting industry in Bangladesh. These are low-cost methods for governments and
agencies that have traditionally lacked the ability to locate and monitor distributed in satellite and aerial
polluters to enforce regulation. imagery, coupled with
Deep learning is also being used to understand the drivers of deforestation in powerful advances in
Indonesia to inform policy and conservation efforts, as well as understand the causes
computer vision, holds
of extreme weather events. We can thus visualize the potential impacts of different
the promise to leapfrog
management interventions to better plan for wildfire events and flooding mitigation.
over conventional
forms of environmental
monitoring.”
–Daniel E. Ho,
Benjamin Scott
and Luna M. Scott
Professor of Law at
Stanford Law School,
Professor of Political
Science, Senior
Fellow at the Stanford
Institute for Economic
Policy Research,
Associate Director of
the Stanford HAI, and
Director of RegLab

Industry Brief

Sustainability and AI
Informing Environmental Policy
Continued
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW?
“Enforcing environmental
To protect the Earth’s resources for generations to come, policy and regulations are
necessary to correct market failures that do not account for the preservation and regulations is notoriously
flourishing of essential ecosystem services. Methane emissions are heating the planet difficult. Regulatory
faster than CO22. As alluded to in the Sustainable Agriculture section of this brief, agencies often lack
CAFOs violating environmental protection policies has a substantial impact on pollution,
information on compliance
as they produce between 70% and 99% of the United States’ pigs, cows and chickens3.
and the ability to
The number of acres across the country burned by wildfires has quadrupled in the last
effectively punish or
four decades4.
sanction violators. In
It is necessary to develop policies that incentivize communities and institutions to fix
our recent scalable
these failures. It is also important to be able to enforce such policies cost effectively,
which has historically been difficult both within countries and across international deep learning study to
borders. Machine vision can help us achieve both these goals. Our work is already identify brick kilns and aid
helping agencies like the EPA, which has relied on self-reporting in the past, create regulatory capacity, we
accountability and protect the natural resources we depend on.
demonstrate an accurate,
Read more: scalable machine-
learning approach for
1 Clean Water Act
identifying brick kilns, a
2 Methane: A crucial opportunity in the climate fight, EDF
highly polluting informal
3 What is a CAFO?, Food Industry industry in Bangladesh,
4 U.S. Fires Quadrupled in Size, Tripled in Frequency in 20 Years, Eos in satellite imagery. Our
approach identifies kilns
with 94.2% accuracy
and 88.7% precision and
extracts the precise GPS
coordinates of every brick
kiln across Bangladesh.
This solution offers a low-
cost, replicable method
for regulatory agencies to
generate information on
key pollution sources.”
–Marshall Burke,
Associate Professor, Doerr
School of Sustainability,
and Deputy Director,
Center on Food Security
and the Environment

Industry Brief

Sustainability and AI
Informing Environmental Policy
Continued
EYE ON CAMPUS
• D eep Learning With Satellite Imagery to Enhance Environmental Enforcement
• D etecting Environmental Violations With Satellite Imagery in Near Real Time
• S calable Deep Learning to Identify Brick Kilns and Aid Regulatory Capacity
• F orestNet: Classifying Drivers of Deforestation in Indonesia Using Deep Learning on Satellite Imagery
• M ETER-ML: A Multi-Sensor Earth Observation Benchmark for Automated Methane Source Mapping
• T he Changing Risk and Burden of Wildfire in the United States
• O n the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models (Environment Section 5.3)
• A I’s Carbon Footprint Problem
• U sing Machine Learning to Analyze Physical Causes of Climate Change: A Case Study of U.S. Midwest Extreme Precipitation

Industry Brief

Sustainability and AI
Managing the Built Environment
WHAT’S NEW?
Stanford researchers are using machine learning to make infrastructure more adaptive
and efficient. By training models with enough data, we can understand the unique
demand patterns of individual buildings, which allows us to reduce and optimize
their infrastructure use. This work is applicable to any entity managing multiple “People in many countries
building operations, including corporate campuses. Our urban informatics lab at spend around 90% of their
Stanford focuses on addressing sustainability challenges in the built environment, time in buildings, making the
from individual buildings to entire cities. A framework that combines a network-based physical and digital design
machine learning algorithm with engineering simulation can more accurately predict of these environments a
how buildings consume energy at different scales and times. This approach can help powerful means of studying,
us design more sustainable cities.
shaping, and supporting human
In order to promote urban sustainability and walkability, Stanford scientists are using a behavior and wellbeing. To best
deep learning-based computer vision model to identify changes in marked crosswalks support human well-being, it
around more than 4,000 US transit stations over a 14-year period. This approach could is imperative that we increase
potentially be used in the future to automatically detect large-scale infrastructure understanding of how attributes
changes at a reasonable cost.
like connection to nature
In addition to optimizing design and energy use, researchers at Stanford are using and access to natural light,
data-driven methods to integrate nature into the built environment by understanding affect well-being outcomes
how nature is tied to human health. such as stress, creativity,
cognitive functioning and
pro-environmental behavior.
In collaboration with James
Landay (Professor of Computer
Science, Stanford University),
our team is developing an
extensible platform that
integrates information from
environmental sensors, personal
devices, and experience
sampling interfaces. We are
deploying this platform in the
wild to capture ecologically
valid data about the status of
workers and the spaces they
occupy both in office and home
workspaces.”
–Sarah Billington, UPS
Foundation Professor,
Civil and Environmental
Engineering, and Senior
Fellow, Stanford Woods
Institute for the Environment

Industry Brief

Sustainability and AI
Managing the Built Environment
Continued
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW?
Buildings contribute approximately 40% of global emissions1. Of this, about 27% “Enhancing the energy
are related to building operations, while the remaining 13% come from embodied efficiency of commercial
emissions from the construction of buildings1. Reducing these emissions is crucial buildings is a challenging
for mitigating climate change and creating a more sustainable future. Buildings are problem, due to the fact that
growing older, with the average age of structures in cities like New York being over centralized building systems—
50 years2. Thus, in addition to prioritizing new energy-efficient design, we need to such as heating, ventilation
focus on existing, older buildings. Buildings tend to get disconnected from power to and air conditioning (HVAC), or
preserve essential operations during extreme weather events, hence incorporating lighting—must be synthesized
resilience in building operations by adjusting power use is becoming increasingly more and integrated with individual
important. As explained in the Decarbonizing Energy Systems section of this brief, inhabitant behavior and energy
power outages are estimated to cost between 10 and 100 billion dollars annually3. The consumption patterns. This
insight we are gaining predicting urban-scale energy consumption at hourly, daily, and motivates our research to
monthly intervals can inform decision-making of a wide range of urban sustainability design, analyze, and test a
stakeholders, such as architects, engineers, and policymakers. cyber-physical and human-in-
the-loop enabled control system
Beyond energy impacts, the design and operations of the built environment dramatically
that can drive sustained energy
impact human physical and mental health. Health implications vary dramatically
savings and enable dynamic
depending on one’s postcode with, for example, urban heat islands becoming more
interactions between occupants
prevalent due to climate change4. Therefore, we need to prioritize insulation and
in commercial buildings. It
incorporate more greenery in our built environment. Recent research shows the impact
brings together expertise in
of nature on our mental health5. As we spend more time indoors and in urban areas,
computational building science,
designing buildings and cities that include elements of nature can be transformational to
network theory, data science,
human well-being.
and control systems to integrate
physical building information
and inhabitants with cyber
(building-human) interaction
models to enable intelligent
control of commercial building
systems. We aim to achieve
this via an integrated cyber-
physical system (CPS),
called Building Information,
Inhabitant, Interaction,
Intelligent Integrated Modeling
(BI5M), aimed at reducing
energy usage and enhancing
collaboration in buildings.”
–Rishee Jain, Assistant
Professor of Civil &
Environmental Engineering and
Director of the Stanford Urban
Informatics Lab (UIL)

Industry Brief

Sustainability and AI
Managing the Built Environment
Continued
Read more:
1 Buildings – Analysis, International Energy Agency
2 Average Age of Infrastructure, Statista
3 Surging Weather-Related Power Outages and
Surging Power Outages and Climate Change,
Climate Central
4 Heat Islands and Equity, EPA
5 Building nature into cities for better mental health,
Stanford News
EYE ON CAMPUS
• M arked Crosswalks in US Transit-
Oriented Station Areas, 2007–2020:
A Computer Vision Approach Using
Street View Imagery
• U nlocking Demand Response in
Commercial Buildings: Empirical
Response of Commercial Buildings to
Daily Cooling Set Point Adjustments
• D ata-driven Urban Energy Simulation
HAI
(DUE-S): A framework for integrating
RESEARCH engineering simulation and machine
learning methods in a multi-scale
urban energy modeling workflow -
ScienceDirect
• P hysical workplaces and human
well-being: A mixed-methods study
to quantify the effects of materials,
windows, and representation on
biobehavioral outcomes

Industry Brief

5 Sustainability and AI
Engaging with our
Environment through VR/AR
WHAT’S NEW?
Along with traditional metrics and methods to assess sustainability, many industries
are examining the future of their businesses and how they can continue to meet “VR experiences can help
client needs while improving the sustainability of their methods using emerging people understand climate
technologies such as the metaverse, Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR) science. First, VR tools
and Web 3.0. This includes designing cheaper what-if scenarios to span more can mark the progression
potential situations. Several industries, including design, are considering VR as a
of ecological systems
solution to some of these issues. For example, VR for architecture can help promote
affected by climate change
sustainability by offering digital solutions. Through the use of a head-mounted
and increase participant
display (HMD), hand controllers, and stereoscopic sound, immersive virtual
interest, concern, or
reality (IVR) technologies provide a vivid first-person experience in a 3D virtual
knowledge about the issue.
environment augmented with multisensory feedback. IVR allows users to perceive
Climate change research
with multiple senses as if they were in the real world (so-called psychological
presence). in VR can also expose
users to new experiences
Many IVR research projects investigate how virtual experiences could improve
that would otherwise be
climate change engagement. Research on the impact of immersive virtual
impossible (e.g., people
environments for environmental literacy is still in its infancy. Being environmentally
literate requires knowledge of earth science along with the intention and motivation cannot accelerate time to
to act. There is promising potential for these technologies to shift human behavior see climate change effects),
to being environmentally responsible with the aim of solving current environmental counterproductive (e.g.,
issues and preventing new ones. people should not burn
fossil fuels to demonstrate
heat being trapped in the
atmosphere), costly (e.g.,
traveling to an area affected
by climate change also
harms the environment),
or dangerous (e.g., wildfire
training in-person can risk
lives, whereas training in
VR does not) in the physical
world. VHIL research
shows that VR can deliver
meaningful climate change
content and test how
people think, feel, and
respond to the issues.”
-Jeremy N. Bailenson,
Founding Director of
Stanford University’s
Virtual Human Interaction
Lab and Professor of
Communication

Industry Brief

5 Sustainability and AI
Engaging with our
Environment through VR/AR
Continued
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW? “Virtual Reality (VR) opens
the window to connect
One of the biggest barriers to climate and sustainability action is the distance, both
in time and space, between our actions and their consequences. This leads to a people's emotions to
psychological disconnect. As one of the fastest growing industries with over 32%
future climate scenarios
compounded annual growth rate1, AR/VR adoption can help bridge that distance.
through simulations that
These technologies increase access to information, knowledge, and nontraditional
experiences to users and researchers around the world. An important characteristic immerse the senses and
of digital technology is its multimodal ability to include texts, images, animations,
bring these scenarios
sound, and even haptic feedback to create rich and engaging experiences through
psychologically and
a steadily growing supply of interactive applications. By enabling users to visualize
something that would otherwise be invisible to them, digital technologies make it emotionally close. As
possible to engage with environmental issues in more specific and interactive ways.
emotions play an essential
role in climate change
Read more:
engagement, with VR, we
1 IDC Spending Guide Forecasts Strong Growth for Augmented and Virtual Reality
don't need to wait for the
climate consequences to
allow people to feel them,
EYE ON CAMPUS
and engage in mitigation
• V irtual Reality as a Promising Tool to Promote Climate Change Awareness
and adaptation behaviors.
• U sing Virtual Reality in Sea Level Rise Planning and Community Engagement—
Leveraging our research
An Overview
at VHIL on the impact
• T he Stanford Ocean Acidification Experience
of VR design on climate
• E xperiencing Nature: Embodying Animals in Immersive Virtual Environments
Increases Inclusion of Nature in Self and Involvement With Nature change behavior, artificial
• S hort- and Long-Term Effects of Embodied Experiences in Immersive Virtual intelligence (AI) can help
Environments on Environmental Locus of Control and Behavior understand it better and
• T he Impact of Vivid Messages on Reducing Energy Consumption Related to customize VR experiences
Hot Water Use
to make the experiences
• D o Students Learn Better with Immersive Virtual Reality Videos than
more personal, increasing
Conventional Videos? A Comparison of Media Effects with Middle School Girls
the user's connection to
the environment.”
-Anna C. Queiroz,
Postdoc researcher
at the Virtual Human
Interaction Lab,
Stanford University

Industry Brief
Industry Take
Industry plays a critical role in creating and
scaling novel applications of AI in sustainability.
It is, therefore, a goal and privilege of HAI to
convene stakeholders from industry in addition
to those in academia, government, and civil
society to address the technical and societal
challenges posed by AI in various sustainability
problems. Leading venture investors, positioned
at the frontlines of startup innovation in robotics,
can provide a unique perspective on the impact
and role of AI technologies in sustainability
assessment and management problems.

Industry Take
“Many of the most promising climate technology startups leverage a robust understanding
of natural and human systems, and AI is a critical enabler of such understanding. For
instance, AI-based approaches can unlock decarbonization in the built environment by
allowing building owners to optimize energy demand from HVAC and cooling systems,
develop robust plans to reduce operational and embedded carbon, and efficiently procure
distributed energy resources for their sites. AI can also enhance the ability to plan for
adaptation and resilience in the face of physical climate risks like floods and fires, by
analyzing ocean salinity data, Earth observation data, and published climate science at scale.
With AI, we can significantly reduce carbon emissions during the decisive decade while
planning for the changes that will result from a warming planet.”
–Emily Kirsch, Founder and Managing Partner, Powerhouse Ventures
“We recognize many applications for AI in accelerating the decoupling of economic growth
from pollution and species extinction. Among other examples, we’re already seeing AI enable
remarkable efficiency in optimizing industrial processes, supply chains, building operations,
averting energy waste, and commensurate carbon emissions. AI is augmenting biotech
and materials science to enable more sustainable production of food and novel materials.
Furthermore, AI is already enabling better decision-making regarding the physical risks of climate
change and enabling better preparation and ongoing risk reduction as society recognizes both
the imperative and the opportunity in creating a definitively sustainable economy.”
–Sierra Peterson, Founding Partner, Voyager
“Mitigating climate change is the most important work of our lifetime. To do so requires
transforming our physical economy. We will need solutions based in hardware, biology,
and chemical innovations to draw carbon out of the air, enable us to store intermittently
generated renewable power, and more. But we also need huge amounts of data, compute,
and intelligence to help us turbo-charge those efforts. Some of the most meaningful
opportunities for AI in climate are high-throughput discovery and screening of next-
generation, low-carbon products; data-driven rollout of decarbonization tools like renewable
energy; and real-time optimization of complex assets and systems, such as the grid.”
–Sam Smith-Eppsteiner, Partner at Innovation Endeavors
“The next decade is the most important for climate change. It is the turning point for us
retooling and rebooting the entire world's energy system. As the grid shifts from centralized,
predictable generation to distributed, unpredictable renewable energy and storage, and as
the demands on the grid massively increase given electrification of transportation and heating,
AI systems to manage and orchestrate this elaborate dance will become critical to humanity's
ability to decarbonize.”
–Greg Smithies, Partner & Co-Head of the Climate Technology Investment Team at Fifth Wall

Philanthropy Take
“Climate solutions and artificial intelligence are intrinsically linked. Predictive rebalancing
of microgrids, decision support for precision agriculture, and modeling complex data
streams to identify the highest impact decarbonization pathways all require deep
expertise in the physical world and access to transformative computational technologies.
This field of sustainability and AI, still in its infancy, could be responsible for humanity’s
successful future on planet Earth and requires our committed engagement as scientists,
policymakers, philanthropists, and entrepreneurs.”
–Vilas Dhar, President, Patrick J. McGovern Foundation, HAI Advisory Council
“AI enables the kind of rapid iteration and experimentation in the physical sciences that
has previously only been possible in computing. For key technologies like long duration
energy storage, low carbon materials and efficient transportation, progress depends on
breakthroughs in everything from biology to materials science. We need newly optimized
enzymes, better battery chemistries and more efficient membranes, and AI is accelerating
that exploration and discovery process.”
–Mike Schroepfer, Climate Tech Investor and Philanthropist

Industry Brief
CCCOOORRRPPPOOORRRAAATTTEEE
EEENNNGGGAAAGGGEEEMMMEEENNNTTT
Corporate
Engagement
Stanford HAI seeks corporate members who
will enable it to lead with the unparalleled
interdisciplinary breadth and excellence
of Stanford University, and a laser focus
on human-centered development and
deployment of AI technology. We invite
engagement from companies that share
our mission to advance AI research,
education, policy, and practice to
improve the human condition.

Industry Brief
CORPORATE
ENGAGEMENT
Are you prepared for
the next wave of change?
Things you should know.
Using AI for environmental applications could:
Contribute Create
$5.2 38.2
MILLION
TRILLION USD
to the global economy
net new jobs across
in 2030, a 4.4% increase
the global economy
relative to business as usual
Reduce worldwide GHG emissions by 4% in 2030,
an amount equivalent to
2.4 GT CO2E –
Source: How AI can enable a sustainable future Estimating the economic and emissions impact of AI adoption in agriculture, water, energy and transport.

Industry Brief
CORPORATE
ENGAGEMENT
Become a
corporate
member today.
50% of companies
are likely to miss the
window of opportunity.1
Let’s talk.
Learn more about the
Corporate Members Program
and the Stanford advantage.
Panos Madamopoulos,
Managing Director for Industry
Programs and Partnerships
1 Jacques Bughin, “Wait-and-See Could Be a Costly AI Strategy,”
MIT Sloan Management Review, June 15, 2018.

Industry Brief
Appendix

Artificial
Intelligence
Definitions
Intelligence might be defined as the ability to learn Deep Learning is the use of large multi-layer (artificial)
and perform a range of techniques to solve problems neural networks that compute with continuous (real number)
and achieve goals—techniques that are appropriate to representations, similar to the hierarchically organized neurons
the context in an uncertain, ever-varying world. A fully in human brains. It is successfully employed for all types of ML,
pre-programmed factory robot is flexible, accurate, and with better generalization from small data and better scaling
consistent, but not intelligent. to big data and compute budgets. A recent breakthrough is
the transformer, a neural net architecture which flexibly
Artificial Intelligence (AI), is a term coined in 1955 by incorporates context via an attention mechanism, allowing
John McCarthy, Stanford’s first faculty member in AI, who powerful and computationally efficient analysis and generation
defined it as “the science and engineering of making intelligent of sequences, such as words in a paragraph.
machines.” Much research has human program software
agents with the knowledge to behave in a particular way, like Foundation models are an emerging class of models, often
playing chess, but today, we emphasize agents that can learn, transformers trained by self-supervision on large-scale broad
just as human beings navigating our changing world. data, that can be easily adapted to perform a wide range
of downstream tasks. The best-known examples are large
Autonomous systems can independently plan and decide pretrained language models like GPT-3, but the term extends
sequences of steps to achieve a specified goal without being to models for all modalities of data and knowledge.
micromanaged. A hospital delivery robot must autonomously
navigate busy corridors to succeed in its task. In AI, autonomy An algorithm is a precise list of steps to take, such as a
doesn’t have the sense of being self-governing common in computer program. AI systems contain algorithms, but
politics or biology. typically just for a few parts like a learning or reward
calculation method. Much of their behavior emerges via
Machine Learning (ML) is the part of AI that studies how learning from data or experience, a fundamental shift in
computer systems can improve their perception, knowledge, system design that Stanford alumnus Andrej Karpathy
decisions, or actions based on experience or data. For this, dubbed Software 2.0.
ML draws from computer science, statistics, psychology,
neuroscience, economics, and control theory. Narrow AI is intelligent systems for particular tasks, e.g.,
speech or facial recognition. Human-level AI, or
In supervised learning, a computer learns to predict artificial general intelligence (AGI), seeks broadly
human-given labels, such as particular dog breeds based intelligent, context-aware machines. It is needed for effective,
on labeled dog pictures. Unsupervised learning does adaptable social chatbots or human-robot interaction.
not require labels, but sometimes adopts selfsupervised
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence is AI that seeks
learning, constructing its own prediction tasks such
to augment the abilities of, address the societal needs of, and
as trying to predict each successive word in a sentence.
draw inspiration from human beings. It researches and builds
Reinforcement learning enables autonomy by allowing
effective partners and tools for people, such as a robot helper
an agent to learn action sequences that optimize its total
and companion for the elderly.
rewards, such as winning games, without explicit examples of
Text by Professor Christopher Manning, v 1.2, 
good techniques.
Learn more at hai.stanford.edu 29

References Zhu, B., Lui, N., Irvin, J., Le, J., Tadwalkar, S., Wang, C.,
Ouyang, Z., Liu, F. Y., Ng, A. Y., & Jackson, R. B. (2022).
METER-ML: A Multi-Sensor Earth Observation Benchmark for
Sustainability and AI Automated Methane Source Mapping (arXiv:2207.11166). arXiv.

Accelerating Sustainable Agriculture
Behrer, A. P., & Lobell, D. (2022). Higher levels of no-till
Decarbonizing Energy Systems agriculture associated with lower PM2.5 in the Corn Belt.
Environmental Research Letters, 17(9), 094012.
de Chalendar, J. A., & Benson, S. M. (2021). A physics-informed 
data reconciliation framework for real-time electricity and
emissions tracking. Applied Energy, 304, 117761. Burke, M., & Lobell, D. B. (2017). Satellite-based assessment
 of yield variation and its determinants in smallholder African
systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(9),
de Chalendar, J. A., Taggart, J., & Benson, S. M. (2019). 2189–2194. 
Tracking emissions in the US electricity system. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(51), 25497–25502. Deines, J. M., Wang, S., & Lobell, D. B. (2019). Satellites reveal a
 small positive yield effect from conservation tillage across the
US Corn Belt. Environmental Research Letters, 14(12), 124038.
Deng, H. D., Zhao, H., Jin, N., Hughes, L., Savitzky, B. H., Ophus, 
C., Fraggedakis, D., Borbély, A., Yu, Y.-S., Lomeli, E. G., Yan, R.,
Liu, J., Shapiro, D. A., Cai, W., Bazant, M. Z., Minor, A. M., & Lobell, D. B., Di Tommaso, S., & Burney, J. A. (2022).
Chueh, W. C. (2022). Correlative image learning of chemo- Globally ubiquitous negative effects of nitrogen dioxide
mechanics in phase-transforming solids. Nature Materials, 21(5), on crop growth. Science Advances, 8(22), eabm9909.
Article 5. 
Mern, J., & Caers, J. (2022). Intelligent prospector v1.0: Rustowicz, R. M., Cheong, R., Wang, L., Ermon, S., Burke, M., &
Geoscientific model development and prediction by sequential Lobell, D. (n.d.). Semantic Segmentation of Crop Type in Africa: A
data acquisition planning with application to mineral exploration. Novel Dataset and Analysis of Deep Learning Methods. 8.
Geoscientific Model Development Discussions, 1–50.
 Wang, Y., Zechner, M., Mern, J. M., Kochenderfer, M. J., & Caers,
J. K. (2022). A sequential decision-making framework with
Sheng, H., Irvin, J., Munukutla, S., Zhang, S., Cross, C., Story, uncertainty quantification for groundwater management.
K., Rustowicz, R., Elsworth, C., Yang, Z., Omara, M., Gautam, R., Advances in Water Resources, 166, 104266.
Jackson, R. B., & Ng, A. Y. (2020). OGNet: Towards a Global Oil 
and Gas Infrastructure Database using Deep Learning on
Remotely Sensed Imagery (arXiv:2011.07227). arXiv. Hartmann, W.. Satellite Imagery, AI and Efficiency in
 Agricultural Water Use. Retrieved December 20, 2022, from

Wang, J., Tchapmi, L. P., Ravikumar, A. P., McGuire, M., Bell, C.
S., Zimmerle, D., Savarese, S., & Brandt, A. R. (2020). Machine You, J., Li, X., Low, M., Lobell, D., & Ermon, S. (2017).
vision for natural gas methane emissions detection using an infra- Deep Gaussian Process for Crop Yield Prediction Based on
red camera. Applied Energy, 257, 113998. Remote Sensing Data. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
apenergy.2019.113998 Artificial Intelligence, 31(1). 
Yu, J., Wang, Z., Majumdar, A., & Rajagopal, R. (2018).
DeepSolar: A Machine Learning Framework to Efficiently
Informing Environmental Policy
Construct a Solar Deployment Database in the United States.
Joule, 2(12), 2605–2617. 
Bommasani, R., Hudson, D. A., Adeli, E., Altman, R., Arora, S.,
Zelikman, E., Zhou, S., Irvin, J., Raterink, C., Sheng, H., Avati, A., von Arx, S., Bernstein, M. S., Bohg, J., Bosselut, A., Brunskill, E.,
Kelly, J., Rajagopal, R., Ng, A. Y., & Gagne, D. (2020). Short-Term Brynjolfsson, E., Buch, S., Card, D., Castellon, R., Chatterji, N.,
Solar Irradiance Forecasting Using Calibrated Probabilistic Models Chen, A., Creel, K., Davis, J. Q., Demszky, D., … Liang, P. (2022).
(arXiv:2010.04715). arXiv. On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models
(arXiv:2108.07258). arXiv. 
Zhou, S., Irvin, J., Wang, Z., Zhang, E., Aljubran, J., Deadrick,
W., Rajagopal, R., & Ng, A. (n.d.). DeepWind: Weakly Supervised
Localization of Wind Turbines in Satellite Imagery.

References Douglas, I. P., Murnane, E. L., Bencharit, L. Z., Altaf, B., Costa,
J. M. dos R., Yang, J., Ackerson, M., Srivastava, C., Cooper, M.,
Douglas, K., King, J., Paredes, P. E., Camp, N. P., Mauriello, M.
Sustainability and AI L., Ardoin, N. M., Markus, H. R., Landay, J. A., & Billington, S. L.
(2022). Physical workplaces and human well-being: A mixed-
methods study to quantify the effects of materials, windows, and
representation on biobehavioral outcomes. Building and Environ-
ment, 224, 109516. 
Li, M., Sheng, H., Irvin, J., Chung, H., Ying, A., Sun, T., Ng, A. Y., &
Burke, M., Driscoll, A., Heft-Neal, S., Xue, J., Burney, J., & Wara, Rodriguez, D. A. (2022). Marked crosswalks in US transit-
M. (2021). The changing risk and burden of wildfire in the United oriented station areas, 2007–2020: A computer vision approach
States. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(2), using street view imagery. Environment and Planning B:
e2011048118. Urban Analytics and City Science, 23998083221112156.

Chugg, B., Rothbacher, N., Feng, A., Long, X., & Ho, D. E. (2022).
Detecting Environmental Violations with Satellite Imagery in Nutkiewicz, A., Yang, Z., & Jain, R. K. (2018). Data-driven
Near Real Time: Land Application under the Clean Water Act. Urban Energy Simulation (DUE-S): A framework for integrating
Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on engineering simulation and machine learning methods in a
Information & Knowledge Management, 3052–3062. multi-scale urban energy modeling workflow. Applied Energy, 225,
 1176–1189. 
Davenport, F. V., & Diffenbaugh, N. S. (2021). Using Machine
Learning to Analyze Physical Causes of Climate Change:
Engaging with our
A Case Study of U.S. Midwest Extreme Precipitation.
Geophysical Research Letters, 48(15), e2021GL093787. Environment through VR/AR

Handan-Nader, C., & Ho, D. E. (2019). Deep learning to map Ahn, S. J. G., Bostick, J., Ogle, E., Nowak, K. L., McGillicuddy,
concentrated animal feeding operations. Nature Sustainability, K. T., & Bailenson, J. N. (2016). Experiencing Nature: Embodying
2(4), 298–306. Animals in Immersive Virtual Environments Increases Inclusion of
Nature in Self and Involvement With Nature: EMBODYING
Handan-Nader, C., Ho, D. E., & Liu, L. Y. (2021). Deep learning ANIMALS IN IMMERSIVE VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENTS.
with satellite imagery to enhance environmental enforcement. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 21(6), 399–419.
In Data Science Applied to Sustainability Analysis (pp. 205–228). 
Elsevier. 
Ahn, S. J. (Grace), Bailenson, J. N., & Park, D. (2014). Short-
Irvin, J., Sheng, H., Ramachandran, N., Johnson-Yu, S., Zhou, and long-term effects of embodied experiences in immersive vir-
S., Story, K., Rustowicz, R., Elsworth, C., Austin, K., & Ng, A. Y. tual environments on environmental locus of control and behavior.
(2020). ForestNet: Classifying Drivers of Deforestation in Indonesia Computers in Human Behavior, 39, 235–245.
using Deep Learning on Satellite Imagery (arXiv:2011.05479). arXiv. 

Bailey, J. O., Bailenson, J. N., Flora, J., Armel, K. C., Voelker, D., &
Lee, J., Brooks, N. R., Tajwar, F., Burke, M., Ermon, S., Lobell, D. Reeves, B. (2015). The Impact of Vivid Messages on Reducing Energy
B., Biswas, D., & Luby, S. P. (2021). Scalable deep learning Consumption Related to Hot Water Use. Environment and Behavior,
to identify brick kilns and aid regulatory capacity. Proceedings 47(5), 570–592. 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(17), e2018863118.
 Calil, J., Fauville, G., Queiroz, A. C. M., Leo, K. L., Mann, A. G. N.,
Wise-West, T., Salvatore, P., & Bailenson, J. N. (2021). Using Virtual
Zhu, B., Lui, N., Irvin, J., Le, J., Tadwalkar, S., Wang, C., Reality in Sea Level Rise Planning and Community Engagement—
Ouyang, Z., Liu, F. Y., Ng, A. Y., & Jackson, R. B. (2022). An Overview. Water, 13(9), Article 9. 
METER-ML: A Multi-Sensor Earth Observation Benchmark for w13091142
Automated Methane Source Mapping (arXiv:2207.11166). arXiv.
 Fauville, G., Queiroz, A. C. M., & Bailenson, J. N. (2020).
Virtual reality as a promising tool to promote climate change
awareness. In Technology and Health (pp. 91–108). Elsevier.
Managing the Built Environment 
Queiroz, A. C. M., Fauville, G., Herrera, F., Leme, M. I. D. S., &
de Chalendar, J. A., McMahon, C., Fuentes Valenzuela, L., Glynn,
Bailenson, J. N. (2022). Do Students Learn Better With Immersive
P. W., & Benson, S. M. (2023). Unlocking demand response in
Virtual Reality Videos Than Conventional Videos? A Comparison
commercial buildings: Empirical response of commercial buildings
of Media Effects With Middle School Girls. Technology, Mind, and
to daily cooling set point adjustments. Energy and Buildings, 278,
Behavior, 3(3).
112599. 

IInndduussttrryy BBrriieeff
Brief Author & Editor
Christina Baladis
Joint MS-MBA, Stanford Graduate School of Business,
and Emmett-Interdisciplinary Program in Environment
and Resources, Doerr School of Sustainability
Follow-up Requests
For research collaborations or questions about the technical content of this brief, please reach out to Ahmad Rushdi,
Senior Research Manager, Stanford HAI. For partnerships, please reach out to Panos Madamopoulos, Managing Director
for Industry Programs and Partnerships, Stanford HAI.
Acknowledgments
This brief was produced by the HAI Industry Programs & Partnerships team as one of its strategic initiatives. Research and
writing were led by Christina Baladis and Ahmad Rushdi in coordination with Marc Gough, Victoria Moore, and Panos
Madamopoulos. We are grateful for the generosity of the following people for providing their time, helpful suggestions,
and constructive feedback in the creation of this brief (names listed in no particular order): Jacques de Chalendar, Pamela
Matson, Jef Caers, Peter Henderson, Stefano Ermon, David Lobell, Daniel E. Ho, Marshall Burke, Sarah Billington, Rishee
Jain, Jeremy N. Bailenson, Anna C. Queiroz, Alex Pentland, Emily Kirsch, Sierra Peterson, Sam Smith-Eppsteiner, Greg
Smithies, Vilas Dhar and Mike Schroepfer. We would also like to thank the HAI staff team including Vanessa Parli, Jeanina
Casusi, Joe Hinman, Shana Lynch, Stacy Peña, and Michi Turner for their help preparing the publication.