Issue Brief
HAI Policy & Society
Stanford RegLab

Adverse Event Reporting Key Takeaways
Adverse event reporting
for AI: Developing the systems enable
policymakers, industry,
and downstream users to
Information Infrastructure learn about AI risks from
real-world use.
Government Needs to
These systems don’t
necessarily require
massive new spending
Learn and Act or agencies—they can
be developed iteratively,
scaled over time, and
supported through
strategic partnerships.
Lindsey A. Gailmard, Drew Spence, and Daniel E. Ho
Reporting allows both
Why Pre-Deployment Testing Alone regulators and industry
to respond proactively
Cannot Identify All AI Risks by surfacing problems
quickly, which promotes
a culture of safety.
FOR POLICYMAKERS TRYING TO PROACTIVELY ADDRESS AI RISKS, one of
the most persistent—and underappreciated—problems is that the most serious
Reporting means
risks of advanced AI systems often don’t emerge until after deployment. While
better policymaking by
much recent attention has focused on pre-deployment risk assessments—
providing policymakers
testing, evaluation, and red-teaming—these efforts cannot fully anticipate with evidence to fill
how models will behave in real-world use. Systems like GPT-4, Claude, regulatory gaps only
where they actually exist.
and DeepSeek continue to surprise even their developers with unexpected
capabilities and behaviors post-release. And the uncertainty surrounding model
capabilities and risks only grows as general-purpose models are deployed in
complex environments.

Issue Brief
Adverse Event Reporting for AI:
Developing the Information
Infrastructure Government
Needs to Learn and Act
Pre-deployment testing is important, but it is not
enough. If policymakers want to ensure that AI
Pre-deployment testing is
development serves the public interest, they need
mechanisms that allow government, industry, and important, but it is not enough.
society to learn about the technology as it evolves—
and to respond when things go wrong.
This is one lesson from earlier governance failures of
new and emerging digital technology. Social media
platforms were not required to monitor or report harms
systematically, and, as a result, policymakers were largely
blind to emerging risks until crises like mental health
Why Reporting Adverse
harms provoked reactive responses. AI models may very
well follow the same path unless we build capacity to Events Matters: Lessons
capture and responsibly react to new information.
from Past Experiences
Right now, most of the information about how
these systems perform post-deployment is held by Governments do not need to reinvent the wheel.
private companies, out of reach of policymakers From monitoring for vehicle safety hazards, aircraft
and the public. Closing that gap requires more near-misses, adverse vaccine reactions, medical
than asking companies to “do better” with device malfunctions, product defects, data breaches,
voluntary commitments—it requires building public and cybersecurity risks, incident reporting systems
infrastructure for learning. One central tool for this is have helped government, industry, and the public
adverse event reporting.1 identify and respond to risks before harms become
widespread. These systems work because they enable
Adverse event reporting systems are already used to policy to move from guesswork to evidence—and
surface harms, detrimental events, errors, or malfunctions they can be built iteratively, scaled with resources,
in other domains. Applied to AI, these systems would and supported by institutions that already possess the
provide a structured way to collect reports of model requisite expertise.
failures, misuse, or unexpected behavior from developers
and downstream users. By enabling iterative, evidence- An adverse event reporting system provides a more
based policymaking, adverse event reporting can help complete depiction of downstream risk, including
regulators move from guessing about potential risks to unanticipated risks. Instead of requiring regulators
understanding what is happening.2, 3 to specify risks in advance, regulators can define
reportable events in terms of damaging or dangerous
If policymakers are serious about regulating AI in a way model output or unanticipated problems to learn about
that is effective, adaptive, scalable, and sustainable, the full range of post-deployment risks—even those
building an adverse event reporting system should be that are unknown. In doing so, the system builds an
a top priority. Without it, government risks flying blind. independent evidence base over time.

Issue Brief
Adverse Event Reporting for AI:
Developing the Information
Infrastructure Government
Needs to Learn and Act
And, above all, this has worked in practice:
Better information doesn’t just help
• Cyber-incident reporting works at scale.
The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security policymakers—it helps the entire
Agency (CISA) has helped detect and fix over
AI ecosystem.
25 million vulnerabilities through its Continuous
Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) program.
Its vulnerability warning pilot has prevented
potentially trillions of dollars in damages
by identifying over 3 million vulnerabilities
across 7,600 organizations. Under the Cyber
Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure
Why Reporting Matters
Act (CIRCIA) of 2022, CISA will soon take this
further with mandatory reporting requirements for AI: Closing the
to systematically surface risks in real time,
Information Gap
improving the agency’s ability to proactively
warn businesses about critical vulnerabilities.
At present, the companies building general-purpose
• Medical device surveillance is effective—and AI systems have more information about the risks than
affordable. The Food and Drug Administration regulators do—which creates a problem. Companies
(FDA) has begun an active postmarket may acknowledge AI-related risks in financial filings,
surveillance system for medical devices, to but those summaries are often inaccurate, incomplete,
operate in tandem with both mandatory and or outdated. Worse, firms may fail to disclose material
voluntary adverse event reporting. By analyzing risks or engage in AI-washing by making misleading
health care data, the active surveillance system claims about AI uses and capabilities.
complements event reports to identify potential
associations between medical devices and • Coordinated responses require reliable
adverse health outcomes. The FDA estimates information. Better information doesn’t just
the active surveillance system will cost roughly help policymakers—it helps the entire AI
$8 million per year to establish and maintain. ecosystem. The National Highway Traffic Safety
For less than the cost of product defect recalls, Administration (NHTSA) already uses this
the FDA’s active surveillance system supports approach to monitor for autonomous vehicle
national monitoring for health and safety risks. safety risks: Developers report accidents daily
and regulators can issue recalls based on that
data. The same model can work for AI, creating
a shared safety infrastructure that benefits both
companies deploying AI and downstream users,
while encouraging a proactive, coordinated

Issue Brief
Adverse Event Reporting for AI:
Developing the Information
Infrastructure Government
Needs to Learn and Act
approach to risk management and cross-platform
vulnerabilities. In this way, an adverse event
Adverse event reporting systems
reporting system can help to create a “culture of
safety,” where stakeholders prioritize reporting work because they provide a
information in an effort to build safer systems—as
streamlined, structured way to
the aviation sector has successfully done.
learn from real-world events.
• Identifying necessary regulation requires an
informed understanding of risks. One of the
key unknowns in AI regulation is whether we
need new laws or whether existing authorities
are sufficient to address AI-specific risks.
Adverse event reports help answer that question.
Reporting systems help lawmakers tailor future
legislation to avoid both gaps and unnecessary
medical device malfunctions, cybersecurity incidents,
burdens. Many agencies are equipped to regulate
and pharmaceutical adverse reactions.4
based on the risks of AI without requiring new
regulatory or statutory authorities. For example,
Adverse event reporting systems work because they
laws already make malicious uses of technology
provide a streamlined, structured way to learn from
illegal, and public health, transportation safety,
real-world events. Instead of trying to predict every
and consumer safety agencies already possess
possible failure in advance—an exercise that is both
recall authority for devices or technology with
impossible and fails to capture the magnitude of the
adverse safety consequences. A reporting system
risks—these systems allow governments, developers,
can help agencies understand how to apply
and researchers to learn iteratively.
existing regulatory practices to govern AI.
1. Start narrow, but learn fast
Building a Scalable
The first principle for designing a scalable, effective
Adverse Event Reporting
adverse event reporting system for AI is to start narrow,
System for AI but learn fast. Trying to capture every possible AI risk
would overwhelm both agencies fielding reports and
mandated reporters. Instead, focusing mandatory
If policymakers want to regulate AI in a way that
reporting on high-consequence risks—like biosecurity
addresses this information asymmetry, the first step is
or public infrastructure threats—avoids overwhelming
clear: We need a system for reporting AI failures and
the system or degrading the quality of reports.
harms after these systems are deployed. Standing up
an adverse event reporting system does not require
massive resource commitments. The government Clear reporting criteria help reporters and the
has created similar systems before—to monitor for government. Specific, narrowly scoped reporting

Issue Brief
Adverse Event Reporting for AI:
Developing the Information
Infrastructure Government
Needs to Learn and Act
requirements make it easier for agencies to process
reports and avoid wasting investigatory resources on
The first principle for designing a
noise. As the system matures, reporting criteria should
be reassessed regularly to account for new sources of scalable, effective adverse event
risk. California’s data breach notification law provides
reporting system for AI is to start
an illustration of iterative reporting requirements—as
it has been amended several times to capture new
narrow, but learn fast.
sources of risk based on emerging trends. Recent
amendments to the law include mandatory reporting
for breaches of biometric data, for instance.
2. Use a hybrid system to improve detection
A hybrid reporting system may use mandatory capacity at low cost. When the Morris computer
reporting requirements on parts of the AI stack where worm hobbled internet-connected computers in 1988,
information gathering is most critical, while allowing unleashing the world’s first significant cyberattack, the
voluntary reporting to supplement risk assessments government did not build a new agency—it partnered
and surface rare risks. The FDA’s adverse event with Carnegie Mellon to establish the Computer
reporting system for medical devices is one example of Emergency Readiness Team Coordination Center
a hybrid approach: It collects reports from mandated (CERT/CC)—a government/academic partnership
reporters (manufacturers, importers, and device on cybersecurity incident response that continues
user facilities) and voluntary reporters (health care to play a key role in cybersecurity. CERT has been
professionals, patients, caregivers, and consumers). successful in leveraging academic expertise to help
Similarly, CISA administers a voluntary reporting the government more effectively, and cost-effectively,
system for cyber and ransomware incidents. Updates gain a better understanding of the cybersecurity threat
to this reporting system will follow a hybrid model, landscape.
accepting both voluntary and mandatory reports
through the web-based portal once the CIRCIA final The same approach may work for AI. Academic
rule takes effect. labs can help review reports, surface patterns, and
recommend potential remediations, all of which inform
Employing incentives like liability protections or policy responses. If properly leveraged, this model can
safe harbors for companies that report quickly and create a continuous feedback loop between the data
accurately can also increase compliance without and government responses.
requiring heavy-handed enforcement.
4. Use information sharing and data access to
3. Don’t build from scratch, build partnerships support analysis
Partnerships with universities and independent Collecting reports is only a starting point. The next
research centers are a proven way to amplify analytical step—integrating the reports into policy debates or

Issue Brief
Adverse Event Reporting for AI:
Developing the Information
Infrastructure Government
Needs to Learn and Act
Creating an adverse event reporting system for AI
need not mean building a cumbersome regulatory
Partnerships with universities and
apparatus. It means building systems that help
independent research centers are the government learn. Clear requirements, hybrid
reporting, partnerships to support analysis, and
a proven way to amplify analytical
information sharing combine to form an agile,
adaptable, and scalable framework with the capacity
capacity at low cost.
to evolve.
Policymakers do not need to fund moon shot programs
or establish new regulatory agencies. They can build a
reporting system that learns, adapts, and encourages
proactive risk mitigation. They can look to responsible
partners to supplement scarce bureaucratic resources.
And they can leverage expertise in government and
beyond to support and sustain research.
regulatory decisions—requires directing the reports to
actors with the expertise and capacity to investigate
them. Agencies should share information with relevant
domain experts across government, just as CISA has
developed joint ventures like the Joint Cyber Defense
Collaborative (JCDC) and Information Sharing and
Analysis Organizations (ISAOs) for emerging cyber
threats. Summarized, anonymized findings should be
published to inform both industry and the public. Open
data helps researchers discover risks regulators may
miss and shares the load of risk detection and analysis.
Conclusion
Adverse event reporting should play a central role in
addressing emerging risks of AI. Other sectors have
already demonstrated the utility of such schemes. It’s
how we learn about dangerous side effects of drugs.
It’s how we identify automated vehicle risks. It’s how
we tackle cyber vulnerabilities. And it’s a compelling,
adaptable, and flexible means for governments to
address AI in a way that is grounded in real evidence,
not speculation.

Issue Brief
Adverse Event Reporting for AI:
Developing the Information
Infrastructure Government
Needs to Learn and Act
Endnotes
1. See, e.g., Chris W. Johnson, Failure in Safety-Critical Systems: A Handbook of Incident and Accident Reporting. Glasgow, UK: University of
Glasgow Press (2003); Kevin Paeth, Daniel Atherton, Nikiforos Pittaras, Heather Frase, and Sean McGregor, “Lessons for Editors of AI Incidents
from the AI Incident Database,” ArXiv preprint (2024), 
2. The National Artificial Intelligence Advisory Committee (NAIAC). Recommendation: Improve Monitoring of Emerging Risks from AI through
Adverse Event Reporting. 2023.
3. Rishi Bommasani, Scott R. Singer, Ruth E. Appel, Sarah Cen, A. Feder Cooper, Elena Cryst, Lindsey A. Gailmard, Ian Klaus, Meredith M. Lee,
Inioluwa Debora Raji, Anka Reuel, Drew Spence, Alexander Wan, Angelina Wang, Daniel Zhang, Daniel E. Ho, Percy Liang, Dawn Song, Joseph
E. Gonzalez, Jonathan Zittrain, Jennifer Tour Chayes, Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar, Li Fei-Fei. “The California Report on Frontier AI Policy.” The
Joint California Policy Working Group on AI Frontier Models. June 17, 2025.
4. Neel Guha, Christie M. Lawrence, Lindsey A. Gailmard, Kit T. Rodolfa, Faiz Surani, Rishi Bommasani, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Mariano-
Florentino Cuéllar, Colleen Honigsberg, Percy Liang. “AI Regulation Has Its Own Alignment Problem: The Technical and Institutional Feasibility
of Disclosure, Registration, Licensing, and Auditing.” 2024. George Washington Law Review 92:1473.

Stanford University’s Institute on Human-Centered
Lindsey A. Gailmard is a postdoctoral scholar
Artificial Intelligence (HAI) applies rigorous analysis
at the Regulation, Evaluation, and Governance
and research to pressing policy questions on artificial
Lab (RegLab) at Stanford University.
intelligence. A pillar of HAI is to inform policymakers,
industry leaders, and civil society by disseminating
scholarship to a wide audience. HAI is a nonpartisan
Drew Spence is the policy program manager
research institute, representing a range of voices.
for the Stanford Institute for Human-
Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI).
Stanford University’s Regulation, Evaluation, and
Governance Lab (RegLab) partners with government
agencies to design and evaluate programs, policies,
Daniel E. Ho is the William Benjamin Scott
and technologies that modernize government.
and Luna M. Scott Professor of Law, Professor
of Political Science and Computer Science (by
The views expressed in this policy brief reflect the courtesy), Senior Fellow at HAI, Senior Fellow
views of the authors. For further information, please at the Institute for Economic Policy Research
contact HAI-Policy@stanford.edu. (SIEPR), and director at the RegLab.
Note: The authors thank Nancy King and Caroline Meinhardt for
providing feedback on this issue brief.
Stanford HAI: 353 Jane Stanford Way, Stanford CA 94305-5008
T 650.725.4537 F 650.123.4567 E HAI-Policy@stanford.edu hai.stanford.edu