Annual Report 2024
Stanford Institute
for Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence
In its fifth year, HAI continued to accelerate its efforts to bring together
thought leaders from academia, industry, government, and civil society
to shape the development and responsible deployment of AI.

Contents Letter
from the HAI Among our five-year achievements, we are especially proud to share these highlights:
03 Letter from the HAI Leadership Team
Leadership Team
04 Spotlight on HAI at Five: Celebrating 5 Years of Impact • Since 2019, HAI has awarded $45 million in funding • HAI envisioned and championed the CREATE AI Act
05 HAI Mission & Research Focus to faculty across all of Stanford’s seven schools, in (Creating Resources for Every American to Experiment
fields ranging from robotics and cognitive science with Artificial Intelligence Act) to establish a National
Five years ago, we began a journey
Research to healthcare and education. Of that, approximately AI Research Resource (NAIRR) that proposes to make
with a bold vision: to guide and $12 million in Seed Grant awards has attracted costly compute resources and government datasets
06 Grant Programs for AI Research
build AI that improves the human over $25 million in external funding, creating a widely available to academics, nonprofit researchers,
10 State of AI Reports
multiplier effect for many of our affiliated scholars. and start-ups so they can conduct education and
condition. HAI was the first public
11 Research Convenings
research for the public good. Through this process,
sector organization established to • Forecasting a need to study the economy and the
HAI has shaped global conversations about the need
Education drive innovation and engage policy, emerging foundation model space, HAI established
to provide resources to more colleges, universities,
two specialized research centers: the Stanford
industry, and civil society around and nonprofits in order to ensure more equitable
12 Student Affinity Groups
Digital Economy Lab (DEL), which explores AI’s
12 Graduate Fellows the mission of human-centered AI. access and opportunities for academia and the public
impact on the economy and nature of work; and
sector to shape the future of human-centered AI.
12 AI Literacy in K–12 Schools Today, HAI is firmly established
the Center for Research on Foundation Models
13 Human-Centered AI Courses
as a trailblazer in this space, (CRFM), which seeks to understand and shape • In the 2023–24 academic year, HAI made notable
13 Executive Education
shaping the ethical and inclusive the development of foundation models. progress in our policy engagement and thought
leadership efforts. We tailored our education
development of AI technologies.
Policy • With the seventh edition published in 2024, the annual
programs to meet the needs of distinct audiences,
We are thrilled to have exceeded AI Index Report has become the definitive resource
including undergraduates, executives, government
14 Policy Research
expectations, driving real-world for AI macro-trends and analysis, while the Foundation
officials, and social sector employees. We increased
16 Tech Ethics Policy Fellows
Model Transparency Index, introduced in October
impact through our many research, engagement with the broader AI community
16 Policy Engagement
2023, exposed an alarming lack of transparency
education, and policy programs. through our content and media relations efforts.
17 Policy Convenings
among the top 10 foundation model developers.
17 Education & Training for Policymakers
18 Society Looking ahead, we can see that in many ways, AI is
pushing the research boundaries of the university model.
Research Centers & Labs To ensure the next generation of this technology gets
created for the public good, academic scholars will
19 Stanford Digital Economy Lab Fei-Fei Li James Landay
need access to deeper resources. This is why HAI is
22 Center for Research on Foundation Models Sequoia Professor, Anand Rajaraman and Venky
advocating for a collaborative lab environment funded
Computer Science Harinarayan Professor, School
24 A dditional HAI Centers, Labs, Initiatives, Partners,
Department of Engineering, Professor by philanthropy and government support. We envision
& Collaborators of Computer Science
Denning Co-Director, a setting in which students have access to cutting-edge
Stanford HAI Denning Co-Director
training and the possibility to go deep into researching
and Faculty Director of
Industry Programs & Partnerships Research, Stanford HAI complex AI models for the benefit of humanity.
25 Industrial Affiliates Program
As we continue this exciting journey, we are grateful
25 Executive Education
for the support and partnership of our extended
26 Research Collaborations & Faculty Engagement John Etchemendy Russell Wald
HAI community. We look forward to building a
Patrick Suppes Family Executive Director,
future together that reflects our highest potential
Professor in the School of Stanford HAI
About HAI Humanities and Sciences as well as our shared values as a society.
Denning Co-Director,
27 People
Stanford HAI
34 Financial Data
36 Support for HAI
This annual report reflects the research, activities, and impact of Stanford HAI between and . LETTER FROM THE HAI LEADERSHIP TEAM ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 03

Spotlight HAI Mission
on HAI at Five: & Research Focus
HAI Timeline
Celebrating 5

Stanford HAI’s mission is to advance AI research,
Years of Impact education, policy, and practice to improve the human
Mar: HAI officially launches
condition. We believe AI should be guided by its human
Mar: HAI proposes a national AI research resource
impact, inspired by human intelligence, and designed
to drive American innovation in AI
In the five years since our founding in 2019, HAI Apr: HAI launches fellowship program for faculty to augment, not replace, people. Each of our research
has fostered an interdisciplinary community of initiatives connects to one of these three pillars:

people in research, industry, policy, and civil
society who have helped to carry forth our
vision for promoting human-centered uses of Feb: E conomist Erik Brynjolfsson joins HAI, launches
the Stanford Digital Economy Lab (S-DEL)
AI. In spring 2024, we invited this community
Aug: Hoffman Yee Grants launch
to join us in celebrating HAI’s fifth anniversary
Oct: H AI, with Stanford CS and the Center for Ethics Human Impact
with a conference focused on the theme, “HAI
in Society, launches Embedded EthiCS
at Five: Celebrating 5 Years of Impact.” Human Impact projects seek to develop
2021 a deeper understanding of how we can
Throughout the day, thought leaders and experts
address the issues society will confront
in the field covered a wide range of issues,
Jun: H AI pilots Ethics & Society Review as AI becomes commonplace.
including mapping the human brain, removing
for awarding grants
impediments to a robust AI innovative ecosystem,
Aug: HAI’s Center for Research on Foundation
CREDIT: CHRISTINE BAKER
accelerating science with AI, and implementing Models launches
AI in society at scale. A virtual poster session Aug: HAI creates graduate fellowship program
showcased the work of the HAI community Oct: H AI and Stanford scholars develop
Augment Human Capabilities
over the last five years, highlighting more than a blueprint for a NAIRR
20 projects that HAI has supported to date. Research efforts that augment human

capabilities have the potential to educate,
train, and support individuals in ways that
Aug: HAI launches policy boot camp
lead to progress in health care, education,
Sep: HAI launches AI startup series
sustainability, automation, and other domains.
Sep: HAI debuts student affinity groups
Dec: HAI starts Corporate Affiliate Program

Intelligence
CREDIT: CHRISTINE BAKER Jan: H AI partners with Wu Tsai Center to fund
Intelligence initiatives aim to develop
research in AI and neuroscience
AI that understands human language,
Mar: HAI develops Tech Ethics & Policy fellowships
emotions, inventions, behaviors, and
Jun: S tanford Medicine and HAI announce
interactions at multiple scales.
RAISE-Health
Jun: H AI leaders Fei-Fei Li and Rob Reich
meet with President Biden
Sep: H AI launches the AI Training Series CREDIT: CHRISTINE BAKER
for Federal Employees
Nov: H AI and The Asia Foundation announce
AI Perspectives from Asia
HAI MISSION & RESEARCH FOCUS ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 05

Grant Programs
From my perspective, the The funding fosters
Research
for AI Research HAI funding programs have interaction across campus,
been excellent and have which often leads to novel
had a positive impact on insights and viewpoints
In AY 2023–24, HAI distributed $10.3 million to faculty research and collaboration on a problem.”
HAI’s research team supports its
spanning all seven Stanford University Schools to work among affiliated faculty.”
Jeannette Bohg
mission through funding innovative
on projects aligned with the three research focus Computer Science
Steve Collins
and multidisciplinary research, areas of human impact, augment human capabilities, Mechanical Engineering
convening scholar workshops, and and intelligence. Many of these projects span
multiple departments in keeping with the institute’s
producing the annual AI Index.
HAI runs three types of grant programs with specific and disparate objectives:
commitment to support interdisciplinary AI research.
Each year, this funding generates a multiplier effect.
01. Hoffman-Yee Grants
At publication time, HAI grant recipients reported
The Hoffman-Yee Grants, generously supported by Reid Hoffman and Michelle
$10.8 million in follow-on funding in AY 2023–24.
Yee, fund “asteroid-shot” ideas to address significant scientific, technical, or
societal challenges. HAI believes the results of these projects will play a significant
role in defining future work in AI, from academia to industry, government, and
Grant Funding by School Seed
civil society. This year’s cohort of six interdisciplinary teams received $500,000
Hoffman-Yee
each to pursue their research projects, and four of the teams were selected
AIMI-HAI
for follow-on funding of $1 million to $2 million over the next two years.
Graduate School of Business Cloud
$2,500
$118,750
EVENT HIGHLIGHT
Graduate School of Education
$105,500
In , HAI hosted the
$314,286
Hoffman-Yee Research Symposium,
School of Engineering
which showcased six winning teams’
$112,500
progress toward realizing their
$741,023
$894,095 ambitious ideas. With more than 200
$2,751,785
MEDIA MENTIONS people joining in person and over
CREDIT: DAVID GONZALES
School of Humanities and Sciences
AI’s openness is being sharply debated 250 virtual participants, the event
$37,500
by technologists, policymakers showcased advances in areas such as:
$197,343
$248,986 SF Examiner, June 16, 2024
• Integrating technically better, socially
$1,751,785
responsible foundation models
What Gen Z Wants from
School of Sustainability
AI Policymakers • B ridging the gap between vision
$114,916
$10.38M Semafor Tech, June 7, 2024 and language models
• B uilding the next-generation,
US National Security Experts
School of Law Warn AI Giants Aren’t Doing brain-inspired computer chip
FY24 Total Grant Funding Distributed
$75,000 Enough to Protect Their Secrets • Improving immigration integration
$119,000
Wired, June 6, 2024
$357,142 • E ncoding societal values
expressed on social media
To solve AI’s energy crisis, ‘rethink
School of Medicine
the entire stack from electrons to • D eveloping a framework for
$1,214,285
algorithms,’ says Stanford prof children’s diabetes care CREDIT: DAVID GONZALES
$630,434
The Register, June 5, 2024
$440,358
$150,000
Meet 12 Asteroid Shots in AI
Machine Learning, December 11, 2023
06 | ANNUAL REPORT 2024 RESEARCH ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 07

This team is seeking to develop intertwined social 02. Seed Research Grants 03. Cloud Credit Grants
PROJECT HIGHLIGHT scientific, engineering, and policy answers to the
The HAI Seed Research Grants, supported Cloud Credit Grants support emerging research that
question, “How can we encode societal values
Tuning Our Algorithmic Amplifiers: Encoding
early on by Steve and Roberta Denning and requires advanced computational resources provided
Societal Values into Social Media Algorithms into these algorithms without sacrificing the core
for the past four years by Dalio Philanthropies, by the commercial cloud. In the last academic year, HAI
of what can make social media compelling?”
Michael Bernstein, Main PI Nathaniel Persily, Co-Pl are dedicated to supporting new, ambitious, distributed $1.8 million in cloud credits with generous
School of Engineering, School of Law, The researchers have created a first-in-class social and speculative ideas with the objective of gifts from Microsoft Azure and Google Cloud.
Computer Science Law School
media feed algorithm that translates social science getting initial results. Since the program’s start
Angele Christin, Co-Pl Jeanne Tsai, Co-Pl
research on anti-democratic attitudes into a concrete in 2018, approximately $12 million in awards has
School of Humanities and School of Humanities and
Sciences, Communication Sciences, Psychology formalization and minimizes it as part of a news feed- attracted over $25 million in external funding. PROJECT HIGHLIGHT
Jeffrey Hancock, Co-Pl Johan Ugander, Co-Pl ranking algorithm. In an online experiment, the team This outcome demonstrates the program’s Controllable Language Modeling
School of Humanities and School of Engineering, empirically demonstrated that this algorithm reduced promise in identifying high-reward, speculative, with Discrete Diffusion
Sciences, Communication Management Science
political animosity among nearly 2,000 U.S. partisans and early-stage research. Additionally, due to
and Engineering
Tatsunori Hashimoto, Co-Pl
without decreasing engagement or prompting perceived the breadth of proposals the institute receives With compute resources from Google Cloud Credits,
School of Engineering,
threats to freedom of speech. The team’s findings are from across campus, the seed grants provide a Stefano Ermon (Computer Science) and colleagues
Computer Science
described in an paper that was accepted into bellwether for what is to come in the field of AI. developed a novel approach to training discrete
the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Computer-Supported diffusion models called Score Entropy Discrete
Cooperative Work & Social Computing (CSCW). Diffusion. When the team tested the method on
standard language modeling tasks, it outperformed
GPT-2. This work won best paper at the International
PROJECT HIGHLIGHT Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) 2024.
Force-based Robot Learning
CREDIT: DAVID GONZALES
for Soft Tissue Manipulation
PROJECT HIGHLIGHT Allison Okamura, Main PI Carla Pugh, Co-Pl
School of Engineering, School of Medicine, Ethics & Society Review
EAE Scores: A Framework for Explainable,
Mechanical Engineering Surgery
Actionable, and Equitable Risk Scores
Jeannette Bohg, Co-Pl Before receiving funding, all research
for Healthcare Decision
Fast review to
School of Engineering, proposals submitted to HAI undergo
Carlos Ernesto Guestrin, Computer Science (courtesy) Computer Science enable accelerated
multiple rounds of rigorous faculty
Main PI David Maahs, Co-Pl research on new
review, including an Ethics and Society
School of Engineering, School of Medicine, This team is building a “Framework for Explainable, This project explored incorporating an awareness topics, overall
Computer Science Pediatrics Actionable, and Equitable Risk Scores for Healthcare Review (ESR). The ESR assesses potential
of force into robot-assisted surgery to augment process was
Carissa Carter, Co-Pl Priya Prahalad, Co-Pl Decisions” with a focus on diabetes care. negative impact on society before being
the skills of human surgeons. The team theorized excellent, the
School of Engineering, School of Medicine, greenlighted for funding.
d.school Pediatrics The scholars have made significant progress toward that a robot that can gently manipulate tissue addition of ethical
Emily Fox, Co-Pl Sherri Rose, Co-Pl three goals: sensor-enabled monitoring of patient state; during surgery could be incredibly valuable. The ESR conducted a mixed-methods review is very
School of Humanities and School of Medicine, algorithmic tools and technology for optimizing the researchers trained two robotic arms: one using evaluation, described in a Proceedings important.”
Sciences, Statistics, Computer Health Policy vision and motion data, and the other using vision, of the National Academy of Sciences
Science (courtesy) targeting of care resources and interventions depending Allison Okamura
David Scheinker, Co-Pl motion, and force data. The arm trained with (PNAS) paper, in which surveys and Mechanical Engineering
Ramesh Johari, Co-Pl on patient state; and AI methods that work in partnership
School of Engineering, S Pe c d ho ia o tr l i o c f s Medicine, with human clinicians, rather than supplanting them, force data was three times more successful and interviews of researchers found:
Management Science and applied significantly less force to the tissue.
Engineering, Electrical
to enable remote patient monitoring at scale. A key
100% 58%
Engineering (courtesy), outcome for this team over the past year was the
The results were presented at a leading medical
publication of “Smart Start: Designing Powerful Clinical
CREDIT: DAVID GONZALES robotics conference, and the team has submitted
Trials Using Pilot Study Data,” a three-step method for a proposal for an Exploratory/Developmental were willing to continue felt that it had influenced
using retrospective data from a pilot study to design submitting future projects the design of their
Grant (R21) from the National Institutes of Health.
to the ESR research project
an adaptive health intervention and a subsequent
The team received a donation of a new da Vinci
clinical trial, in the New England Journal of Medicine.
Research Kit from Intuitive Surgical Inc., which
The ESR process has been so successful
will be housed in the Stanford Robotics Center.
that it is now being used in other research
domains at Stanford, beyond HAI and AI.
RESEARCH ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 09

State of AI Reports Research Convenings
AI100
AI + Health 2023 Online Conference
The One Hundred Year Study of Artificial Intelligence During the past academic year, AI100 selected Mike
HAI co-organized the third annual AI + Health online Three conference tracks included:
(AI100) is a 100-year effort to study and anticipate Wooldridge, Professor of Computer Science, University
conference in collaboration with the Center for Artificial
• Advancing Clinical Excellence and Healthcare Delivery
how AI will affect every part of human life. The study of Oxford, to lead the Study Panel tasked with writing the
Intelligence in Medicine and Imaging (AIMI) and the
is administered by HAI and managed by a standing next report. The Standing Committee also added three • A dvancing Health AI Research & Development
Center for Continuing Medical Education (CME). The
committee of AI leaders from institutions around the new members: David Autor, Professor of Economics, event convened 1,000 experts and • N ew AI Methods to Accelerate Innovation in Healthcare
world, chaired by Vincent Conitzer at Carnegie Mellon Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Ryan Calo,
leaders from academia, industry, government, and clinical
University. AI100 releases reports every five years with Professor of Law, University of Washington; and Yejin Choi,
practice to explore critical and emerging issues related
the goal of documenting AI developments and their Professor of Computer Science, formerly at the University
to AI’s impact across the spectrum of healthcare.
ethical implications for society, as well as providing of Washington, joining Stanford University in 2025.
a through-line that marks the trajectory of the field.
MEDIA MENTIONS
A.I. Has a Measurement Problem
AI Index The New York Times, April 15, 2024 AI + Education Summit:
Advancing Human Learning
HAI and the AI Index Steering Committee released the An auspicious ‘World Quantum Day’
2024 AI Index report in . This seventh edition Politico, April 15, 2024 with AI Technologies
featured data from a broad range of academic, private,
Is there enough text to feed Building on the success of the first summit in 2023, HAI
and nonprofit organizations, along with more self-collected the AI beast? and the Stanford Accelerator for Learning hosted the
data and original analysis than any previous report. Semafor, April 16, 2024 second summit in . The event brought
together Stanford faculty and students, along with
This year’s launch included several high-profile events, AI-Related Regulations Rise in US
and Globally: Stanford Report leaders and participants from academia, industry,
such as a panel discussion at the Council on Foreign
Bloomberg Law, April 15, 2024 Civil society, PK–12 education, and government.
Relations, a briefing for U.S. congressional staffers, and
As AI technologies continue to evolve and new
a workshop for the Swedish AI Commission. The 2024 Responsible AI’s yardstick mess
opportunities and challenges emerge in education, the
AI Index website has been viewed over 600,000 times, Axios, April 16, 2024
AI + Education research community showcased the
and the report has been downloaded 135,000 times.
Stanford HAI on 2024 AI latest findings and solutions to meet key challenges.
Additionally, since its inception, the AI Index has been
Global Index Report
referenced by governments around the world, including
Bloomberg, April 16, 2024
those of the United States, China, and the United Kingdom.
Mind and Iron: AI is hitting a wall
Since Launch: its champions are in denial about
Mind and Iron, April 18, 2024
500+ 600,000+
Are We Running Out of Training Data?
The Information, April 20, 2024
pieces of news website page views
coverage Generative AI is speeding up
human-like robot development.
What that means for jobs
50+ 135,000+
CNBC, May 7, 2024
promotional events downloads
to industry, government,
& academic audiences
CREDITS: JEANINA MATIAS
10 | ANNUAL REPORT 2024 RESEARCH RESEARCH ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 11

Education
Graduate Fellows Human-Centered MUSIC 356: Music and AI (CS 470)
AI Courses
Ge Wang
The mission of HAI’s education portfolio HAI offers a three-quarter fellowship program
HAI Senior Fellow
is to equip leaders with AI knowledge, for Stanford graduate students to encourage and Associate Director
HAI faculty and fellows bring diverse
interdisciplinary research conversations, facilitate
helping them address the societal and
new collaborations, and grow the HAI community perspectives on AI technology and its societal In this “critical making” course led by Ge Wang,
ethical implications of AI across government,
of graduate scholars who are working in areas impact to Stanford students and adult learners students learn practical tools and techniques for AI-
business, and education. In academic year related to AI. The program fosters collaboration through innovative courses and programs. mediated music creation, engineer software systems
2023–24, HAI developed and continued among engineers, social scientists, humanists, incorporating AI, HCI, and music, and critically reflect on
the following programs to strengthen and others researching the future of purposeful, the aesthetic and ethical dimensions of technology.
CS 139: Human-Centered AI
intentional, and human-centered AI.
our community of young scholars as
well as experienced professionals. In AY 2023–24, HAI hosted 19 graduate
Professional Education
Peter Norvig
students from six Stanford schools. These
HAI Distinguished Education Fellow
fellows participated in programming that
emphasized the human-centered AI perspective Offered in person and virtually, HAI’s professional
from HAI’s faculty leaders through biweekly In its third year, CS139: Human-Centered AI, led education programs cultivate synergy and strengthen
Student Affinity Groups
seminars and a capstone project. by Peter Norvig and Dan Russell, emphasized connections between academic endeavors and industry
the intersection of AI development and human
in alignment with HAI’s mission. These programs provide
impact, delving into how advanced tools
a platform for industry leaders to engage with real-
This year marked the second cohort of the student affinity
AI Literacy must be designed with consideration for their
world use cases. In 2023–24, HAI delivered executive
group program; 12 teams of interdisciplinary students
effects on users and communities. The course
education programs to a diverse set of organizations,
participated (70+ students). Each group formed around
in K–12 Schools
was recorded and is intended to become a
including Accenture, PepsiCo, and Ernst & Young.
a distinct interest in a topic related to the development
signature HAI online course for professionals.
or study of human-centered AI. Teams received up
to $1,000 in funding for the academic year. Responsible AI Program
HAI’s K–12 programs focus on enhancing
for Accenture
AI literacy for educators and students. For ENGLISH 106A: Black
example, the AI4ALL summer camp immerses Mirror: A.I. Activism HAI conducted this on-campus program over three consecutive
students in hands-on AI research and mentoring
days. Attendees included 65 international Accenture
at Stanford Together, these K–12 initiatives
EVENT HIGHLIGHT executives. During the program, attendees cultivated a shared
equip teachers and youth with the Michele Elam
understanding of responsible AI, informed by insights from
Lightning Talk Session knowledge, skills, and access needed HAI Senior Fellow
industry and academia. This course empowered participants
to shape AI innovations in ways that
The groups shared their outcomes during a lightning to develop operational expertise and helped them build
talk session in spring 2024. For example, one of the reflect community needs. This small-group course led by Michele confidence for navigating the ethical complexities of AI.
teams examined the ethical challenges faced by data Elam explores the social, ethical, and artistic
workers and the companies that employ them. implications of AI systems with an emphasis Generative AI: Technology,
on aesthetics, civic society, and racial justice,
Business, and Society Program
including scholarship on decolonial AI, indigenous
AI, disability activism AI, feminist AI, and This program, developed with Stanford Online, explores the
the future of work for creative industries. technical fundamentals, business implications, and societal
considerations of AI with a focus on putting people first.
12 | ANNUAL REPORT 2024 ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 13
CREDIT:
JEANINA
MATIAS
EDUCATION EDUCATION

HAI’s white paper, Exploring the Impact of AI on Black
Policy
Americans: Considerations for the Congressional
Policy Briefs
Black Caucus’s Policy Initiatives, prepared for the
Policy briefs translate the key findings from published Congressional Black Caucus in conjunction with Black RESEARCH HIGHLIGHT
academic articles on policy-relevant AI topics into succinct in AI, equips lawmakers with the tools to develop a Considerations for Governing
In AY 2023–24, HAI further solidified recommendations for regulators and other audiences. thoughtful, forward-looking AI policy strategy that Open Foundation Models
its role as a global leader in shaping HAI’s 12 published policy briefs in the last academic ensures the benefits of this technology are widely
year were widely received. For example, Understanding shared and its risks are carefully managed. Rethinking In response to the growing policy discussions
AI governance. HAI’s policy team
Liability Risk from Healthcare AI, coauthored by HAI Privacy in the AI Era: Policy Provocations for a on open-source AI, HAI, in collaboration with
drove key conversations around the
faculty affiliate Michelle Mello, coincided with her Data-Centric World explores the current and future CRFM, RegLab, and Princeton’s Center for
responsible development, application, testimony before the U.S. Senate, enabling immediate impact of privacy and data protection legislation Information Technology Policy, developed
and governance of AI. Through congressional engagement on healthcare AI regulation. on AI development and provides recommendations an issue brief addressing the benefits
engagements with domestic and Other briefs on topics such as The AI Regulatory for mitigating privacy harms in an AI era. and risks of open foundation models and
Alignment Problem and Foundation Models and introducing a framework to assess their
international policymakers, HAI shared
Copyright Questions also garnered significant attention. HAI scholars have analyzed AI-related U.S. executive marginal risks. To further this dialogue, HAI
its cutting-edge, multidisciplinary actions issued since 2019. Following Executive Order convened a workshop with 42 participants
empirical research, tailored educational 14110 on the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development from the federal government, industry,
programs, and convenings with diverse and Use of AI, HAI, CRFM, and RegLab developed a and civil society. Policymakers, including
detailed tracker of its 150 implementation requirements. the U.S. National Telecommunications and
stakeholders. HAI policy efforts
This resource helps policymakers and the public monitor Information Administration, have widely
are made possible by philanthropic
progress and understand federal implementation efforts. adopted this framework. This work culminated
support from entities such as the
in a publication in Science, advancing a more
Patrick J. McGovern Foundation and Research Workshops nuanced understanding of open foundation
donors like Bob and Dottie King. models and their policy implications.
In closed-door policy research workshops, HAI
convenes leading policymakers, academics,
practitioners, and members of civil society for
candid and outcome-focused multi-stakeholder
discussions on critical AI policy issues. The workshops
Policy Research lay the foundation for more in-depth policy
CREDIT: PEPE GOMEZ research and tailored policy recommendations.
Responses to Requests
Through papers and briefs, HAI draws multidisciplinary Healthcare AI Policy Workshop HAI organized a
AI policy insights from Stanford’s cutting-edge for Information workshop with 50 leading policymakers, scientists,
research. These translational and analytic pieces healthcare providers, ethicists, AI developers, and
In response to federal requests for information or
equip policymakers with tools to better understand patient advocates to discuss regulatory challenges in
comment, HAI scholars provided policymakers with
and govern AI, ensuring policies are informed by the healthcare AI across three use cases. The workshop
recommendations to consider when drafting rulemaking or
latest research and aligned with real-world needs. was led by HAI Associate Director Curt Langlotz with
federal agency initiatives. Those included Managing Misuse
HAI’s Healthcare AI Policy Steering Committee.
Risk for Dual-Use Foundation Models, Response to USAID’s
To stay updated on the latest insights, research, and
opportunities on the intersection of policy, society, Request for Comment on AI in Global Development Global South AI Workshop HAI held a two-part
and AI sign up for the HAI policy newsletter. Playbook, and Responses to OMB’s Request for Comment workshop with 32 civil society and tech leaders
on Draft Policy Guidance on Agency Use of AI. to discuss AI’s impact on elections in South Asia,
Latin America, and Africa—and to explore ways to
Original Policy Research strengthen the AI ecosystem in the Global South.
The workshop was co-hosted with Stanford’s
HAI policy white papers present in-depth research
Cyber Policy Center and The Asia Foundation.
and bold proposals on critical AI policy issues
to policy audiences.
14 | ANNUAL REPORT 2024 POLICY POLICY ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 15

Tech Ethics & Policy Policy Engagement Policy Convenings Education & Training
Summer Fellowships for Policymakers
HAI significantly increased its policy engagement this HAI’s policy convenings offer a vital forum to unite
year to meet growing demand from policymakers seeking leaders from academia, industry, government,
For the second year, HAI awarded 12 Tech Ethics & Policy expert insights on AI innovation and governance. The team and civil society, creating opportunities for deep HAI provides educational opportunities to close
fellowships to Stanford graduate students in technical deepened its collaboration with policymakers in California, discussions and collaboration across disciplines. the gap between rapid AI advancements and
programs as part of our efforts to build a stronger technical the United States, European Union, United Nations, and By bringing together diverse perspectives, HAI policymakers’ understanding of the technology.
talent pipeline into government and public service. The other international organizations and global governments. facilitates meaningful dialogue on shaping the future Through tailored training, these programs equip
program demonstrates to early-career technologists how of AI governance and its societal implications. leaders with knowledge and tools to make informed
valuable their diverse STEM skillsets are to informing HAI experts testified on issues of AI governance before decisions and develop responsible AI policies.
public policy and sound AI governance. Through a multiple federal and state legislative committees, including AI+Policy Symposium:
2024 Congressional Boot Camp on AI
specialized spring course and a summer placement in the U.S. Senate Committee on Homeland Security and A Global Stocktaking
Washington, D.C., fellows gained firsthand experience Governmental Affairs, the U.S. Senate Committee on HAI launched its congressional boot camp in 2022 to fill
This symposium was hosted by HAI and the Stanford
working in congressional offices, government agencies, Finance, the U.S. House Oversight Subcommittee on a perceived gap in exposure to cutting-edge, technical
Cyber Policy Center and led by Marietje Schake and
and think tanks. The student fellows were also connected Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government research on developments in the AI field. In three years, the
James Landay, with 230 in-person participants for
to Stanford alumni mentors working in Washington D.C. Innovation, a joint hearing of two California State program has enabled over 75 congressional staffers from
a day-long gathering to discuss the state of global
to provide guidance and support. The program, run in Legislature committees, the California State Senate both sides of the aisle to engage directly with HAI faculty
AI policymaking. Participants included officials
collaboration with the McCoy Family Center for Ethics Governmental Organization Committee, the California researchers to learn about the policy implications of work
and policy leaders from the United States, United
in Society, is supported by a gift from Project Liberty. State Assembly Privacy and Consumer Protection from a range of interdisciplinary backgrounds. HAI’s 2024
Kingdom, European Union, Brazil, China, India, South
Committee, and the California Little Hoover Commission.
boot camp brought 26 bipartisan congressional staffers
Africa, Organization for Economic Co-operation and
For the 2024 cohort, placements included: HAI also engaged with a variety of policymakers through
to Stanford for three days, with sessions on AI’s impact
Development (OECD), African Union, and more.
meetings, workshops, and other forums noted below:
•American Enterprise Institute on international security, work, and healthcare, featuring
scholars, Silicon Valley leaders, and civil society pioneers.
By the numbers:
•Center for Democracy and Technology
•Department of Commerce 18 13
•Department of Health and Human Services
U.S. federal agencies California state agencies
•Freedom House
and legislative offices
•National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
42 15
•S enate Committee on Homeland
Security & Governmental Affairs
U.S. Congressional Foreign government CREDIT: PATRICK BEAUDOUIN AI Training Series for
•U.S. AI Safety Institute offices and committees offices
Federal Employees
Joint California Summit
•The Brookings Institution on Generative AI In , HAI partnered with the U.S. General
Services Administration and the White House Office of
•White House Office of Management and Budget HAI, along with co-organizers—UC Berkeley College
Management and Budget to develop a specialized training
of Computing, Data Science and Society, and the
program for government employees at the local, state,
California state government—hosted this summit in
and federal level. This six-session program introduced
. Stanford faculty Dan Ho, Fei-Fei Li, and
key AI concepts—including technical foundations, public
Chris Manning, plus incoming university president
sector use cases, and risk mitigation strategies—to
Jonathan Levin, participated in panels, including a
over 8,000 federal employees who registered for the
fireside chat featuring Li and Gov. Gavin Newsom.
course. The series supports the mandate from the AI
Training Act of 2022 and empowers participants with
the knowledge to navigate and manage AI in their work.
This was HAI’s second year participating in the training.
16 | ANNUAL REPORT 2024 ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 17
CREDIT:
DANIEL
BECK
POLICY POLICY

Workshop with the Association of AI Fundamentals for Public Servants Research
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) MEDIA MENTIONS
In , HAI and Stanford Online launched
What will artificial intelligence
In , HAI collaborated with The Asia Foundation an online course in partnership with the learning
mean for your pay?
Centers
to host digital ministry officials, technologists, and platform Apolitical to expand our education offerings
The Economist, November 16, 2023
members of the ASEAN community for a workshop for public sector employees. The training features
on the eve of ASEAN’s Committee on Science, instruction from multiple HAI experts and is designed ChatGPT provided better customer
service than his staff. He fired them.
Technology & Innovation Ministerial Meeting on Science, to reach a broader audience of policymakers, & Labs
The Washington Post, October 3, 2023
Technology, and Innovation in Siem Reap, Cambodia. including those in foreign governments. The course
HAI faculty affiliates Jeff Hancock and Sanmi Koyejo is currently provided free of charge and can be Transforming the tax and finance
discussed AI governance, bias, fairness, and trust, and accessed on demand on the Apolitical platform. functions for the future
Fast Company Executive Board,
they convened a panel of policy experts to discuss
September 29, 2023
approaches to AI regulation from around the world. CREDITS: AFORATIVE MEDIA / THE ASIA FOUNDATION
Stanford Digital
How can AI help you? What LLMs mean
for the future of customer service jobs
Economy Lab (DEL)
Tech Brew, November 7, 2023
The Stanford Digital Economy Lab is an
interdisciplinary research group studying how
digital technologies are transforming work,
organizations, and the economy toward a world of
shared prosperity. The lab leverages the expertise
and interests of Stanford faculty, researchers,
and students to initiate and support a wide range
of projects on the most pressing topics related
to the digital economy. As an integral part of
Stanford HAI, DEL pursues a multidisciplinary
approach that encourages dialogue and
collaboration across the domains of economics,
Society
is still a notable gap between these organizations’ interest business, technology, policy, and beyond.
in adapting AI technologies and the actual uptake.
DEL has made significant strides over the
In an expanded effort to engage in critical public interest This paper fed into a full day convening at Stanford on past year. It welcomed its first Faculty Center
CREDITS: CHRISTINE BAKER
conversations outside of policymakers, the policy team “Philanthropy and Equitable AI.” The event brought together Fellow and eight new postdoctoral fellows, all
supports mission-driven civil society leaders in harnessing executive leaders from 44 philanthropic foundations of whom are contributing to current and new
AI for social good, ensuring that the transformative with remarks by faculty members Alyce Adams, Michael projects in the lab’s core areas of research:
potential of AI is aligned with the public interest. Bernstein, Daniel E. Ho, and James Landay and a keynote
Areas of Research
address from Omidyar Network CEO Mike Kubzansky, who
Society Convenings emphasized the need for greater philanthropic coordination Measuring the Digital Economy: Creating
on AI. Attendees engaged in community-building activities, better methods of measuring the health
Inspiring Action: Identifying the Social
Sector AI Opportunity Gap table discussions, and field-building recommendations. of an increasingly digital economy
This past year, HAI collaborated with Project Evident to AI & the Future of Work: Understanding
Designing Your Human-Centered AI
conduct a nationwide survey for leaders in nonprofits Strategy: The Social Sector Cohort the future of the workforce in a rapidly
and philanthropic organizations to assess their current changing global economy
The social sector plays a critical role in shaping the
use of and learning needs around AI. The findings were
future of AI. In this program, leaders in social impact Digital Platforms and Society: Exploring how
published in a working paper, “Inspiring Action: Identifying
organizations, such as nonprofits and philanthropy, digital technologies can transform platforms and
the Social Sector AI Opportunity Gap,” which found that
learn how to integrate AI into their organization’s impact social media infrastructure to benefit society
while nonprofits are using AI more than expected, there
strategy, policies, and programmatic initiatives.
18 | ANNUAL REPORT 2024 POLICY RESEARCH CENTERS & LABS ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 19

Thought Leadership Student Engagement media and misinformation, Computer Science Professor RESEARCH HIGHLIGHTS
Michael Bernstein on AI agents/simulations, GSB GDP-B: Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is the sum of the
Economics of Transformative AI: In , This past spring, DEL hosted the second iteration of
Professor Chad Jones on AI and economic growth, and value of all goods and services produced in a country in one
DEL hosted a closed-door workshop, “What If We its Stanford graduate-level course: The AI Awakening: year, where price is a proxy for value. GDP-B (B = Benefits)
Sociology Professor Robb Willer on digital platforms and
Succeed? The Economics of Transformative AI,” Implications for the Economy and Society, which received measures how much consumers benefit from goods and
democracy, DEL added Computer Science Professor Diyi
services, not just how much they pay. DEL’s approach starts
bringing together AI leaders and economists to explore several hundred applications from PhD, master’s, and
Yang and Stanford Center for Longevity Director Laura from basic principles of economics: Changes in well-being
the implications of transformative AI—technology bachelor’s degree students in the Graduate School of
Carstensen to its network via joint postdoctoral fellows. stem from changes in the economic surplus created by
that could perform a significant share of tasks in the Business (GSB) and in Computer Science, Economics, and goods and services, rather than the money spent on them.
economy. The workshop addressed key questions other departments. Each week, students learned from DEL Researchers
This past year, DEL expanded its large-scale experiments
about timelines, technological hurdles, and economic frontier researchers and industry leaders in technology,
DEL’s Advisory Group convened twice during the to measure consumer surplus across 700 items, including
impacts, including productivity, wealth concentration, economics, and business, read the relevant research, digital platforms, public goods, and the latest addition,
academic year. In , it discussed AI, social
and global AI distribution. The event fostered crucial and discussed implications. As a final capstone, students measuring the value of “health.” Additionally, the lab added
media and democracy, and milestones, timelines, and
new members (both on campus and abroad), including
dialogue between technologists and economists, completed research proposals, policy proposals, and
economic implications of transformative AI. In , a new Stanford Research Scientist, Sophia Kazinnik, as
helping shape DEL’s research agenda on the economic business plans. Topics included foundation models,
members discussed an early-stage research agenda for well as faculty collaborators in other parts of the world,
challenges and opportunities posed by transformative AI. large language models (LLMs), and generative AI; including at Tsinghua University and CEIBS, which are
transformative AI, as well as AI for scientific discovery.
vision and robotics; work and employment; bias and adapting its methodology and launching surveys in China.
The Digitalist Papers: The Digitalist Papers explore
explainability; AI and geopolitics; and a world without
DEL also assembled a group of experts from academia,
how AI could reshape governance and legacy social
work. DEL was honored to be joined by esteemed industry, and governmental statistical agencies to join
institutions in profound and unpredictable ways. The
guest speakers including Eric Schmidt, Mira Murati, its GDP-B Advisory Committee to provide crucial
inaugural volume was developed during AY 2023–24 feedback and diverse perspectives. Finally, the lab
Reid Hoffman, Anima Anandkumar, James Manyika,
and features a dozen original essays from leading released a new website dedicated to this work, where
Shivon Zilis, Lawrence Lessig, and Daniel Susskind.
forthcoming survey data will be published.
thinkers across academia, industry, and civil society.
To guide the writing process, DEL facilitated a full The 2023 course content remains live on Coursera. Thanks AI and the Future of Work: In a collaboration enabled by
peer review of each essay and hosted an in-person to a continued collaboration with the Stanford Center for the Dieter Schwarz Foundation, postdoctoral researcher
Christina Langer is working with Helmut Krcmar and
workshop in , bringing authors together to Professional Development, DEL has made select videos
Philipp Lergetporer of TUM Heilbronn to explore how
refine their contributions. This project is funded by from 2024 available for free to all learners on Stanford’s
automation and AI are changing the skills requirements
Frank McCourt and the Project Liberty Institute. YouTube channel. The published recordings of this course for a variety of professions. In this multi-year engagement,
gained attention from wide audiences, accumulating Christina is splitting her time between Stanford and TUM
Heilbronn, where she is conducting field research.
over 100,000 views within the first two months.
Erik Brynjolfsson Christie Ko Misinformation Funding Experiment: Using survey
Director Executive Director experiments and decision-maker interviews, the lab
examined how online misinformation is financed through
Jerry Yang and Akiko Yamazaki Professor and Senior
advertising and found that most decision makers
Fellow at HAI, Ralph Landau Senior Fellow at the Stanford
are unaware of their companies’ ads appearing on
Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR), and
professor, by courtesy, at the Stanford Graduate School misinformation sites and that consumers often react
of Business and Stanford Department of Economics negatively when informed of these practices.
The monetization of misinformation is amplified by
Faculty Fellow Andreas Haupt
digital ad platforms, which algorithmically distribute ads
Alex “Sandy” Pentland Christina Langer
across the internet. When informed about how platforms
Jiaxin Pei contribute to this process, decision makers express a
Research Scientists
José Ramón Enríquez preference for scalable, platform-based solutions to reduce
Sophia Kazinnik
Philip Trammell misinformation financing. DEL proposed interventions to
CREDIT: PATRICK BEAUDOUIN Wang Jin Gabriel Unger disrupt this financial support and counter the spread of
David Nguyen misinformation. This research was published in Nature.
Luca Vendraminelli
CREDIT: PATRICK BEAUDOUIN
Andrew Wang
Generative AI for Enhanced Deliberation: DEL launched
Cross-Campus Collaboration
Students
deliberation.io, a new platform designed to support large-scale
Postdoctoral Fellows
Wajeeha Ahmad discussions with customizable features aimed at improving
DEL continues building relationships and research ties
Ruyu Chen
Alma Andino Frydman public discourse and fostering consensus. It also completed
with other parts of the campus and faculty, fostering joint Ziv Epstein Alia Braley (UC Berkeley, a baseline study showing improvements in Americans’
projects this fall and “bridge” researchers. In addition to its Basil Halperin & Stanford Project Scientist) commitment to democratic practices, with upcoming pilots
collaborations with GSB Professor Susan Athey on social exploring how AI can aid in depolarization and collective action.
20 | ANNUAL REPORT 2024 RESEARCH CENTERS & LABS RESEARCH CENTERS & LABS ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 21

Center for Research In AY 2023–24, the center also made Applied Research Societal Research
progress across its three research areas:
Building foundation models and other artifacts Shaping policy and clarifying the societal impact
on Foundation Models
Technical Research that provide value in specific application of foundation models to facilitate the responsible
domains such as medicine and law governance of this new technology
Core technical contributions toward building,
The Center for Research on Foundation Models using, and understanding foundation models • O penVLA: An Open-Source Vision-Language- • C onsiderations for Governing
(CRFM) makes fundamental advances in the study, Action Model: A new approach for building vision- Open Foundation Models
• R obust Distortion-free Watermarks
development, and deployment of foundation models. language-action models for robotics, achieving state-
for Language Models: A best-in- • A Safe Harbor for AI Evaluation and Red
The center brings together a multidisciplinary group of-the-art performance on various robotics tasks
class watermark for language models, Teaming: A paper on the practices of leading
of faculty, students, researchers, and engineers
helping developers to identify whether • B ioDiscoveryAgent: An AI Agent for Designing foundation model developers, finding that none
spanning more than 10 departments at Stanford.
text is generated by their model Genetic Perturbation Experiments offer comprehensive protections for third-party
researchers. The U.S. Copyright Office subsequently
• D oReMi: Optimizing Data Mixtures • Merlin: A Vision Language Foundation
partially supported the researchers’ position,
Speeds Up Language Model Pretraining Model for 3D Computed Tomography
stating that independent evaluation of AI models
• Cybench: A Framework for Evaluating • MedAlign: A Clinician-Generated Dataset for did not constitute violations of copyright law.
Cybersecurity Capabilities and Instruction Following with Electronic Medical Records
• AIR-Bench 2024: A Safety Benchmark Based on
RESEARCH HIGHLIGHT
Risks of Language Models
• LegalBench: A Collaboratively Built Benchmark for Risk Categories from Regulations and Policies
CRFM launched the Foundation Model Transparency
• AutoBencher: Creating Salient, Novel, Measuring Legal Reasoning in Large Language Models
Index in as an annual initiative to assess • T he AI Regulatory Alignment Problem
Difficult Datasets for Language Models
leading foundation model developers. The 2023 study
revealed an alarming lack of transparency among major
• H olistic Evaluation of Text-To-Image
companies, while the 2024 report showed considerable Models: A new framework for standardizing
improvement with companies publishing new transparency evaluation of text-to-image models, building on CRFM Researchers
reports via the Index. The index received widespread the substantial success of the HELM (Holistic
coverage in the media and widely consulted by Evaluation of Language Models) framework
policymakers across the United States, United Kingdom,
Singapore, European Union, and United Nations. Rishi Bommasani Yifan Mai
Society Lead, CRFM; PhD Research Engineer, CRFM,
Candidate of Computer Stanford University
Science, Stanford University
MEDIA MENTIONS Julian Quevedo
David Hall
Stanford researchers issue AI We Don’t Actually Know If AI Student, Computer Science and
transparency report, urge tech Is Taking Over Everything Research Engineering Lead, Mathematics, Stanford University
companies to reveal more The Atlantic, October 19, 2023 CRFM, Stanford University
Josselin Somerville
Reuters, October 18, 2023
Top AI Shops Fail Transparency Percy Liang Kevin Klyman Master’s Student, Computer
OpenAI Is Human After All; Test: Stanford transparency Master’s Student, International Science, Stanford University
Director, CRFM
‘Sharing Is Caring,’ Researchers index rates Meta, OpenAI, and Policy, Stanford University
Ivan Zhou
Tell Model Developers others on 100 indicators Associate Professor of
Tony Lee
The Information, October 18, 2023 IEEE Spectrum, October 22, 2023 Computer Science, and, by Master’s Student, Computer
courtesy, of Statistics; Senior Research Engineer, CRFM, Science, Stanford University
Why everyone seems to disagree AI developers are failing on Fellow, Stanford HAI Stanford University
on how to define Artificial transparency, new index shows
General Intelligence Axios, October 24, 2023
Fast Company, October 18, 2023
Maybe We Will Finally Learn
The world’s biggest AI models aren’t More About How A.I. Works
very transparent, Stanford study says The New York Times, October 18, 2023
The Verge, October 18, 2023
22 | ANNUAL REPORT 2024 RESEARCH CENTERS & LABS RESEARCH CENTERS & LABS ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 23

Additional HAI Centers, Labs,
Industry
Initiatives, Partners, & Collaborators
Executive Education
Programs &
Additional programming in AY 2023–24
Centers & Labs •G olub Capital Social Impact Lab: Using
included a Bangkok-based Executive
digital technology and social science
• Center for Research on Foundation Models
research to improve the effectiveness of Partnerships Education program hosted with Accenture,
(CRFM): An interdisciplinary initiative at the Stanford
leading social sector organizations an industry leaders conference on the
Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
periphery of the HAI at Five celebrations,
that makes fundamental advances in the study, •O pen Virtual Assistant Lab: Building LLM-
development, and deployment of foundation models. augmented cognition systems (LLM-CSys) and 11 executive breakfasts, featuring faculty
that combine the expressive language Over the past year, HAI broadened its reach including Julian Nyarko, Monica Lam, and
•C enter for the Study of Language and Information
skills of LLMs with the interpretability and Ge Wang. The HAI Startup Series continued
(CSLI): CSLI serves Stanford faculty and students who are with industry partners while deepening existing
reliability of software systems, as well as
engaged in research involving computational, logical, and to provide a unique setting for industry
connecting LLMs with databases, compilers, collaborations, working within an expanding
stochastic modeling of cognitive functions and processes. engagement with Stanford’s AI-focused
and executive functions to create assistants
corporate ecosystem to guide decision makers
•S tanford Digital Economy Lab (DEL): Pursuing a that are more trustworthy and helpful entrepreneurial community, showcasing
deeper understanding of the digital economy and and ensure that AI technologies are deployed with 21 start-ups over seven sessions.
•R egulation, Evaluation, and Governance Lab
its impact on the future of work and society a strong focus on human-centered approaches.
(RegLab): Stanford’s RegLab builds the evidence
base and technology for effective governance.
Initiatives • TUM Campus, Heilbronn: Since fall 2018,
the renowned Technical University of Munich
•R AISE Health: A joint initiative between Stanford Medicine
is present at the Bildungscampus Heilbronn
and the Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial
and offers a wide variety of services to its Industrial Affiliates Program
Intelligence (HAI) to guide the responsible use of AI
more than 500 students in five programs.
across biomedical research, education, and patient care HAI significantly increased membership in the HAI Industrial Affiliates Program,
•A I4ALL: Empowering the next generation adding new members including American Express, the Hanwha Group, LVMH, PwC,
of AI change makers Collaborators and SAP, from through . These new relationships
• Stanford Robotics Center: Bringing together cross- •B lack in AI Research (BlackAIR) have expanded HAI’s footprint in Europe and Asia and positioned the HAI Industrial
disciplinary world-class researchers and industrial Affiliates Program as the largest affiliate program at Stanford. Members include:
•C enter for AI in Medicine and Imaging
affiliates with a shared vision of robotics’ future. Its unique
collaborative facility supports large-scale innovative projects • Center for Comparative Studies
for transformative impact on people and the planet. in Race and Ethnicity
•C enter for International Security
and Cooperation
Research Partners
•C yber Policy Center
• Center for AI Safety: The mission of the Stanford
•D igital Civil Society Lab (DCSL)
Center for AI Safety is to develop rigorous techniques for
building safe and trustworthy AI systems and establishing •H oover Institution
confidence in their behavior and robustness, thereby • Institute for Diversity in the Arts (IDA)
facilitating their successful adoption in society.
•J ohn S. Knight Journalism Fellowships
•O ne Hundred Year Study of Artificial Intelligence
•M cCoy Family Center for Ethics in Society
(AI100): A longitudinal study to examine and anticipate
how the effects of artificial intelligence will ripple through •O ffice of the Vice President for the Arts
every aspect of how people work, live, and play •S tanford Aging & Ethnogeriatrics
• Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (SAIL): A Research Center (SAGE)
center of excellence for artificial intelligence research, •S tanford Institute for Economic
teaching, theory, and practice since its founding in 1963 Policy Research (SIEPR)
24 | XAXN NAUNANLU ARLE PROERPTO R2T0 224024 RESEARRECSHE ACRECNHT ECRESN T&E RLSA B&S LABS INDUSTRY PROGRAMS & PARTNERSHIPS ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 25

Research Collaborations
About HAI
& Faculty Engagement
HAI’s industry research collaborations benefited
more than 30 faculty members and engaged
Stanford HAI brings together thought leaders from academia,
50+ postdocs and graduate students.
industry, government, and civil society to shape the
Support has gone to a variety of fundamental
development and responsible deployment of AI.
and applied AI research domains spanning AI
and society/economy, generative AI, responsible/
trusted AI, foundation models, embodied AI,
healthcare, fintech, and sustainability.
People
PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS
Denning Co-Directors
Building and Evaluating Multilingual Deepening Interaction Between Retrieval and LMs
MultiModal Models and Trustworthy Language New mechanisms that facilitate deeper interaction between
Models with Conformal Guarantees retrieval and LM components either in pre-training, fine-
John John Etchemendy is a professor of philosophy and symbolic systems,
Offering new insights to fintech apps. tuning, or post-training, in a way that reduces hallucination.
teaching Philosophy of Artificial Intelligence to undergraduate students.
Etchemendy
Diyi Yang Dan Jurafsky During AY 2023–24, he co-led the HAI at Five: Celebrating 5 Years of
Provost, Emeritus, and Patrick Impact Conference in and co-hosted U.S. Representative
Assistant Professor, Computer Science, Professor, Linguistics and Computer
Suppes Family Professor in the
Stanford University; Faculty Affiliate, Science, Stanford University Anna Eshoo (CA-16) for the Unlocking Public Section AI Innovation:
School of Humanities and Sciences
Stanford HAI Next Steps for the National AI Research Resource seminar in . In his 35 years as a Stanford faculty member, he has served as
director of the Center for the Study of Language and Information, chair
Holistic Evaluation of Language Models (HELM) Stream of Search
of the Philosophy Department, senior associate dean for the School of
Adding financial-domain scenarios to HELM to cover Stream of Search (SoS) is a new framework that teaches
Humanities and Sciences, and Stanford University’s 12th provost.
the above financial-domain related aspects. language models to search for solutions by representing the
search process itself in natural language. This framework:
Percy Liang
•Targets naturalistic domains like mathematics and coding James Landay James Landay was named Denning Co-Director for Stanford HAI
Associate Professor, Computer Science, during AY 2023–24. In , he received the SIGCHI Lifetime
Stanford University; Director, CRFM; • Creates a synthetic data generation pipeline that imbues Anand Rajaraman and Venky
Research Award by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM)
Senior Fellow, Stanford HAI language models with the ability to backtrack and self-correct, Harinarayan Professor in the
breaks down problems into sub-goals, and assigns values School of Engineering, Professor for his career of leading cutting-edge research with his students. He co-
of Computer Science led the HAI at Five: Celebrating 5 Years of Impact Conference in June
to intermediate states represented in natural language
Network infrastructure for LLMs 2024. During AY 2023–24, he focused his recent talks, including two HAI
Creating new solutions for key networking problems. Noah Goodman Research Seminars, on outlining a design process for human-centered AI:
Associate Professor of Psychology AI designers need to consider the needs and concerns of the AI’s users,
Balaji Prabhakar and Computer Science of the communities impacted by the AI’s use, and of society at large.
VMWare Founders Professor, Computer
Science and Electrical Engineering,
Stanford University Fei-Fei Li In , Fei-Fei Li was recognized as one of the most influential
Cross-Asset Time-Series Patterns for
people in AI by TIME100 AI and received the Intel Innovation Lifetime
Investment: A Machine Learning Approach Sequoia Professor, Computer
Achievement Award. In , she spoke with Geoffrey Hinton,
RelBench: A Benchmark for Deep A new approach that leverages the dependency of time- Science Department
another recipient of the TIME100 AI award, during a masterclass. She
Learning on Relational Databases series patterns in multiple assets for optimal portfolio
co-hosted U.S. Representative Anna Eshoo (CA-16) for the Unlocking
A benchmark for deep learning on relational databases; a design in order to exploit lead-lag relationships and complex
collection of realistic, large-scale, and diverse benchmark statistical arbitrage relationships between assets. Public Section AI Innovation: Next Steps for the National AI Research
Resource seminar in . She and President Emeritus John
datasets for machine learning on relational databases.
Markus Pelger
Hennessey conversed in on her memoir The Worlds
Jure Leskovec Associate Professor, Management Science I See: Curiosity, Exploration, and Discovery at the Dawn of AI. She co-
Professor, Computer Science, & Engineering, Stanford University led the HAI at Five: Celebrating 5 Years of Impact Conference in June
Stanford University 2024 alongside Denning Co-Directors John Etchemendy and James
Landay. She co-sponsored the AI + Health Conference in alongside HAI Associate Director Curt Langlotz. During the 2024
Congressional Boot Camp in August, she spoke at the dinner keynote
panel on the topic of AI’s Global Impact of Democracy and Governance.
26 | ANNUAL REPORT 2024 INDUSTRY PROGRAMS & PARTNERSHIPS

Fellows Surya Ganguli Surya Ganguli co-hosted the 2023 HAI Signature Fall Conference, New Horizons
in Generative AI: Science, Creativity, and Society, in October, which focused
Associate Director and Senior
HAI currently has over 220 fellows and affiliated In AY 2023–24, HAI welcomed 30 new graduate and on AI in the sciences, creative disciplines, and society. His research spans the
Fellow, Associate Professor
Stanford faculty from across all seven schools. postdoctoral fellows from an array of disciplines, of Applied Physics and, by fields of neuroscience, machine learning, and physics, focusing on understanding
Each year, the institute aims to support the work of facilitating collaboration between engineers, social courtesy, of Neurobiology, and improving how both biological and artificial neural networks learn striking
of Electrical Engineering,
emergent computations. Over the academic year, he has been working on
researchers who focus on the intersection of multiple scientists, humanists, and others researching the future and of Computer Science
launching a new HAI lab with a research focus on the science of intelligence.
disciplines. The HAI Fellows Program is made possible of human-centered AI. In 2025, HAI will welcome
by generous donors like Martin and Millie Lau. new Senior Fellows: Susan Athey, Michael Bernstein, Daniel E. Ho Daniel Ho serves as the director of the Stanford RegLab, which partners with government
Angele Christan, Dorsa Sadigh, and Melissa Valentine. agencies to design and evaluate programs, policies, and technologies that modernize
Senior Fellow, William
Senior Fellows government. He spoke at the Hoffman-Yee Symposium to present
Benjamin Scott and Luna
M. Scott Professor of Law; his team’s research project, which won a Hoffman-Yee research grant. In November
Russ Altman During AY 2023–24, Russ Altman helped organize the recruitment of several HAI Senior Professor of Political Science; 2023, he worked with the HAI Policy team to release “The AI Regulatory Alignment
Professor of Computer
Fellows and served as a liaison between HAI and RAISE Health, a joint initiative between Problem” policy brief. He testified to the U.S. House Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Science (by courtesy); Senior
Associate Director and HAI and the School of Medicine. He co-hosted U.S. Representative Anna Eshoo (CA-16) Fellow, SIEPR; Faculty Information Technology, and Government Innovation on “Governing Artificial Intelligence”
Senior Fellow Kenneth Fong
Professor and Professor of for the Unlocking Public Section AI Innovation: Next Steps for the National AI Research Fellow, Center for Advanced in and worked on the HAI issue brief on “Considerations for Governing
Bioengineering, of Genetics, Resource seminar in . He moderated a lightning session panel on the Study in the Behavioral Open Foundation Models.” In , he testified at the California State Senate
Sciences (CASBS); Faculty
of Medicine (General Medical topic of “Implementation of AI in Society at Scale: How Do We Augment the Human Director, Stanford RegLab Hearing on Securing California’s Future: Artificial Intelligence and worked with HAI
Discipline), of Biomedical Data
Experience?” at the HAI at Five: Celebrating 5 Years of Impact Conference in June on the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy AI EO Tracker that follows the implementation
Science, and, by courtesy,
of Computer Science 2024. He is a faculty director of the AI100, a 100-Year Study of Artificial Intelligence. of the U.S. government’s Executive Order 14110 on AI. In , he coauthored a
He is also the host of the podcast “The Future of Everything with Russ Altman.” new study, “Hallucination-Free? Assessing the Reliability of Leading AI Legal Research
Tools,” revealing the need for benchmarking and public evaluation of AI tools in law.
Erik Erik Brynjolfsson spoke at the 2024 Congressional Boot Camp in August on the
topic of AI, Automation, and the Future of Work. He also spoke at the HAI at Five: Curtis As the director of the Center for Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging (AIMI Center)
Brynjolfsson
and associate director of Stanford HAI, Curtis P. Langlotz helps lead RAISE Health, a
Celebrating 5 Years of Impact Conference in on Implementation of AI in P. Langlotz
joint AI initiative of HAI and the School of Medicine. He also helped organize the 2023
Jerry Yang and Akiko Yamazaki Society at Scale: How Do We Augment the Human Experience. During AY 2023–24,
Professor and Senior Fellow Associate Director and Senior AI + Health Conference, which convened experts and leaders from academia, industry,
he hosted a number of workshops, including the New Measures of the Economy
Director, Stanford Digital Fellow, Professor of Radiology, government, and clinical practice to explore critical and emerging issues related to AI’s
Economy Lab; Ralph Landau Workshop in , which explored new tools and techniques to measure Medicine, and Biomedical
impact across the spectrum of healthcare. He serves as a reviewer for HAI-AIMI grant
Senior Fellow, Stanford modern economies, including the contribution of household production, people’s Data Science; Director, Center
Institute for Economic health, and the environment; t he Workshop on New Approaches to Characterize for Artificial Intelligence programs and the HAI Start-up series. He was elected President of the Radiology Society
Policy Research (SIEPR) in Medicine & Imaging of North America in . He spoke at the Congressional Boot Camp about
Industries: AI as a Framework and a Use Case to address the recent shifts in
“Transforming Healthcare Through Innovation” in . In , he also
federal policy to invest in critical and emerging technologies; and the Workshop
gave a lightning talk at the HAI at Five: Celebrating 5 Years of Impact Conference on
for Reinventing Digital Infrastructure for Civil Empowerment in focused
“Implementation of AI in Society at Scale: How Do We Augment the Human Experience?”
on understanding concrete pathways for AI-enhanced digital communications
to promote human deliberation and enable productive collective action.
Percy Liang Percy Liang is the director of the Center of Research on Foundation Models (CRFM),
a research center under HAI. He co-hosted the 2023 HAI Signature Fall Conference,
Michele Elam In AY 2023–24, Michele Elam taught undergraduate and graduate courses including Senior Fellow, Associate
New Horizons in Generative AI: Science, Creativity, and Society, in October, which
Black Mirror: A.I. Activism, Mixed-Race Politics and Culture, James Baldwin and Professor of Computer
Senior Fellow, William American Culture, and Harlem Renaissance. She was the lead PI, working closely Science, Stanford University; focused on AI in the sciences, creative disciplines, and society. In , he
Robertson Coe Professor Director, Stanford coauthored the “Transparency Index on Foundation Models,” which rated foundation
of Humanities, Department with Stanford symbolic systems student Isabelle Levent, on the 2023 HAI Seed Grant Center for Research on
model companies on their transparency. In , he coauthored the HAI
of English, Center for recipient for her project, Stories of the Future: An AI and Film Convening, which Foundation Models
Comparative Studies in Policy Briefs, “The Regulatory Alignment Problem,” the “Foundation Models and
brought together AI and HCI researchers, science fiction screenwriters, film directors,
Race & Ethnicity, African & Copyright Questions,” and “Whose Opinions Do Language Models Reflect?” in November
and producers to craft new depictions of AI, weaving in recent advancements and
African American Studies
2023. He was a speaker at the Congressional Boot Camp where he educated the
pressing philosophical/ethical concerns. She won the 2023 Norman Foerster Prize,
attendees on “Understanding the Basics of Foundation Models” in .
awarded to the best essay of the year in American Literature for her piece: “Poetry
Will Not Optimize; or, What Is Literature to AI?” in . Concurrently,
Christopher Christopher Manning is the Director of the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Lab (SAIL) and a
she published “Digital Griots, Wampum Codes, and Choreo-Robotics: Artist-
cofounder of HAI. In AY 2023–24, he coauthored the paper “Direct Preference Optimization:
Technologists of Color, Reshaping the Public Sphere,” which explored the impact of Manning
Your Language Model is Secretly a Reward Model,” which was one of the two Outstanding
AI on philanthropy. Additionally, she spoke at several impactful conferences, including
Associate Director and Senior Main Track Runner-Ups at NeurIPS 2023. He received the 2024 IEEE John von Neumann
the Big Data and AI Paris Conference, and was the plenary keynote speaker at the Fellow, Thomas M. Siebel
Medal for advances in computational representation and analysis of natural language. In
Beyond Human-in-the-Loop: AI & “Human” Rights conference, the keynote speaker at Professor in Machine Learning,
, “GloVe: Global Vectors for Word Representation,” which he coauthored, won
Professor of Linguistics
the Generative AI: Leveraging AI for Economic Empowerment conference, a keynote
and of Computer Science; the 10-year Test of Time Award at ACL. He spoke at the Joint Summit on Generative AI, a
panelist at the AI and Democracy summit on Renewing Democracy, Women Leading Director, Stanford Artificial joint-conference between Stanford HAI and the University of California, Berkeley, focusing
the Way for the opening of the Hillary Rodham Clinton Center, and the keynote Intelligence Laboratory (SAIL)
on how the state can best use generative AI to better serve the people of California and
speaker at the Leading Women Defined Summit on AI and Black Womanhood. She
the impacts of GenAI on California and its workforce in . Also in , he
also joined the editorial board for the Cambridge Forum on AI, a global platform
coauthored a new study, “Hallucination-Free? Assessing the Reliability of Leading AI Legal
publishing and hosting conversations about emerging interdisciplinary work on AI.
Research Tools,” revealing the need for benchmarking and public evaluation of AI tools in law.

Faculty Fellows
Senior Fellows
Julian Julian Nyarko became an Associate Director of Stanford HAI during AY 2023–24. Peter Norvig Peter Norvig is the HAI Distinguished Education Fellow, where he helps to develop a
He has participated and contributed to a number of HAI events, including the human-focused AI curriculum and broaden access to education. A longtime innovator
Nyarko Distinguished Education Fellow
2024 Congressional Boot Camp in August, where he educated attendees on in the field, he co-wrote Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, an introductory
Associate Director and “The Fuel of AI: Data (and its Perils).” He also released a new study, “What’s in a textbook used by 1,500 universities worldwide. He has taught hundreds of thousands
Senior Fellow, Professor of
Name? Auditing Large Language Models for Race and Gender Bias,” in March of students through his courses on the online education platform Udacity.
Law, Stanford University
2024 that showed startling disparities in how the most popular LLMs give advice
relating to individuals of a particular race or gender. In his study, the individual’s
identity was indicated by their first and last name. In , he published
“Risk Scores, Label Bias, and Everything But the Kitchen Sink,” a paper showing
Hariharan Hariharan Subramonyam is an Assistant Professor at the Graduate School of
that in risk modeling, where AI researchers generally take a “more-is-better”
Education and Computer Science (by courtesy). He is a Ram and Vijay Shriram
approach to training data, using less information may often be preferable. Subramonyam
Faculty Fellow at HAI. His research resides at the intersection of human-computer
Ram and Vijay Shriram interaction (HCI) and the learning sciences. He studies methods to enhance
HAI Faculty Fellow
human learning through AI by engaging in cognitively informed design practices,
Rob Reich Rob Reich’s scholarship in political theory engages with the work of social scientists
co-designing with learners and educators, and developing transformative AI-
and engineers. His most recent books are System Error: Where Big Tech Went Wrong
Senior Fellow, enabled learning experiences. Additionally, through this research, he contributes
and How We Can Reboot (with Mehran Sahami and Jeremy M. Weinstein, 2021) and
McGregor-Girand Professor tools and methodologies that emphasize ethical considerations, responsible
in Social Ethics of Science Digital Technology and Democratic Theory (edited with Lucy Bernholz and Hélène
design practices, and human values in the creation of AI experiences.
and Technology Landemore, 2021). He has testified before Congress and written widely for the
public, including for the New York Times, Washington Post, Wired, Time magazine,
The Atlantic, The Guardian, and the Stanford Social Innovation Review. He helped to
create the global movement #GivingTuesday and serves as chair of its board. From
 to , he is on public service leave to serve as Senior Advisor Johannes Johannes Eichstaedt is a computational social scientist jointly appointed as a Ram
to the newly established United States Artificial Intelligence Safety Institute. and Vijay Shriram HAI Faculty Fellow and Assistant Professor of Psychology. His lab
Eichstaedt
in Computational Psychology & Well-Being is currently focused on using LLMs to
Ram and Vijay Shriram, develop interventions for well-being and mental health to augment therapy and support
Ge Wang During AY 2023–24, Ge Wang became an Associate Director of Stanford HAI, where HAI Faculty Fellow therapists. He also analyzes big social text data (Twitter, Facebook, Reddit) with
he focuses on helping everyone find more tools for critical reflection about AI and
natural language processing (NLP) and AI to understand and measure psychological
Associate Director and
its use. Among his many initiatives, he piloted the HAI “Vodcast” series, OffScript,
Senior Fellow, Associate processes for individuals and populations – for example, to build early warning systems
Professor, Center for where he and HAI Research Director Vanessa Parli hosted thought leaders on the for the opioid epidemic and mental health. Across these lines of work, his overall
Computer Research in Music intersection of AI and ranging subjects. During AY 2023–24, he and Vanessa Parli
focus is on using AI and NLP to improve the well-being and health of the population.
and Acoustics (CCRMA);
hosted four OffScript episodes. Among other Stanford courses, he teaches Music
Department of Music and,
356/CS 470: Music and AI (a critical making course). He gave a keynote performance
by courtesy, of Computer
Science, Stanford University at the HAI Signature Fall Conference on New Horizons in Generative
AI: Science, Creativity, and Society. He also served as a panelist during the AI +
Education Summit, a conference co-hosted by HAI and the Stanford Accelerator for Shriti Raj Shriti Raj is a human-centered computing researcher. Her work focuses on
augmenting health-related data reasoning and decision making. She is jointly
Learning in , on the topic of “Cutting Edge Work: Examples on AI and
HAI Faculty Fellow
appointed as a HAI Faculty Fellow and an Assistant Professor in the Department
Education.” During the closing keynote of the HAI at Five: Celebrating 5
of Medicine Center for Biomedical Informatics Research. She received her PhD
Years of Impact Conference, he and Celeste Betancur, a PhD candidate in Music,
in information from the University of Michigan, where she was advised by Dr.
gave a presentation and live performance exploring AI and the creative process.
Mark Newman. Her research develops and evaluates human-centered methods
and tools to help people make health data and algorithms actionable.
Amy Zegart Amy Zegart is an internationally recognized expert in U.S. intelligence, emerging
technologies, and global political risk management. She is the author of five books,
Associate Director and Senior
including the bestseller Spies, Lies, and Algorithms: The History and Future of American
Fellow, Morris Arnold and
Nona Jean Cox Senior Fellow Intelligence, which was nominated by Princeton University Press for the Pulitzer Prize.
at the Hoover Institution; She leads Hoover’s Tech Policy Accelerator and cochairs the Stanford Emerging Sandy Pentland Alex “Sandy” Pentland was appointed as a Center Fellow at HAI and as a Fellow and
Professor, by courtesy, of Faculty Lead for research on digital platforms and society at the HAI’s Digital Economy
Technology Review with Condoleezza Rice and Dean of Engineering Jennifer Widom.
Political Science; Senior Fellow Center Fellow Lab (DEL) during AY 2023–24. He also directs MIT’s Human Dynamics Laboratory
at the Freeman Spogli Institute She serves on two U.S. Intelligence Community boards and frequently advises senior Toshiba Professor of Media
for International Studies government officials on intelligence and national security matters. In AY 2023–24, Arts & Science; Professor, and the MIT Media Lab Entrepreneurship Program, co-leads the World Economic
Information Technology, MIT Forum Big Data and Personal Data initiatives, and is a founding member of the advisory
she became an Associate Director of HAI and spoke at the Congressional Boot
boards for Nissan, Motorola Mobility, Telefonica, and a variety of start-up firms.
Camp keynote dinner on “AI’s Global Impact on Democracy and Governance.”
30 | ANNUAL REPORT 2024 PEOPLE ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 31

Policy Fellows Staff
Jennifer Rohini Russell Wald Russell Wald oversees HAI’s research, education, communications, administrative
activities, industry programs, and policy and society hub. He collaborates with HAI’s
King Kosoglu Executive Director
co-directors and faculty leaders to shape the strategic vision and human-centered
Privacy and Data Policy Policy Fellow, Stanford HAI mission of the organization. From 2020 to 2022, he served as HAI’s first Director of
Fellow, Stanford HAI
Policy and later as Managing Director for Policy and Society. During this time, he
established HAI’s policy and society initiative, engaged with policymakers at the state,
national, and international levels, created the impactful congressional boot camp, and
coauthored several AI policy publications, including Enhancing International Cooperation
in AI Research: The Case for a Multilateral AI Research Institute and The Centrality
of Data and Compute for AI Innovation: A Blueprint for a National Research Cloud.
Michael Susan Rice
Additionally, he serves as a member of the AI Index Steering Committee hosted by HAI.
Kratsios Distinguished Visiting Fellow,
Stanford HAI; Former Domestic
Distinguished Visiting Fellow, Policy Advisor to President Joe Biden;
Stanford HAI; Managing Director Former National Security Advisor for Elena Cryst Panos Madamopoulos-Moraris
of Scale AI and former President Obama and U.S. Permanent
CTO of the United States Representative to the United Nations Director of Policy and Society Managing Director of Industry Programs and Partnerships
Christie Ko Vanessa Parli
Executive Director, Stanford Digital Economy Lab Director of Research
Marietje
Anh Le Stacey Sickels Boyce
Schaake
Director of Administration Senior Associate Director of Development
HAI International Policy
Fellow; International Policy
Director, Cyber Policy Carolyn Lehman
Center, Stanford University
Director of Media and Communications
HAI Advisory Council
The HAI Advisory Council consists of leaders in science,
Postdoctoral Fellows
civil society, and business who provide HAI with expert
advice on issues relevant to the institute’s mission and
Ruyu Chen Farnaz Jahanbakhsh Kaveh Waddell
programs. Reid Hoffman serves as chair of the council,
Stanford Digital Economy Lab Postdoctoral Fellow HAI Postdoctoral Fellow John S. Knight Journalism Fellow along with vice chairs Steve Denning and Srinija Srinivasan.
Yuchen Cui Christopher Kelly Luwen Wan
HAI Postdoctoral Fellow
HAI Postdoctoral Fellow HAI Postdoctoral Fellow
Dapeng Feng
Christina Langer Zhecheng Wang
HAI Postdoctoral Fellow
Stanford Digital Economy Lab Postdoctoral Fellow HAI Postdoctoral Fellow
Caroline Glidden
Gabriel Unger
HAI Postdoctoral Fellow
Stanford Digital Economy Lab Postdoctoral Fellow
Alex Goldmark
Luca Vendraminelli
Journalist in Residence
HAI Postdoctoral Fellow
32 | ANNUAL REPORT 2024 PEOPLE PEOPLE ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 33

Financial Data
Source of Income1
$2,720,930
Sponsored Research
$4,486,216
Endowment Payouts
Expenditures
$39,125,498
$31,918,352
Gifts & Other Income
Total $9,471,211
Operations
$3,920,544
FacultyFellowsandResearchScholars
1 Income does not include increases in endowment principal
$10,458,528
Research
HAI Research Grants Support
$6,843,918
CommunityandPrograms
In FY24, HAI issued
$30,694,201 Total
$10.377M
$10,377,192
in research grants
Total
$1,795,800 $6,075,000 $2,206,392 $300,000
Cloud Credit Grants Hoffman-Yee Grants Seed Grants AIM-HAI Partnership Grants
34 | ANNUAL REPORT 2024 FINANCIAL DATA FINANCIAL DATA ANNUAL REPORT 2024 | 35

Thank you
Thank you for following Stanford HAI’s efforts to realize our vision
of human-centered AI. We appreciate the support of our extended
community and encourage you to contact us with any questions.
Support for HAI
Stanford HAI is grateful for the generosity of those who provide
support to make its work possible. The impact of this philanthropic
support extends beyond individual projects; it ripples wider as our
researchers seek further discoveries, share their findings, and make
strides toward new strategies for the enhancement of artificial
intelligence and its role in shaping a better future for humanity.
The institute welcomes philanthropic contributions.
Please contact Stacey Sickels Boyce, Senior Associate
Director of Development, with interest or questions.
Email
sickels-boyce@stanford.edu
Office
650.497.3772
Mobile/WhatsApp
+1-410-991-4926