458 IEEETRANSACTIONSONTECHNOLOGYANDSOCIETY,VOL.6,NO.4,DECEMBER2025
AI Ethics and Governance in the Job Market:
Trends, Skills, and Sectoral Demand
Lucas Wiese , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Sonali Subbu Rathinam , Matthias Oschinski ,
Bryan DeWitt , and Daniel S. Schiff , Member, IEEE
Abstract—DemandforanAI-literateworkforcehassurged,in AI4K12 and AI4ALL, Finland’s Elements of AI, and China’s
largeparttocounteragrowingskillsgap.Meanwhile,expertisein AI+X program aim to cultivate a literate workforce through
ethical and governance dimensions of AI is increasingly deemed primary, secondary, and tertiary education, certificates, and
crucial to handle various organizational, regulatory, and social retraininginitiatives [1],[2],[3],[4],[5].Initiatives areaimed
concerns. However, the focus of AI literacy efforts to date has
not only at future AI developers with advanced graduate
beenprimarilytechnical.Thispaperhelpsclosethisgapbypro-
education,butalsoatworkerswhomayinteractwithorutilize
viding the first large-scale analysis of AI ethics and governance
AI, and at members of the general public of the general
skillssoughtbyemployersinthelabormarket.Drawingonmore
thanfourmillionjobpostingsforAI-relatedprofessionsoverthe public [6]. Government policies like the U.S. National AI
years 2018-2023, we provide an empirically-grounded character- Initiative Act [7] and other efforts addressing AI adoption
ization of AI ethics and governance competencies and perform and literacy are now providing funding in the billions of
associateddescriptiveanalyses.WefindthatprofessionalswithAI dollars, as an extension of prior STEM-focused workforce
ethics and governance competencies are requested by employers development strategies. These calls to invest in and develop
to hold diverse skill sets, covering technical, managerial, and
anAIworkforcesignalaconcerninggapregardingthecurrent
regulatory domains, though the two professions remain distinct.
workforce’scapacityandthedesiredskillsneededtomaintain
Moreover, the demand for expertise in these domains has grown
an innovative yet inclusive AI workforce. Extending from a
rapidly,bothinabsolutetermsandasaproportionofAI-related
job postings. More than 100,000 professionals with expertise in decades-long concern about STEM skills competitiveness [8],
AI ethics and governance are now requested annually, with the this mismatch is broadly described as the AI skills gap.
concentration highest in the financial and information sectors. As defined by Wu and Lin [9, p. 1], “this gap refers to the
These findings can help individuals, employers, and institutions disparity between the growing demand for AI expertise and
of higher education better design job requirements, educational the available talent pool—spanning both individual workforce
programs, and individual learning pathways, closing the career
capabilities and national technological capacities.” Thus, the
competency gap in AI ethics and governance.
AIskillsgaphasbothdomesticandglobalinvocations,serving
IndexTerms—AIliteracy,AIethics,AIgovernance,workforce as a hidden catalyst that exacerbates economic disparity and
development, labor market, career competencies. social inequality. On this logic, those who hold the skills,
resources, and knowledge to shape and use AI will continue
to innovate, rendering it less feasible for other communities
I. INTRODUCTION
and countries to catch up, causing the gap to expand at an
THE DEMAND for artificial intelligence (AI)-literate unprecedented rate compared to previous technologies.
workers has grown substantially in recent years, with An underlying skillsmismatch in the labor market has long
significant efforts by policymakers, industry, and scholars been recognized [10], [11], especially in STEM. However,
to cultivate a workforce capable of realizing AI’s role in the skills mismatch in AI is particularly unique; the large
innovation and provision of goods and services. Calls to investment in AI is hypothesized to play a heightened role
prepare workers emanate from local to international scales, in inducing labor disruption and displacement. Thus, it may
with initiatives led by government, educational institutions, be that AI advancement both silos AI jobs and disrupts
and the private sector. For example, U.S. initiatives like others. The scale of change, the requirements for upskilling
or reskilling, and the pace of change raise the stakes of the
Received 14 ; revised 24 and 30 ; skills gap from concerning to potentially economically and
accepted 30 . Date of publication 20 ; date of current socially existential [12], [13], [14], [15]. Heightened power
version 22 . This work was supported in part by the
concentration, withdrawn economic development ladders, and
U.S. National Science Foundation under Award 2134667. (Lucas Wiese,
SonaliSubbuRathinam,MatthiasOschinski,andDanielS.Schiffareco-first uncertainty about even the feasibility of keeping up with the
authors.)(Correspondingauthor:DanielS.Schiff.) paceofinnovationthreatentoexacerbatethedistancebetween
Lucas Wiese is with the Department of Computer and Information the haves and have-nots.
Technology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907 USA (e-mail:
lwiese@purdue.edu).
Sonali Subbu Rathinam and Matthias Oschinski are with the Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, Georgetown University, Washington, A. Beyond Technical AI: The Need for Socio-Ethical and
DC 20001 USA (e-mail: ss4608@georgetown.edu; matthias.oschinski@ Governance Competencies
georgetown.edu).
BryanDeWittiswiththeDepartmentofCurriculumandInstruction,Purdue To mitigate the AI skills gap, stakeholders have thus
University,WestLafayette,IN47907USA(e-mail:bdewitt@purdue.edu). proposed a wide array of strategies: increased international
Daniel S. Schiff is with the Department of Political Science, Purdue
collaboration,socialdialogue,equity-promoting policyframe-
University,WestLafayette,IN47907USA(e-mail:dschiff@purdue.edu).
DigitalObjectIdentifier10.1109/TTS.2025.3567143 works,andthepotentialofeducationalreformandinstitutional
2637-6415(cid:2)c 2025IEEE.Allrightsreserved,includingrightsfortextanddatamining,andtrainingofartificialintelligence
andsimilartechnologies. Personaluseispermitted,butrepublication/redistributionrequiresIEEEpermission.
See
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WIESEetal.:AIETHICSANDGOVERNANCEINTHEJOBMARKET:TRENDS,SKILLS,ANDSECTORALDEMAND 459
promotion of AI education in preparing workers across dis- private and public sector organizations [35], [36]. That is, a
ciplines [16], [17], [18], [19]. Yet, a critical element of this consistent feature of AI policy and innovation is the need for
effortistherecognitionthattheAIskillsgapisnotmanifested professionalpractitionerswhocandesignandmaintainframe-
just through the (uneven) distribution of technical expertise. works for responsible AI within and across organizations,
Instead,desiredskillsinAIliteracyalsoconsistofthecapacity ranging from hospitals to schools to manufacturing floors.
to navigate complex socio-ethical issues, advanced critical Thus, while efforts to build the technical AI workforce,
thinking and creative reasoning, and interpersonal and inter- emphasizing skills in computer science, software engineer-
disciplinary collaboration skills, as well as more traditional ing, and data science remain dominant [6], this paper
technical expertise [20], [21], [22], [23]. Associated AI ethics highlights the need to understand and prepare the work-
and AI governance skills gaps are the focus of this paper. force with respect to competence in AI governance and AI
Importantly, the aims of AI literacy—or competency— ethics. A growing number of initiatives do exist, including
initiatives alsogo beyond depositing necessary jobskillsfora undergraduate and graduate courses [37], graduate degree
givenworkplace[21], [22].Theyincludetrainingstudentsand programs [38], professional certifications [39], and train-
future professionals to be independent agents capable of their ings offered by industry and civil society groups. Another
ownlearningandpersonalandprofessionalgrowth[24], [25]. body of research discusses the prospects for teaching AI
Insights from ethics education, professional ethics, AI liter- ethics and governance to future practitioners [40], [41], [42],
acy, and business ethics are all pertinent. For instance, [20] aligned with a growing body of scholarship that addresses
recommendsthatAIliteracyeffortsaddresshowprofessionals the practice of AI ethics within organizations and associated
understand the socio-legal-technical impacts of their work, challenges [35], [43], [44]. Further, a portion of research has
practice collaboration with each other, and engage in self- sought to specifically understand the competencies for AI
reflection over professional practices. Sidra and Mason [25] ethics practitioners, a necessary step and literature to which
similarly highlight the unique metacognitive skills required this study directly contributes [45], [46], [47].
for effective human-AI collaboration, corresponding with
accounts of day-to-day problems for AI ethicists [26], [27].
B. Addressing Foundational Knowledge Gaps in AI Ethics
AI ethics and governance professionals also do not solve
and Governance Workforce Development
problems in a detached, clean environment; moral decision-
making is subject to cognitive biases and heuristics and beset Despite growing recognition of the importance of AI
by organizational pressures [28], and these dimensions of ethics and governance competencies, major gaps remain in
“what it means to be an AI ethicist” are among many of scholars’ and decision-makers’ understanding of how these
importance to consider for AI deployment in organizational fields are developing. Key uncertainties include: 1) the scale
contexts. and distribution of demand for AI ethics and governance
Moreover, while these skill sets and competencies are skills across sectors; 2) the degree of alignment or mismatch
indeed essential for the technical design and development of between employer needs and available talent; and 3) the
AI systems, they are equally essential for their responsible design of effective educational programs, career pathways,
adoption,implementation,monitoring,andgovernance,forall and instructional strategies to prepare future practitioners. For
professionals, including executive leadership [29]. Achieving instance,towhatextentareskillsinrelatedfields,likeprivacy,
these goals is likely to require the efforts of (at least) tens of compliance, or risk management transferable to these new
thousands of individuals over many years, and across societal AI ethics and governance roles? Further, should organizations
sectors. For instance, to help manage AI’s implications for or educators concentrate AI ethics and governance skills
safety, ethics, and human rights, recent years have seen land- within dedicated specialist roles, or should these skills be
markgovernanceeffortsliketheEuropeanUnionAIAct[30], fostered across all technical and AI-engaged professionals?
or the U.S. NIST AI Risk Management Framework [31] This paper takes an initial step toward addressing these foun-
which include proposals for independent auditing, conformity dational questions by conceptualizing these issues, analyzing
assessment,safetytesting,organizationalgovernance,andrisk large-scale labor market data, and offering empirical insights
management. into the emerging composition of AI ethics and governance
Recent policy and initiatives emanating globally, such as professions.
from the since-revoked 2023 U.S. Executive Order on Safe, In short, calls for safe, trustworthy, and responsible AI
Secure, and Trustworthy AI [32] include: requirements for governance will require attention comparable to that afforded
publicsectoragenciestorecruitchiefAIofficersandadvisory to training future scientists and technical AI practitioners.
councils; the public posting of AI inventories and evalu- Yet we have very little empirical understanding of these
ation results; the development of responsible AI maturity professionals, their roles, and which skills are demanded of
models for private organizations; and consortia of interested them or truly needed of them. This paper aims to help close
professionals who participate in organizations, such as the thesegapsbyfocusingonthecompositionofskillsdemanded
Ethical AI Governance Group and Responsible AI Institute, by AI ethics and governance jobs. Through our analysis, it is
potentially receiving certification in AI ethics or governance important to note that our findings are drawn from empirical
skills [33], [34]. Meanwhile, urged along by these consortia evidence from job postings, but there remains a larger gap
and public policy, an industry has emerged to address respon- between the deeper realities of these jobs and the market’s
sible AI, trustworthy or ethical AI, and AI governance within preliminary conception of them. This may further reflect a
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

460 IEEETRANSACTIONSONTECHNOLOGYANDSOCIETY,VOL.6,NO.4,DECEMBER2025
limitedunderstandingorevennormativelyundesirableneglect thesethreeactors(whilenotcomprehensive)iscriticaltoclose
of key skills and roles surrounding ethics. This paper is a first the gap in the availability and empowerment of AI ethics and
step in connecting prior work [26], [27], [46] on AI ethics to AI governance professionals.
thesesystem-leveltrendsandassociatedunresolvedquestions. The interactions between these three actors are additionally
Specifically,weexamineskillsrelatedtoeitherAIethicsor nfluencedbyeffortsfromgovernmentandregulatoryagencies,
AI governance in job posting data from 2018-2023 compiled at both national and local levels. As depicted in Fig. 1, these
by Lightcast.1 In this descriptive analysis, we consider the governmentandregulatorybodiesarefoundationaltoshaping,
following three research questions (RQ): informing, and encouraging the competencies and capabilities
1) RQ1: What core competencies characterize AI ethics that the labor market demands. For instance, government
and governance roles as reflected in the labor market? agencies are motivated to advance national priorities, such
Specifically, what skill subcategories—including techni- as economic growth and national security, and build public
cal, managerial, regulatory, and socio-ethical—are most trust in AI to help sustain a fair and competitive market.
desired for professionals in AI ethics and governance- Government agencies also strategically engage in agenda-
aligned job postings? setting for AI regulations and policy. This may include
2) RQ2: How has the demand for professionals with AI establishing standards and guidelines for AI development as
ethicsandgovernancecompetencieschangedfrom2018 well as funding and investing in STEM education initiatives
to 2023? or AI research at large. In total, individual learners, higher
3) RQ3: How does the demand for professionals with AI educational institutions, and employers are influenced by the
ethicsandgovernancecompetenciesvaryacrossindustry strategic actions emerging from the public sector. Finally,
sectors? these dynamics are likely affected by other actors as well not
Next, we present our conceptual framework that outlines depictedhere,likemedia,civilsociety,andthegeneralpublic.
the assumptions guiding our research and findings on the AI TheframeworkpresentedinFig. 1representsanoperational
(ethics and governance) skills gap. This framework situates understanding of the role of these three actors in addressing
the role of individual learners, employing organizations, and the aforementioned AI skills gap [16]. It builds on the exist-
higher education institutions as amongst key stakeholders in ing Competency-Capability Chasm (CCC) as developed by
addressing the skills gap. Following, we present our methods Ward et al. [48], [49], which represents the distance between
which describe our use of job posting data to determine the capabilities taught from higher education institutions and
competenciesandtheanalyticalstrategiesappliedtothesedata the competencies sought in the job market. That is, the CCC
to investigate job postings for AI ethics and AI governance “exists between what is taught and what is sought” [49,
roles from 2018 to 2023. Our results section highlights key p. 898]. We expand this understanding to the AI context
findings across our three research questions, from under- by situating individuals, employers, and institutions within
standing core competencies to trends over time and sectors. the chasm to conceptualize responsible actors, institutions,
Finally,wediscusstheimplicationsofourfindingsasthefirst and mechanisms that might be activated to address the AI
comprehensive analysis on the demand of AI ethics and AI skills gap.
governance using real-time job posting data. As our results For each actor, we present examples of key motivations
empirically operationalize AI ethics and AI governance as potentially driving their behavior in this ecosystem as well
concrete professional domains, and draw distinctions between as strategic actions they might take. For instance, individual
them, our study has practical implications for educational learners may be motivated both by the interest in secur-
design, policy development, and professional organizations ing career opportunities in AI ethics or governance roles,
who are defining these fields moving forward. as well as promoting their job security in an uncertain
labor market generally. Meanwhile, institutions of higher
II. CONCEPTUALFRAMEWORK education are motivated by ensuring their graduates are
prepared for these roles, as well as supporting organiza-
We approach our investigation under the assumption that
tional goals like student recruitment and stable funding.
(1)individuallearners,(2)employers,and(3)higher-education
Employers may likewise be motivated by the need to comply
institutions have a shared responsibility to effectively con-
with regulations and promote trust of consumers or the
tribute to a skilled AI ethics and AI governance workforce.
public.
As a corollary, none of these actors alone can be solely
These motivations suggest ways in which the actors’ deci-
responsible for driving an AI-literate workforce: the uncer-
sions and actions are entangled. For instance, universities that
taintiessurroundingtheseskills,regulatoryandsocioeconomic
remain unaware of needs in industry may fail to promote the
developments, and the change of pace of AI technology make
relevant skills needed in their programs. Meanwhile, employ-
planning especially difficult. Under these conditions, it is
ers that present a narrow vision of AI ethics and governance
unrealistic to expect an individual to fully navigate these
roles may lead to the creation of educational programs that
dynamic conditions, to expect employers to be fully equipped
areunattractiveforuniversitiesandstudents,andtoconditions
or incentivized to upskill their employees, or to expect
which are deemed untrustworthy by the public. Along these
higher-education institutions to become prescient workforce
lines, Fig. 1 presents examples of suggested strategic actions
development factories. Understanding the interaction between
thatcanhelpsupportallthreeactors’sharedinterests.Inturn,
1Lightcast is a labor market analysis company that collects job postings this conceptualization affords scholars the ability to map the
frommultiplesources,andprovidesinsightintothelabormarket. findings of the present study onto the broader literature, and
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WIESEetal.:AIETHICSANDGOVERNANCEINTHEJOBMARKET:TRENDS,SKILLS,ANDSECTORALDEMAND 461
Fig. 1. Adapted Competency-Capability Chasm from [49] to account for individuals, employers, higher education institutions, and the public sector. The
frameworkrepresentshowsharedcommitmentbetweenindividuals,employers,andhighereducationinstitutionsisnecessarytoclosethecapability-competency
chasmforAIethicsandgovernance.
helps futureresearchers and practitioners identifypathways to For instance, appropriate learning paths must not only
close the gap further. account for the sought-after skills articulated as important
in the labor market; they should also account for learners’
motivations,needs,andexpectations[52].Moreover,learners’
A. The Nature of Instructional Design and Aligning motivations are themselves often inextricably linked with the
Individuals, Employers, and Institutions job market—they want the education that will afford them
For this vision to be realized, it is important to understand theflexibility,opportunity,impact,andcompensationthatthey
the traditional approach universities take with instructional desire [53], [54]. Consequently, this framework’s successful
design, including when developing new educational programs application depends on recognizing what each stakeholder
or degrees. This includes how institutions respond to individ- brings to the table dynamically, rather than working from
ual learners and draw ideas from employer needs (or not). fixed assumptions. Importantly, this does not assume that
Instructionaldesignersinparticularmustapplytheirexpertise, employers’ articulation of what the job market does or should
experience, and understand the context to solve complex require is the ground truth. Rather, employers may also have
problems in educational design, which are often novel [50]. gapsintheirknowledgeandunderstanding,andmaybeoverly
That is, designing for AI ethics and AI governance education focused on short-term goals or attached to prior ways of
requiressynthesizingtherequirementsandconstraintsforeach thinking. As argued in [48], [49], the CCC is a space where
actor in this model. stakeholders should constantly assess, reassess, and realign
However, conventional approaches, while valuable, have workforce development and educational efforts.
focused primarily on the start of a learner’s journey (what When addressing the CCC, a few strategic options may
skills or competencies they bring when beginning a program) be prudent. First, individual learners must do the necessary
and typically design forward from there to scaffold their reflectionandarticulatetheirdesires,trajectories,andinterests.
learning[51].Unfortunately,thisstrategyoftenfailstoaccount This is no doubt informed by both the evolving demands
for how the learning journey will culminate into professional of the labor market and the messaging from higher edu-
applications down the road; that is whether the articulated cation institutions that construct curricula and opportunities
learning goals are reasonable, useful, and sufficient. This for students. Second, employers must maintain a culture and
problem is not easily solved by backwards design approaches atmosphere of continuous learning, growth, and professional
either. Instead, we argue that it requires we argue it requires development [55]. With this, they can maintain an adaptive
deeper synthesis and collaboration. workforce that responds to the fast paced AI landscape,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

462 IEEETRANSACTIONSONTECHNOLOGYANDSOCIETY,VOL.6,NO.4,DECEMBER2025
without outsourcing employee learning entirely to individuals understanding applies to AI governance professionals as well.
or educational institutions [56], a growing approach which AI governance professionals are needed to understand techni-
risks increased employee turnover and skill stagnation. cal components of the AI development lifecycle and integrate
Helpfully, employers can leverage programs like (in the legal,regulatory,andcomplianceframeworksseamlessly,min-
U.S.) the Section 127 Educational Assistance Program for up imizing the likelihood of harm while maximizing the capacity
to $5,250 in annual expenses per employee for professional and innovation of AI systems. And while many of these
development [57]. Third, higher education institutions must dimensions are discussed in policy and educational discourse,
evolve beyond traditional instructional design practices and and present in general AI literacy frameworks, it remains
foster foundational capabilities, respond to evolving market- unclearexactlywhichsetsofskillsareimportantorprioritized
alignedcompetencies,andrespectindividuals’experiencesand for AI ethics and governance professionals.
motivations. This might include innovative approaches like As such, we next detail the methods we used to conduct
non-credit-to-creditorearned-admissionpathwaysthatprovide a large-scale job posting analysis to study the sought-after
flexible degree trajectories [58], [59], [60]. Yet, universities skills for these types of professionals. We emphasize again
are also in a position to help identify and shape the skill that the current state of demands from employers do not
demands and future roles of students, not merely react to the fully capture the ground truth about these professions or their
market, especially in dynamic settings like AI, or in arguably future. However, they provide important signals about how
underdeveloped settings like ethics. AI ethics and governance skills and professions are emerging;
These shared commitments, as we propose in Fig. 1, can what skills are imagined to be important; to what extent these
thus assist with more robustly closing the AI skills gap. Next, professionals are unique compared to professionals in related
we will examine the context surrounding AI ethics and AI roles; and to what extent AI ethics and governance skills and
governance skills in particular. roles are concentrated or distributed.
B. Specifying the AI Ethics and AI Governance Domains
III. METHODS
A. Rationale and Data Collection
DesigninganddevelopingAIsystemscomeswithaplethora
of social and ethical considerations to protect human life To ascertain skill requirements in AI ethics and AI gov-
and promote societal welfare. As such, ethical principles ernance occupations, we leveraged real-time labor market
and practices help to guide responsible AI, and governance informationfromLightcast,particularlytheirjobpostingdata.
mechanisms must exist to connect and align AI systems with Lightcast collects job posting data by scraping over 65,000
humanvalues[61], [62].Acrosssettingsanddisciplines,there websites globally, including company career pages, national
are practices that professionals can implement at each stage and local job boards, and data from job aggregators [65]. The
of the AI development lifecycle, policies that organizations use of job posting data, and Lightcast data in particular, is
can enforce, and national and local regulations that can guide increasingly common in labor market studies [66], [67], [68]
the AI industry and AI systems at large [25], [63]. While a and has been used for purposes such as analyzing skills
full review of relevant AI ethics and AI governance strategies demand [69], [70], assessing emerging job markets [71], [72]
is outside the scope of this paper, it suffices to say that and measuring the effects of technological change [73], [74].
accomplishing these widely demanded goals of safe and Closely related to the current context, these data have been
responsible AI requires unique socio-technical skill sets that used to assess trends in digital literacy [75] and competencies
are important to target. in the green economy [76]. These data have also proven
Responsible AI practitioners may range from technical valuableforanalyzingtheevolutionofAI-relatedjobpostings
researchers, computer scientists, and engineers, to policy and skill requirements [77], [78].
experts and managerial professionals. Across these occu- Fig. 2 illustrates our methodological approach. In the first
pations, [64] present a helpful taxonomy of different step, we followed [79] in using keywords that designate
skills thought necessary across technical and non-technical an occupation as AI-related. The initial dataset included
professionalsincluding:technicalresearchcapacities,interdis- U.S. job postings with associated metadata such as company
ciplinary communication, analytical systems thinking, policy names, skills, industry taxonomies [80], and occupational
integration strategies, and business or human resources taxonomies [81]. Lightcast removes duplicates and we only
expertise [64]. Extending the complexity of this unique, includedjobpostingsthatcontainskillsmappedtoLightcast’s
multidisciplinarydomain[26]arguesthatanAIethicistshould publicly-available skills taxonomy.
possess a unique capacity to “apply and communicate ethical We used a total of 72 AI (skills) keywords to extract
principles in the context of artificial intelligence within a the primary AI-related dataset, all available in Lightcast’s
corporate structure” which may require special skills like formal typology of terms [82]. To come up with our list of
bravery [26, p. 4]. Moreover, the AI ethicist must be able AI keywords that we crosswalked with Lightcast’s available
to hold conflicting personal and professional identities; as terms, we drew on prior taxonomic research from [78] and
identified by [27], the motivations of an AI ethicist may be augmented this list by examining other AI-related keywords
in conflict with those of their employing institution—whether articulated in the Lightcast skills taxonomy. We iterated this
because of financial, social, or philosophical differences. list over several rounds as outlined as best practice for textual
While more explicit research has been done on the pro- analysis in [83], [84] and depicted in Fig. 2. This process
fessional capacities of the AI ethicist, we argue that this involved examining a subset of identified job postings and
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WIESEetal.:AIETHICSANDGOVERNANCEINTHEJOBMARKET:TRENDS,SKILLS,ANDSECTORALDEMAND 463
Fig.2. DeterminingAIethicsandAIgovernanceoccupations.
TABLEI
Next, we conducted a second stage of iterative data col-
EXAMPLECATEGORIESOFAI-RELATEDSKILLSKEYWORDS
lection to pinpoint job postings specifically associated with
AI ethics and AI governance, respectively, using a refined set
of 30 ethics and 58 governance keywords. This process was
similarly informed by literature and expert sources but was
also augmented by large language model support. To begin,
we used OpenAI’s GPT-4 large language model to brainstorm
keywords, consistent with the strategy used by [79]. For
example, terms associated with AI ethics included: fairness,
accountability, transparency, privacy, bias, mitigation, and
ethical decision-making. For AI governance, terms included:
policy development, compliance, risk management, standards
development, oversight, and stakeholder engagement. Next,
we expanded this keyword set based on additional keywords
from previous studies on AI ethics and AI governance con-
cepts [85], [86], [87]. After expert review and several rounds
of iteration, similar to the process employed for the superset
adjusting keywords iteratively to ensure greater completeness ofAIjobpostings,weidentifiedfinalsetsof(skills)keywords
and accuracy of coverage. for AI ethics and governance jobs.
Due to contractual limitations with our data provider, The results provided us with an AI ethics (job posting)
we cannot share the proprietary set of final keywords for dataset of n=388,107, an AI governance (job posting) dataset
the AI, ethics, and governance datasets. However, Table I of n=367,439, and a dataset of job postings which contain
presents examples of overarching categories synthesized from both AI ethics and AI governance terms of n=114,913. See
the 72 skills keywords which were used to identify the Fig. 3 for a Venn diagram of these datasets and their overlap.
initial AI-related job postings. Finally, note that all keywords We describe these individuals as AI ethics or governance
must definitionally be part of the formal Lightcast typology professionals, though this should be understood to include
to enable extraction based on those keywords. The result- individuals with a variety of roles and both greater or lesser
ing dataset comprises 4,457,851 job postings for the years degrees of focus on AI ethics and governance. For instance,
spanning 2018 to 2023, covering the demand for AI-related a data scientist or risk management professional might devote
occupations. much, or only some, of their job to AI ethics or governance.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

464 IEEETRANSACTIONSONTECHNOLOGYANDSOCIETY,VOL.6,NO.4,DECEMBER2025
To answer RQ2, regarding the evolution of demand from
2018 to 2023, we conducted a trend analysis by examining
how the frequency of job postings changed over this time
period. Specifically, we analyzed the amount of AI, AI ethics,
and AI governance job postings by year, which allows us to
glean insight into growth patterns, relative frequencies, and
changing employer priorities over time.
To answer RQ3, regarding how these skills vary across
economic sectors, we calculated the prevalence of AI ethics
and AI governance job postings for each year from 2018 to
2023 as a percentage of all job postings (not just AI-related)
in those industries. The results offer a sectoral perspective on
the demand for these competencies.
Fig.3. FrequencyofAIethicsandAIgovernancejobpostings.
IV. RESULTS
However, importantly, all individuals are ostensibly working
A. RQ1: Core Competencies of AI Ethics and AI
in AI-related roles, and the jobs they apply to require skills
Governance Professionals
like ‘privacy law’ or ‘fairness.’ So, while most of these
professionals would not have job titles like “AI Governance As a first step, we determined the core competencies
Lead” or “AI Ethics Manager,” they are working at the required of AI ethics and AI governance professionals by
intersection of AI and ethics or governance, at least to some identifying skills with the largest location quotients (LQ).
degree. Using Lightcast’s built-in skill subcategories attached to a set
of 39M online job postings from2023, we calculated the LQs
for all skill subcategories by comparing how frequently each
B. Analysis skill subcategory appeared in AI ethics or AI governance job
postings relative to how frequently it appeared across all job
Our analysis procedure was designed to address each of
postings, as described in (1) and (2). In this context, a LQ
our RQs. To answer RQ1, regarding the core competencies
greaterthan1indicatesthatagivenskillismoreconcentrated
requiredofAIethicsandAIgovernance-alignedprofessionals,
within a specific domain (i.e., AI ethics or AI governance
we conducted a skill analysis using location quotients (LQ)
occupations) relative to its prevalence across the full set of
andajobtitlefrequencyanalysis.Assuch,first,wecalculated
job postings. This suggests that the skill is disproportionately
the LQ for ethics- and governance-related skills across job
important for that domain and can be considered a core
postings.
competency. For instance, if a skill appears in 4% of AI
The LQ is typically used to compare the concentration of a
ethics job postings but only 1% of job postings overall,
specific industry or occupation in a region to its concentration
its LQ would be 4.0, indicating strong overrepresentation in
in a broader geography as a measure of specialization [88].
that domain. Here, all skills are aggregated into higher-level
In this context, it measures the relative representation (or
Lightcast-providedskillsubcategoriestosimplifyanalysisand
importance) of a given skill in AI ethics or governance job
interpretation.
postings compared to that skill’s overall representation (or
importance) in the entire job posting dataset. For instance, kAIEthics
the entire job posting dataset for 2023 has approximately nAIEthics =LQ (1)
Pk
39 million job postings. Skills with an LQ greater than 1 are N
considered highly represented in the 388,107 AI ethics job kAIGovernance
postings or 367,439 AI governance job postings, respectively, nAIGovernance =LQ (2)
Pk
meaning these skills are especially likely to be particular N
emphases of AI ethics or governance jobs rather than just where
generally important skills (i.e., they are core competencies). LQ = location quotient
Note that, for ease of interpretation, we aggregated individual k = number of job postings for skill subcategory
skills to a pre-defined set of higher-level skill subcategories, n = number of job postings for domain
discussed in more detail later. P = number of total postings for subcategory k
Next,weidentifiedthemostfrequentjobsorjobtitlesasso- N = total number of job postings
ciated with AI ethics and AI governance skills by calculating Table II presents skill subcategories that are most sought
theshareoftotalAIethicsorAIgovernance postingsin2023 after in AI ethics job postings, relative to all job postings. For
as a percentage of all job postings, analyzed per job title. instance, the Lightcast-provided subcategory ‘Regulation and
Here, we drew on a standardized set of job titles provided by Legal Compliance’ encompasses ‘Data Ethics,’ ‘Knowledge
Lightcast because of the diversity of informal job titles used of Data Privacy Laws,’ and ‘Ethical Standards and Conduct.’
inthemarketplace.Thisanalysiseffectivelyhighlightsthetop Importantly, note that the core competencies demanded of
types of occupations—or roles—that employers are targeting these professionals need not be limited to (obviously) ethics-
when they ask candidates to have AI ethics or AI governance or governance-focused skills; more general skills are cer-
skills when applying for a position. tainly also relevant. The diverse range of skill subcategories
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WIESEetal.:AIETHICSANDGOVERNANCEINTHEJOBMARKET:TRENDS,SKILLS,ANDSECTORALDEMAND 465
TABLEII TABLEIV
TOPSKILLSUBCATEGORIESINAIETHICSJOBPOSTINGS TOPSOCCODESWITHAIETHICSJOBPOSTINGS
TABLEV
TOPSOCCODESWITHAIGOVERNANCEJOBPOSTINGS
TABLEIII
TOPSKILLSUBCATEGORIESINAIGOVERNANCEJOBPOSTINGS
This concentration is followed by postings for Computer and
Information Systems Managers, Data Scientists, and Database
Architects, each with similar shares in AI ethics postings.
BeyondtheprevalenceofAIethicsskillsincomputing-related
roles, we found that over 2% of job postings for Financial
Specialists were related to AI ethics. This is suggestive of the
importance of AI ethics professionals in this specific sector,
one which is highly regulated.
Similarly, for AI governance job postings, Table V show-
identified suggests that desired AI ethics competencies cut cases the top five SOC codes with AI governance job
across multiple disciplines, with prominent skills in domains postings. As seen, job postings for Financial Specialists had
like technology, strategy, research, management, policy, and the highest share of AI governance skills requested. Then,
regulation. a similar share of Financial Risk Specialist, Computer and
In contrast, in AI governance job postings, we see less Information Systems Manager, Statistician, and Data Scientist
science, research, and technical skills required and more job postings reflected a desire for AI governance-competent
project management-related skills. Table III showcases the professionals. Currently, these concentrations suggest close
most sought-after skill subcategories for AI governance job alignment between the financial sector and AI governance
postings. Here, we see desired business-specific skills like skills, and between computer professionals and AI ethics
analysis, communication, leadership, operations, and manage- skills. Importantly, however, these top five example occupa-
ment as well as field-specific skills such as regulatory, legal, tions only reflect a fraction of the tens of thousands of total
and data-related skills. job postings calling for AI ethics and governance skills, as
Overall, while the skill compositions that the job mar- seen in Fig. 4.
ket is seeking for professionals in AI ethics- and AI Overall, the findings suggest that ethical and governance-
governance-aligned roles differ, both are interdisciplinary and related skills are becoming core requirements for established
multifunctional in nature. occupations, such as data scientists, machine learning engi-
To elaborate on this understanding, we next looked at neers,andfinancialspecialists.Concurrently,however,wealso
the specific occupations and job titles which seek AI ethics observe the emergence of new, dedicated roles in these areas.
and governance skills most. Table IV showcases the top five For example, McKinsey & Company describe the growing
standard occupational classification (SOC) codes where AI trend of organizations hiring dedicated AI governance and AI
ethics job postings are common, subset to 2023, as a portion ethics specialists to complement their AI workforce strategy,
of all job postings. The SOC codes come from a frequently along with transforming expectations for data science and
usedtaxonomy,linkedtotheLightcastdataset,whichenabled machinelearningroles[89].Alongtheselines,aconsortiumof
us to view the concentration of AI ethics job postings by leadingglobalcorporationsidentifiesAIethicsandresponsible
(standardized) occupation. AI skills as the overall most critical new skill domain for
As shown, job postings for Computer and Information informationandcommunicationtechnologyjobs[90],increas-
Research Scientists in 2023 most frequently cited AI ethics- ingly relevant to 100% of jobs analyzed in their study.
related skills in their requirements, with nearly 5% of all Together, these developments offer an initial map of the
postings for this occupation including a focus on AI ethics. diverse literacies that may become increasingly important for
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

466 IEEETRANSACTIONSONTECHNOLOGYANDSOCIETY,VOL.6,NO.4,DECEMBER2025
Fig.4. FrequencyofAI,AIethics,andAIgovernancejobpostingsovertime,from2018to2023.
TABLEVI
jobseekers and institutions of higher education seeking to
INDUSTRIESWITHHIGHESTSHAREOFAIETHICSJOBPOSTINGS
prepare the future AI workforce.
B. RQ2: Evolution of AI Ethics and AI Governance Skills
The demand for skilled AI, AI ethics, and AI governance
jobs has grown from 2018 to 2022, with a noticeable dip
in job postings in 2023, potentially related to broader labor
markettrends(i.e.,sweepinglayoffsinthetechnologysector).
InFig. 4,wepresentabargraphthatdepictsthetotalnumber
ofeachtypeofjobposting,whichprovidesarelativesenseof
C. RQ3: Skills Across Sectors
theprevalenceofAIethicsandAIgovernancerolesversusAI
roles more generally. Note the definition of skills associated Lastly,toaddressourthirdRQ,weanalyzedthedistribution
with each type of role remains consistent across these years ofAIethicsandAIgovernancejobpostingsacrossindustries,
in our analysis. focusing on the top four industries. We used the standard
As seen, job postings in AI nearly doubled from 2018 to North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS)
2022. Then, in 2023, numbers returned almost to 2018 levels codes to label industries and to subset our analyses. Presented
(albeit, with a higher proportion of AI ethics and governance in Table VI and Table VII, we see that the “Finance and
jobs). The 2024 AI Index Report [91] finds a similar dip in Insurance” industry has the highest demand for AI ethics
AI labor demand in 2023, as the authors found that “every and AI governance skills, followed closely by jobs in the
AI-related skill cluster tracked by Lightcast had a decrease in “Information” sector.
marketshare,withtheexceptionofgenerativeAI,whichgrew ForbothAIethicsandAIgovernanceskills,thepercentage
by more than a factor of 10” [91, p. 224]. Notwithstanding shareoutofalljobpostingsineachindustrysteadilyincreased
2023’s decline, AI ethics and AI governance job postings do from 2018 to 2022, but again, in 2023 seemed to stagnate. As
not seem as affected by this dip, and it will be interesting an example of the significance of the change: the prevalence
to observe whether this trend continues. Instead, the relative oftheseskillshasgrownfromaboutaquarterofapercentage
demandforprofessionalswiththeseskillsisbroadlyincreasing, point to a one-half of a percentage point, roughly doubling
bothasanabsolutenumbercomparedtoearlieryears,andasa over only a five-year period.
proportion of AI-related jobs. For instance, while only around Future research will be necessary to evaluate the stability
6% of AI job postings featured ethics and governance skills of these patterns, especially in light of other economic shocks
in 2018, around 10% did only five years later. and cycles. Nevertheless, we see that the same industries are
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WIESEetal.:AIETHICSANDGOVERNANCEINTHEJOBMARKET:TRENDS,SKILLS,ANDSECTORALDEMAND 467
TABLEVII
Finally, we find the greatest demand for AI ethics or
INDUSTRIESWITHHIGHESTSHAREOFAIGOVERNANCEJOBPOSTINGS
AI governance-skilled professionals within the financial and
information sectors, though the demands for these profession-
als are broader and extend to many sectors beyond the four
wehighlightinouranalysis.Asoftheearly2020s,morethan
100,000 job postings annually in the AI industry in the U.S.
require AI ethics or AI governance skills.
The study provides the first comprehensive analysis of
demand for AI ethics and AI governance-aligned roles using
comprehensive job posting data, drawing on empirical evi-
dence of how organizations conceive of these professional
domains. It also contributes by demonstrating the growth of
represented, and in the same order: Finance and Insurance,
these fields as distinct professional domains, and by artic-
Information, Manufacturing, and Professional, Scientific, and
ulating the specific competencies (not limited to ethics or
Technical Services. These sectors are amongst the leaders in
governance skills construed narrowly) requested for individu-
seeking AI ethics and AI governance skills, though again,
als in job postings.
tens of thousands of positions are requested in other sectors,
However, while our study reviews the market’s hiring
ranging from healthcare to education to public administration.
demands with respect to AI ethics and governance roles,
these should be carefully interpreted and not conflated with
the complex realities and deeper normative challenges that
V. DISCUSSIONANDCONCLUSION
demandtheworkofAIethicistsandgovernanceprofessionals
As demands for AI literacy in the general public and in the first place. As [27] highlights, the AI ethicist may be
demands for an AI-skilled workforce have grown, an ecosys- required to work in industries that have potentially opposing
tem has emerged to better understand and prepare for these interests, objectives, and epistemological perspectives. For
changes. While there has been ample focus on technical AI instance, an AI ethicist may have to critically evaluate their
literacy, AI ethics and AI governance skills are increasingly organization and recommend actions that conflict with the
deemed critical to address a wide range of social, regulatory, economic interests of a firm, or, they may have to apply or
and organizational needs. Meanwhile, employers and higher evaluate practices using approaches not already formalized,
education institutions are only beginning to make sense of the understood, or valued within a firm. For instance, we might
skills required for these roles, and stakeholders broadly have expect ethicists to have particular skills in normative ethics,
only a modest knowledge of the scale of labor demand. systemsthinking,sociotechnicalthinking,sociology,andmuch
Adapting ideas from the Competency-Capability Chasm, more, including even atypical skills like ‘bravery’ [26] which
this paper aims to provide insight to employers, educational are unlikely to show up in job postings.
institutions, and individuals pursuing these professional goals, On the one hand, it is understandable that job postings
along with scholars and policymakers. Drawing on more than and skills taxonomies might not list all skills down to a
four million job postings related to AI over the years 2018- maximallevelofdetail,whichmaybedifficultandunrealistic,
2023, we adduce an empirically-grounded characterization of especially given the novelty of some of these job roles. In
AI ethics and AI governance as professional domains, as line with the Competency-Capability Chasm, it may be up to
articulated by job postings—that is, from the perspective of educational institutions to articulate all the micro skills that
employers. This definition encompasses both core specialists feed into “AI ethics” or “AI governance,” allowing employers
in these fields, as well as other adjacent professionals for to rely on this careful planning and associated training. On
whom these skills are important. For example, occupations as the other hand, this gap could suggest that broader work
diverse as statisticians to financial risk specialists now require is needed. This could include better elucidating the deeper
these AI ethics or AI governance skills. sets of skills required, educating employers on the need for
Moreover, we find that professionals with AI ethics or AI certainunfamiliarskillsandroles,andevenadvancingsocietal,
governance competencies—whether in technical, regulatory, normative,orregulatoryeffortstopromoteassociatedactivities
or business domains—require largely distinct yet overlapping or conceptions of those activities. In short, while the job
skill sets. Relatedly, while we find some overlap between market’s current demands constitute an important signal, they
AI ethics and AI governance job postings, the majority (as do not constitute a complete answer to how AI ethics and AI
depicted inFig. 2) belong toone domain alone. Next,we find governance skills, needs, and job roles will or should evolve.
clear evidence of growing demand for both AI ethics and AI While more work is needed, our paper helps identify how
governance roles since 2018, in absolute numbers and as a the market thinks about these professionals, and helps surface
percentage of all AI job postings. There is modest evidence gaps between industry, educational institutions, and broader
of a shift in relative demand as well; while AI governance normativegoals.Asastartingpoint,weencourageeducational
skills were initially more prominent, AI ethics skills have programstonotonlyconsiderthedesiredqualificationsofpro-
slightly surpassed them in importance as of 2021. Either way, fessionals from job posting data like those evaluated here, but
the overall growth trend suggests increasing organizational also consider the ethnographic reports and other taxonomic,
recognition of these roles’ and skills’ importance. qualitative, and conceptual work discussing AI ethics and AI
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

468 IEEETRANSACTIONSONTECHNOLOGYANDSOCIETY,VOL.6,NO.4,DECEMBER2025
governanceinindustry.Educationaldecision-makersalsohave Purdue University and the Center for Security and Emerging
an important role in being future-oriented: they should think Technology(CSET)atGeorgetownUniversityforsupportand
about how skills and roles will evolve—or should evolve—in feedback, especially Veronica Jade Kinoshita.
five or ten years.
These findings offer actionable guidance for educational REFERENCES
programs, professional certifications, and other community-
[1] A. Klein. “Bipartisan bill in congress seeks to help schools teach
servinginitiativesaimedateducationandcareerdevelopment. AI literacy.” Education Week. Accessed: Dec. 21, 2023. https:
The identified skills, and associated overlaps, may be useful //
help-schools-teach-ai-literacy/2023/12
for helping guide competency-based educational programs as
[2] “How we’re improving AI literacy in young people.” Google.
wellashelpingemployersefficientlystructureAIethicsandAI 2024. 
governance job descriptions and job functions. And critically, young-people/
[3] N.DeCarioandO.Etzioni(AllenInst.AI,Seattle,WA,USA).America
forindividuals,understandingrequiredcompetenciesandlabor
NeedsAILiteracyNow.Dec.2021.
market demand can help guide their career pathways, whether ai-literacy-now/72515409
individuals are new to the labor market or transitioning. [4] T. Roos (Univ. Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland). Elements of AI Has
Introduced One Million People to the Basics of Artificial Intelligence.
Our research is limited by several factors. Data sharing
2023. [Online]. Available: 
agreements limit the full set of details we are able to present intelligence/elements-ai-has-introduced-one-million-people-basics-
here. Further, while our methodology for defining AI, ethics, artificial-intelligence
[5] C.Wei.“NanjingUniversitypioneersAIeducationsystem.”Accessed:
and governance roles are based on the literature, iterative
Mar. 20, 2024. [Online]. Available: 
research design, and the available taxonomies, it necessarily 202403/20/WS65fa3a4ea31082fc043bda45.html
involved subjective decisions along the way and remains a [6] D. Schiff, “Education for AI, not AI for education: The role
of education and ethics in national AI policy strategies,” Int.
snapshot of an evolving process. Significantly more research
J. Artif. Intell. Educ., vol.32, no.3, pp.527–563, Sep. 2022,
is needed, including longitudinal studies of labor market doi:10.1007/s40593-021-00270-2.
demandandsupply,improveddefinitionsofrequisiteskillsand [7] M. Heinrich. “Artificial intelligence initiative act.” 2019. [Online].
Available: 
competencies,studiesofcareertrajectories,andevaluationsof

educational programs’ effectiveness in supporting individuals. [8] National Commission on Excellence in Education, “A nation
Next, our research speaks most directly to the U.S. context, at risk: The imperative for educational reform,” Elem. School
J., vol.84, no.2, pp.113–130, 1983. [Online]. Available:
where the data are drawn from. Other regions may have dif-

ferenttrendswithrespecttoAI,AIethics,andAIgovernance: [9] N. Wu, “‘Restrict foreigners, not robots’: Partisan responses to
for instance, the European Union might have greater need automation threat,” Econ. Polit., vol.35, no.2, pp.505–528, 2023,
doi:10.1111/ecpo.12225.
for these competencies and professionals given its heightened
[10] M. J. Handel, “Skills mismatch in the labor mar-
regulatory focus, whereas low-income countries with modest ket,” Annu. Rev. Sociol., vol.29, no. 1, pp.135–165, 2003,
AI industries might have less of a focus. Questions about the doi:10.1146/annurev.soc.29.010202.100030.
[11] J.HandelsmanandM.Smith.“STEMforall.”TheWhiteHouseBlog.
definition and composition of these skills and roles, including
2016. [Online]. Available: 
nuances like focuses on risk management versus ethics, are 2016/02/11/stem-all
worthy of future study. Finally, an important limitation of our [12] The New Frontier: Artificial Intelligence at Work. All Party Parliam.
GroupAI(APPGAI)Secr.,London,U.K.,Nov.2021.
analysis is that it does not fully differentiate between core
[13] D.M.WestandJ.R.Allen.“Howartificialintelligenceistransforming
AI ethics and AI governance professionals and professionals theworld.”Brookings.[Online].Available:
in more peripheral roles. Future work should systematically research/how-artificial-intelligence-is-transforming-the-world/
[14] D.GehlhausandS.Mutis(CenterSecur.Emerg.Technol.,Washington,
analyze associated differences, including how responsibili-
DC,USA).TheU.S.AIWorkforce.Jan.2021.[Online].Available:https:
ties, skill compositions, and organizational positioning vary //live-cset-georgetown.pantheonsite.io/research/the-u-s-ai-workforce/
between core and peripheral roles. [15] S. Bankins, A. C. Ocampo, M. Marrone, S. L. D. Restubog, and
S.E.Woo,“Amultilevelreviewofartificialintelligenceinorganizations:
Along these lines, we hope this analysis encourages future
Implications for organizational behavior research and practice,” J.
investigationsintoopportunitiesforgrowthaswellaspotential Organ.Behav.,vol.5,no.2,pp.159–182,2024,doi:10.1002/job.2735.
misalignment between the skills articulated by employers in [16] Y. Wu and C. Lin, “The hidden multiplier: Unraveling the true cost
of the global ai skills gap,” IEEE Technol. Soc. Mag., vol.43, no.4,
job postings and the complex realities faced by AI ethics
pp.15–23,Dec.2024,doi:10.1109/MTS.2024.3505618.
and AI governance professionals. Our findings suggest that [17] J.Southworthetal.,“DevelopingamodelforAIacrossthecurriculum:
these roles are diverse in nature and growing in prevalence Transforming the higher education landscape via innovation in AI
literacy,”Comput.Educ.,Artif.Intell.,vol.4,Jan.2023,Art.no.100127,
and importance. Looking ahead, additional research will be
doi:10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100127.
essentialtosupportconcertedeffortsbyeducators,employers, [18] X. Fan, “Artificial intelligence’s impact on employment: Challenges,
regulators, and practitioners to better align training with potential consumers, and policy responses through automation and
workforce rehabilitating,” Lecture Notes Educ. Psychol. Public Media,
societal goals and professional practices, ultimately enabling
vol.73,pp.50–55,Nov.2024,doi:10.54254/2753-7048/73/20241040.
more effective AI ethics and AI governance work. [19] P. Cardon, C. Fleischmann, M. Logemann, J. Heidewald, J. Aritz,
and S. Swartz, “Competencies needed by business professionals in
the AI age: Character and communication lead the way,” Bus.
Prof. Commun. Quart., vol. 87, no. 2, pp.223–246, Nov. 2023,
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
doi:10.1177/23294906231208166.
The authors are grateful to Lightcast for their willing- [20] T. K. F. Chiu, Z. Ahmad, M. Ismailov, and I. T. Sanusi, “What
are artificial intelligence literacy and competency? A comprehensive
ness to share data with the research team. Thank you
framework to support them,” Comput. Educ. Open, vol.6, Jun. 2024,
to the Governance and Responsible AI Lab (GRAIL) at Art.no.100171,doi:10.1016/j.caeo.2024.100171.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WIESEetal.:AIETHICSANDGOVERNANCEINTHEJOBMARKET:TRENDS,SKILLS,ANDSECTORALDEMAND 469
[21] D. Long and B. Magerko, “What is AI literacy? Competencies and [43] G.Auld,A.Casovan,A.Clarke,andB.Faveri,“GoverningAIthrough
design considerations,” in Proc. CHI Conf. Human Factors Comput. ethicalstandards:Learningfromtheexperiencesofotherprivategover-
Syst.,Apr.2020,pp.1–16,doi:10.1145/3313831.3376727. nanceinitiatives,”J.Eur.PublicPolicy,vol.29,no.11,pp.1822–1844,
[22] A. Bewersdorff, M. Hornberger, C. Nerdel, and D. S. Schiff, Aug.2022,doi:10.1080/13501763.2022.2099449.
“AI advocates and cautious critics: How AI attitudes, AI [44] (CSIRO,Canberra,ACT,Australia).CatalogueofRAIMaturityModels.
interest, use of AI, and AI literacy build university students’ Accessed:Oct.2,2025.[Online].Available:
AI self-efficacy,” Comput. Educ., Artif. Intell., vol.8, Jun. 2025, science/projects/responsible-ai-pattern-catalogue/rai-maturity-model/
Art.no.100340,doi:10.1016/j.caeai.2024.100340. [45] B. Walsh, B. Dalton, S. Forsyth, and T. Yeh, “Literacy and STEM
teachersadaptAIethicscurriculum,”inProc.AAAIConf.Artif.Intell.,
[23] M. Hornberger, A. Bewersdorff, and C. Nerdel, “What do university
vol.37,Jun.2023,pp.16048–16055,doi:10.1609/aaai.v37i13.26906.
studentsknowaboutartificialintelligence?Developmentandvalidation
[46] M. Z. Cocchiaro, J. Morley, C. Novelli, E. Panai, A. Tartaro, and
of an AI literacy test,” Comput. Educ., Artif. Intell., vol.5, Jan. 2023,
L.Floridi,“WhoisanAIethicist?Anempiricalstudyofexpertise,skills,
Artno.100165,doi:10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100165.
and profiles to build a competency framework,” AI Ethics, pp.1–13,
[24] G. Biesta, “Good education in an age of measurement: On
Feb.2025,doi:10.1007/s43681-024-00643-y.
the need to reconnect with the question of purpose in educa-
[47] T. Turja, T. Särkikoski, P. Koistinen, and H. Melin, “Basic human
tion,”Educ.Assess.Eval.Account.,vol.21,no.1,pp.33–46,Feb.2009,
needsandrobotization:Howtomakedeploymentofrobotsworthwhile
doi:10.1007/s11092-008-9064-9.
for everyone?” Technol. Soc., vol.68, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 101917,
[25] S.SidraandC.Mason,“ReconceptualizingAIliteracy:Theimportance doi:10.1016/j.techsoc.2022.101917.
of metacognitive thinking in an artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled [48] R.Wardetal.,“Towardsa21stcenturypersonalisedlearningskillstax-
workforce,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Artif. Intell. (CAI), Jun. 2024, onomy,”inProc.IEEEGlobalEng.Educ.Conf.(EDUCON),Apr.2021,
pp.1181–1186,doi:10.1109/CAI59869.2024.00211. pp.344–354,doi:10.1109/EDUCON46332.2021.9453883.
[26] O. Gambelin, “Brave: What it means to be an AI ethicist,” AI Ethics, [49] R. Ward, S. Grant, M. W. Larsen, and K. Giovacchini, “The universal
vol.1,no.1,pp.87–91,Feb.2021,doi:10.1007/s43681-020-00020-5. micro-credentialframework:Theroleofbadges,micro-credentials,skills
[27] D.Burema,“Thechallengesofbeinganin-houseAIethicistandhow profiling, and design patterns in developing interdisciplinary learning
to overcome them,” J. Responsib. Innov., vol.12, no.1, Dec. 2025, and assessment paths for computing education,” IEEE Trans. Educ.,
Art.no.2445322,doi:10.1080/23299460.2024.2445322. vol.67,no.6,pp.897–906,Dec.2024,doi:10.1109/TE.2024.3486016.
[28] G. Gigerenzer, “Moral satisficing: Rethinking moral behavior as [50] P.A.Ertmeretal.,“Howinstructionaldesignexpertsuseknowledgeand
bounded rationality,” Topics Cogn. Sci., vol.2, no.3, pp.528–554, experience to solve ill-structured problems,” Perform. Improv. Quart.,
2010,doi:10.1111/j.1756-8765.2010.01094.x. vol.21,no.1,pp.17–42,2008,doi:10.1002/piq.20013.
[51] W.DickandL.Carey,TheSystematicDesignofInstruction.Glenview,
[29] M. Pinski, T. Hofmann, and A. Benlian, “AI literacy for the top
IL,USA:Scott,ForesmanCo.,1978.
management:AnupperechelonsperspectiveoncorporateAIorientation
[52] J.FulgencioandT.I.Asino,“Conductingalearneranalysis,”inDesign
and implementation ability,” Electron. Markets, vol.34, no.1, p.24,
forLearning:Principles,Processes,andPraxis.London,U.K.:EdTech
Apr.2024,doi:10.1007/s12525-024-00707-1.
Books,2021.[Online].Available:
[30] (Eur.Comm.,Brussels,Belgium).ArtificialIntelligenceAct:Regulation [53] Eduventures Research Staff, What We Learned in 2024: The Top 5
(EU)2024/1689.2024.[Online].Available: Takeaways From Our Analysts, Encoura, Austin, TX, USA. Accessed:
2024/1689/oj/eng Feb.10,2025.
[31] “AI risk management framework: AI RMF (1.0),” U.S. Dept. Comm., [54] “Voiceoftheonlinelearner.”Risepoint.2024.[Online].Available:https:
Nat.Inst.Stand.Technol.,Gaithersburg,MD,USA,Rep.NISTAI100- //risepoint.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/09/VOL-2024.pdf
1,2023,doi:10.6028/NIST.AI.100-1. [55] M.J.Ahsan,“Cultivatingacultureoflearning:Theroleofleadership
[32] ExecutiveOrderontheSafe,Secure,andTrustworthyDevelopmentand in fostering lifelong development,” Learn. Organ., vol. 32, no. 4,
UseofArtificialIntelligence,WhiteHouse,OfficeSci.Technol.Policy, pp.282–306,Aug.2024,doi:10.1108/TLO-03-2024-0099.
Washington,DC,USA,Oct.2023. [56] A.Muduli,“Workforceagility:Areviewofliterature,”IUPJ.Manag.
[33] “Responsible AI institute.” Responsible AI. Accessed: Oct. 2, 2025. Res.,vol.12,no.3,pp.1–12,2013.
[Online].Available: [57] (IRS, Washington, DC, USA). Frequently Asked Questions About
Educational Assistance Programs Internal Revenue Service. 2024.
[34] “Ethical AI governance group.” EAIGG. Accessed: Oct. 2, 2025.
[Online]. Available: 
[Online].Available:
questions-about-educational-assistance-programs
[35] S. Kelley, “Employee perceptions of the effective adoption of [58] (ASU, Tempe, AZ, USA). ASU Earned Admission. Accessed: Oct. 2,
AI principles,” J. Bus. Ethics, vol. 178, pp.871–893, Feb. 2022,
2025.[Online].Available:
doi:10.1007/s10551-022-05051-y. [59] (UtahStateUniv.,Logan,UT,USA).USUEarnedAdmission.Accessed:
[36] D. S. Schiff, S. Kelley, and J. Camacho Ibáñez, “The emergence of Oct. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
artificial intelligence ethics auditing,” Big Data Soc., vol.11, no.4, apply/earned-admission
2025,Art.no.20539517241299732,doi:10.1177/20539517241299732. [60] Purdue Graduate Council, Non-Credit to Credit Policy and Guidelines
[37] L. Tuovinen and A. Rohunen, “Teaching AI ethics to engineering for Graduate Degrees at Purdue University, Purdue Univ., West
students:reflectionsonsyllabusdesignandteachingmethods,”inProc. Lafayette,IN,USA,2018.
CEURWorkshop,2021,pp.19–33. [61] Y.-C. Chen and M. Ahn, “Governing AI systems for public values:
[38] E. Castillo. “Purdue launches online master of artificial intelligence Designprinciplesandaprocessframework,”inTheOxfordHandbookof
degree.” BestColleges. Accessed: Mar. 6, 2024. [Online]. Available: AIGovernance,J.B.Bullocketal.,Eds.,Oxford,U.K.:OxfordUniv.,
 2024,doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780197579329.013.31.
intelligence-degree/ [62] M. Sadek, E. Kallina, T. Bohné, C. Mougenot, R. A. Calvo, and
[39] (IEEE Stand. Assoc., Piscataway, NJ, USA). IEEE CertifAIEdTM. S. Cave, “Challenges of responsible AI in practice: scoping review
and recommended actions,” AI Soc., vol. 40, pp.199–215, Feb. 2024,
Accessed: Dec. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
doi:10.1007/s00146-024-01880-9.
products-programs/icap/ieee-certifaied/
[63] Q. Lu, L. Zhu, X. Xu, and J. Whittle, “Responsible-AI-by-design: A
[40] V. Bogina, A. Hartman, T. Kuflik, and A. Shulner-Tal, “Educating
pattern collection for designing responsible AI systems,” Sep. 2022,
softwareandAIstakeholdersaboutalgorithmicfairness,accountability,
arXiv:2203.00905.
transparencyandethics,”Int.J.Artif.Intell.Educ.,vol.32,pp.808–833,
[64] S. Rismani and A. Moon, “What does it mean to be a responsible
Apr.2021,doi:10.1007/s40593-021-00248-0.
AI practitioner: An ontology of roles and skills,” in Proc.
[41] J.BorensteinandA.Howard,“EmergingchallengesinAIandtheneed AAAI/ACM Conf. AI, Ethics, Soc., Aug. 2023, pp.584–595.
forAIethicseducation,”AIEthics,vol.1,no.1,pp.61–65,Feb.2021, doi:10.1145/3600211.3604702.
doi:10.1007/s43681-020-00002-7. [65] “Job posting analytics (JPA) methodology lightcast knowledge base.”
[42] (Univ. Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA). DINS and CS Faculty Get Lightcast. Accessed: Apr. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
Grant from Google to Enhance Ethical Competence in Curriculum. lightcast.io/en/articles/6957446-job-posting-analytics-jpa-methodology
Accessed: Dec. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available: [66] H. Choi and I. Marinescu, “Data for labor market concentration using
pitt.edu/news/dins-and-cs-faculty-get-grant-google-enhance-ethical- lightcast (formerly burning glass technologies),” Data Brief, vol.55,
competence-curriculum Aug.2024,Art.no.110647,doi:10.1016/j.dib.2024.110647.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

470 IEEETRANSACTIONSONTECHNOLOGYANDSOCIETY,VOL.6,NO.4,DECEMBER2025
[67] B.HershbeinandL.B.Kahn,DoRecessionsAccelerateRoutine-Biased [79] T.Eloundou,S.Manning,P.Mishkin,andD.Rock,“GPTsareGPTs:
Technological Change? Evidence from Vacancy Postings, Nat. Bureau An early look at the labor market impact potential of large language
Econ.Res.,Cambridge,MA,USA,2017. models,”Aug.2023,arXiv:2303.10130.
[68] D. J. Deming and K. L. Noray (Nat. Bureau Econ. Res., Cambridge, [80] Economic Census: NAICS Codes & Understanding Industry
MA, USA). STEM Careers and the Changing Skill Requirements of ClassificationSystems,UnitedStatesCensusBureau,Washington,DC,
Work.2018.[Online].Available: USA.Accessed:Apr.20,2025.
[69] J. Fuller, S. Hansen, T. Ramdas, and R. Sadun, “The demand for [81] StandardOccupationalClassification(SOC)System,U.S.BureauLabor
executiveskills:Centerforeconomicperformance,”Nat.BureauEcon. Stat., Washington, DC, USA, 2018. [Online]. Available: 
Res.,Cambridge,MA,USA,WorkingPapers,2021. bls.gov/soc
[70] S. Hemelt, B. Hershbein, S. Martin, and K. Stange, College Majors [82] “Job postings data.” Lightcast. Accessed: Apr. 2, 2025. [Online].
and Skills- Evidence from the Universe of Online Job Ads.pdf, Nat. Available:
Bureau Econ. Res., Cambridge, MA, USA, 2021. [Online]. Available: [83] J.FeredayandE.Muir-Cochrane,“Demonstratingrigorusingthematic
 analysis: A hybrid approach of inductive and deductive coding and
[71] W. Markow, Hughes, and A. Bundy, The New Foundational Skills of theme development,” Int. J. Qual. Methods, vol.5, no.1, pp.80–92,
theDigitalEconomy:DevelopingtheProfessionalsoftheFuture,Bus.- Mar.2006,doi:10.1177/160940690600500107.
HigherEduc.Forum,Washington,DC,USA,2018, [84] G.C.Banks,H.M.Woznyj,R.S.Wesslen,andR.L.Ross,“Areview
[72] L. Jose Gonzalez-Gomez, S. Margarita Hernandez-Munoz, A. Borja, of best practice recommendations for text analysis in R (and a user-
J. Daniel Azofeifa, J. Noguez, and P. Caratozzolo, “Analyzing natural friendlyapp),”J.Bus.Psychol.,vol.33,no.4,pp.445–459,Aug.2018,
language processing techniques to extract meaningful information doi:10.1007/s10869-017-9528-3.
on skills acquisition from textual content,” IEEE Access, vol.12, [85] M.Prates,P.Avelar,andL.C.Lamb,“Onquantifyingandunderstanding
pp.139742–139757,2024,doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3465409. the role of ethics in AI research: A historical account of flagship
[73] D. Acemoglu, D. Autor, J. Hazell, and P. Restrepo, “Artificial intel- conferencesandjournals,”Sep.2018,arXiv:1809.08328.
ligence and jobs: Evidence from online vacancies,” J. Labor Econ., [86] J.Fjeld,N.Achten,H.Hilligoss,A.Nagy,andM.Srikumar,“Principled
vol.40,no.S1,pp.S293–S340,Apr.2022,doi:10.1086/718327. artificial intelligence: Mapping consensus in ethical and rights-based
[74] P. Bastos, K. Stapleton, D. Taglioni, and H. Y. Wei, “Firm networks approachestoprinciplesforAI.”SSRN.2020.[Online].Available:http:
andglobaltechnologydiffusion,”WorldBankGroup,Washington,DC, //dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3518482
USA,WorkingPaper,2024. [87] D. S. Schiff, “Framing contestation and public influence on
[75] A.Bergson-Shilcock,R.Taylor,andN.Hodge,ClosingtheDigitalSkill policymakers: Evidence from U.S. artificial intelligence policy dis-
Divide- The Payoff for Workers, Business, and the Economy, Federal course,” Policy Soc., vol. 4, no. 3, Apr. 2024, Art. no. puae007.
ReserveBankAtlanta,Atlanta,GA,USA,2023. doi:10.1093/polsoc/puae007.
[76] C. Larsen et al., Eds., “The green transition in labour markets across [88] A.M.Isserman,“Thelocationquotientapproachtoestimatingregional
europe: an analysis of job postings data,” in Pathways of Greening economic impacts,” J. Amer. Inst. Planners, vol.43, no.1, pp.33–41,
Labour Markets: Opportunities and Challenges for Regional and Jan.1977,doi:10.1080/01944367708977758.
Local Labour Market Observation in Europe and Beyond. Baden- [89] A.Singla,A.Sukharevsky,L.Yee,M.Chui,andB.Hall,TheStateof
Baden, Germany: Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft mbH Co. KG, 2023, AI:HowOrganizationsAreRewiringToCaptureValue,McKinseyCo.,
doi:10.5771/9783957104236. NewYork,NY,USA,Mar.2025.
[77] E. Beckett. “Demand for AI skills continues climbing.” Lightcast. [90] TheTransformationalOpportunityofAIonICTJobs:AI-EnabledICT
Accessed: Apr. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available: WorkforceConsortium,Cisco,SanJose,CA,USA,2024.
resources/blog/demand-for-ai-skills-continues-climbing [91] N.Maslej etal., TheAIIndex2024AnnualReport:AIIndexSteering
[78] D.GehlhausandS.Mutis,TheU.S.AIWorkforce,CenterSecur.Emerg. Committee, Institute for Human-Centered AI, Stanford University,
Technol.,Washington,DC,USA,Jan.2021. Stanford,CA,USA,Apr.2024.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.