Translation
The following is a list of 67 applied technologies that the Chinese government selected in
2025 as its top priorities for commercialization. Most of the technologies on the list are key
processes, systems, or components for economically or strategically important industries. For
each technology, the government identified a company, research institute, or university that it
has tasked with commercializing it. Notably, the vast majority of the tasked entities on the list
are state-controlled, indicating that the Chinese government remains skittish about
entrusting strategic technology development to the private sector.
Title
2025 Annual List of High Technology Achievement Industrialization Pilot Projects for the National Key
Research and Development Program
2025年度国家重点研发计划高新技术成果产业化试点名单
Author
General Office of the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (工业和信息化部办公室)
Source
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) website, January 23, 2026.
The Chinese source text is available online at:

e.html
An archived version of the Chinese source text is available online at: 
Editor
Translation Date Translator
Ben Murphy, CSET Translation
July 2, 2026 Etcetera Language Group, Inc.
Manager
Notice of the General Office of the Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology on Announcing the 2025 Annual List of High Technology
Achievement Industrialization Pilot Projects for the National Key
Research and Development Program
MIIT General Office High-Tech Letter [2026] No. 28 (工信厅高新函﹝2026﹞28号)
To the main oversight departments (主管部门) for industry and information technology
and high technology of all provinces, autonomous regions, province-level
municipalities, and the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps:

To strengthen the role of high technology in supporting and guiding industry, and
in accordance with the Notice of the General Office of the Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology on Carrying Out Pilot Work on High Technology Achievement
Industrialization for the National Key Research and Development (R&D) Program1 (MIIT
General Office High-Tech Letter [2025] No. 231) and relevant work requirements, the
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT), following procedures including
independent applications by the respective work units (单位), selection and
recommendation of the best candidates by local authorities, and expert review and
evaluation, has determined 67 pilot achievements and 108 pilot units. The list is
hereby announced (see the appendix for details).
The implementation period for this batch of pilot projects is two years from the
date the list is announced. All pilot work units shall promptly improve their pilot
implementation plans and, by February 28, 2026, submit them for filing through the
Information Service Platform for the Industrialization of High-Tech Achievements
(sd.miitip.com). Pilot work shall be advanced in a solid manner in accordance with the
pilot implementation plans. Centering on the industrialization of the pilot
achievements, pilot work units shall establish work coordination mechanisms,
implement resource support measures, and innovate methods and measures, so as to
effectively promote the conversion of a group of National Key R&D Program
achievements into tangible (实实在在) productive forces (生产力) and ensure that the
pilot objectives are achieved on schedule.
Provincial-level main oversight departments in all localities shall increase policy
support for pilot work units, strengthen follow-up management of the pilot work, help
coordinate and resolve relevant issues, promptly summarize work progress, lessons
learned, and best practices, and organize the submission of each pilot work unit’s
annual work summary through the Information Service Platform by December 15 each
year. After the pilot period expires, MIIT will organize an assessment and evaluation.
1 Translator's note: The National Key Research and Development Program (National Key R&D Program;
国家重点研发计划) is China's major overarching plan to advance basic and applied research in strategic
technologies. It replaced both the National High-tech R&D Program (国家高技术研究发展计划; better
known as the 863 Program [863计划]) and the National Key Basic Research and Development Program
(国家重点基础研究发展计划; better known as the 973 Program [973计划]) in 2016.

Appendix
2025 Annual List of High Technology Achievement Industrialization
Pilot Projects for the National Key Research and Development Program
Pilot Achievements
No. Achievement Name Affiliated Work Unit
High-End Functional and Intelligent Materials
Ultra-High Energy Storage Density
1 Tsinghua University
Dielectric Materials and Devices
Data-Driven Design and Manufacturing of
University of Science and Technology
2 Copper Alloys for Integrated Circuit Lead
Beijing
Frames
A High-Sensitivity Entropy-Regulated
Amorphous Alloy Stress-Impedance Strain Nanjing University of Science &

Gauge Suitable for Structural Seismic Technology
Resistance and Disaster Prevention
Precious Metal Reduction (减量)
4 Zhejiang University
Technology for Selective Hydrogenation
Complete Technology for the Preparation
Juhua Group Co., Ltd. (巨化集团有限公
5 of Liquid-Cooling Thermal Management
司)
Materials
Single-Phase Immersion Liquid-Cooling
6 Juhua Group Co., Ltd.
Solution for Data Centers
Innovative Integration of New National Innovation Center of High
7 Electromagnetic Materials into Traction Speed Train (国家高速列车青岛技术创
Motors for 450 km/h High-Speed Trains 新中心)
Aviation Fuel Coalescence and Separation
8 South China University of Technology
Device
Inorganic Two-Dimensional Material
9 Membranes for Efficient Hydrogen South China University of Technology
Separation
Advanced Structural and Composite Materials
Preparation Technology for
AVIC Manufacturing Technology
10 Sound-Absorbing Honeycombs and Their
Institute
Composite Materials
Research and Development of
Manufacturing and Complete Applied China Academy of Railway Sciences

Technology for Wear-Resistant, Corporation Limited
Fatigue-Resistant, and Corrosion-Resistant

No. Achievement Name Affiliated Work Unit
Rails and Frogs for the Sichuan-Tibet
Railway
Key Technologies for Maintaining the
Long-Term Performance of Structural China Academy of Railway Sciences

Concrete in the Complex Environments of Corporation Limited
the Sichuan-Tibet Railway
High-Performance Technology for
China Academy of Railway Sciences
13 Shotcrete in the Complex Environments of
Corporation Limited
the Sichuan-Tibet Railway
Key Technologies for Improving the Crack
Resistance of Structural Concrete in the China Academy of Railway Sciences

Complex Environments of the Corporation Limited
Sichuan-Tibet Railway
Powder Preparation Technology for
AECC Beijing Institute of Aeronautical
15 Recovery and Reuse of Coarse Superalloy
Materials
Powder and its Application
Large-Tonnage Carbon Fiber Composite University of Science and Technology

Cable Beijing
Multilayer Gradient Cold-Spray Repair and
Nano Cemented Carbide Reinforced Ansteel Beijing Research Institute Co.,

Composite Plating Technology for Ltd.
Continuous Casting Crystallizers
R&D on Key Technologies and Application
18 Development for Ultra-High-Stiffness Harbin Institute of Technology
Magnesium-Based Composite Materials
New Displays and Strategic Electronic Materials
13th Research Institute of China
Sub-6GHz Gallium Nitride (GaN) Radio
19 Electronics Technology Group
Frequency (RF) Devices
Corporation (CETC)
Fujian Institute of Research on the
High-Frequency, High-Power Laser
20 Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy
Modulator Technology
of Sciences (CAS)
New Rare Earth Materials
Series Preparation Technology for
21 High-Temperature-Resistant Cobalt-Based China Jiliang University
Permanent Magnet Materials
Key Technology for Heavy Rare Earth-Free,
Ningbo Institute of Materials
22 High-Coercivity Sintered Neodymium
Technology & Engineering, CAS
(NdFeB)
High-Performance Manufacturing Technology and Major Equipment

No. Achievement Name Affiliated Work Unit
6-Inch Semi-Insulating SiC Crystal Growth
Beijing NAURA Microelectronic
23 Furnaces and 6/8-Inch-Compatible SiC
Equipment Co., Ltd.
Epitaxial Furnaces
New Metal-Organic Chemical Vapor
Advanced Micro-Fabrication Equipment
24 Deposition (MOCVD) Equipment for
Inc. China (AMEC)
Micro-LEDs
Precision Forming Technology for Large
Shanghai Spaceflight Precision
25 Thin-Walled Aluminum Alloy Complete
Machinery Institute
Cylindrical Sections for Spacecraft
High-Temperature-Resistant and
26 Corrosion-Resistant Bearings for Luoyang Bearing Group Co., Ltd.
Transmission Systems
High-Performance Sealing Elements for Guangzhou Mechanical Engineering

Aviation Hydraulic Systems Research Institute Co., Ltd.
Key Manufacturing Technology for
Xi’an Taijin New Energy Technology
28 Ultra-Large Seamless Titanium Cathode
Co., Ltd.
Drums
Intelligent Sensors
29 Advanced Sensors and Core Components Beijing Institute of Control Engineering
for Spacecraft Control Systems, and their
Manufacturing Processes
30 Flexible Intracranial Implantable Aerospace Information Research
Multimodal Integrated Sensing and Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Regulation Technology System for
Intracranial Multiparameter Detection
31 Key Self-Powering Technology for Human Beijing Institute of Nanoenergy and
Health Monitoring Sensors Nanosystems, Chinese Academy of
Sciences
High-Sensitivity Micro-Electro-Mechanical
State Grid Smart Grid Research
32 System (MEMS) Magnetic Sensing
Institute Co., Ltd.
Components and Sensors
Miniature High-Performance Beijing Aerospace Xinghua Technology

Accelerometers Co., Ltd.
Aerospace Long March Launch Vehicle
34 Rocket Sensors
Technology Co., Ltd.
New Broadband Triaxial Accelerometer Tianjin SIASUN Robot & Automation

with Nanogram (ng)-Level Resolution Co., Ltd.
Automotive-Grade High-Precision
36 Hebei MT Microsystems Co., Ltd.
Integrated Navigation Sensors
37 A Series of Sensors for Deep-Sea Shenyang Institute of Automation,

No. Achievement Name Affiliated Work Unit
Environmental Observation and Resource Chinese Academy of Sciences
Exploration
Multiparameter Differential Pressure Flow
38 Microcyber Corporation
Meters
Quantitative Model of Sensing Interfaces
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and
Based on Resonant Cantilever Beams and
39 Information Technology, Chinese
Quantitative Analytical Instrument
Academy of Sciences
Technology
iRay Electronic Technology Group Co.,
40 High-Performance X-Ray Sensors
Ltd.
SIM United Superconducting
41 Electromagnetic Sensors
Technology Co., Ltd.
A Thin-Film Getter Structure With a Shanghai Industrial Technology

Microheater and Its Manufacturing Method Research Institute Co., Ltd. (SITRI)
High-Performance Sound-Sensitive Wuxi WillMEMS Semiconductor Co.,

Components and Sensors Ltd. (无锡韦感半导体有限公司)
New High-Performance MEMS Gas
44 SuZhou Huiwen Nano S&T Co., Ltd.
Sensors
MEMS Sensor Batch Manufacturing
45 United Nova Technology Co., Ltd.
Platform
Development and Application of Diamond University of Science and Technology

Quantum Magnetic Sensors of China
In Situ Continuous Temperature
Maanshan Iron & Steel Company
47 Measurement Sensors and Measurement
Limited
Systems for Molten Steel
High-Performance Laser Gas Sensing Shandong SciTech Innovation Group

Components Co., Ltd.
Key Technologies and Applications of Shandong Kanghua Biotechnology Co.,

Sensitive Components for Biosensors Ltd.
Polymer-Derived Ceramic Metamaterial
50 Zhengzhou University
Wireless Passive Temperature Sensors
High-Precision Inkjet Printing Technology Huazhong University of Science and

and Equipment for Ultrafine Fiber Surfaces Technology
Complete Sensor Sets for High-Speed Rail
52 CRRC Zhuzhou Institute Co., Ltd.
Vehicle Health Monitoring Systems
Automotive-Grade Solid-State LiDAR for
53 Industrialized Mass Production for RoboSense Technology Co., Ltd.
Autonomous Driving
Integrated Sensing and Computing Chongqing Institute of Green and

Room-Temperature Infrared Imaging Intelligent Technology, Chinese

No. Achievement Name Affiliated Work Unit
Detection Technology Academy of Sciences
Optical Grating Sensors for
55 Nanoscale-Precision Displacement Xi'an Jiaotong University
Measurement
Distributed Thin-Film Sensors for Highway Zhonghang Electronic Measuring

Infrastructure Instruments (Xi’an) Co., Ltd.
Industrial Software
Core Components of an Industrial Internet
57 Operating System for Discrete Industries Beijing Institute of Technology
(离散行业)
Data-Driven Closed-Loop Performance
Analysis, Regulation, and Optimization University of Science and Technology

Technologies and Software for Beijing
Manufacturing Processes
Industrial Data Intelligent Analysis and
Beijing University of Aeronautics and
59 Decision-Making System for the Entire
Astronautics (Beihang University)
Discrete Manufacturing (离散制造) Process
Apache IoTDB Distributed Time-Series
60 Tsinghua University
Data Management System
Basic Theory and Methods for Multi-access
Shenyang Institute of Automation,
61 Edge Computing (MEC)-Based Edge
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Control and Real-Time Simulation
Cloud Architecture-Based
Service-Oriented Manufacturing Execution Beijing Xiaomi Mobile Software Co.,

System (MES) and Intelligent Management Ltd.
and Control Platform System
Domestically Produced Isogeometric
63 Dalian University of Technology
Analysis Software ADIGA
Industrial Interconnection Platform for COMAC Shanghai Aircraft

Distributed Factories Manufacturing Co., Ltd.
Industrial Interconnection Platform for the Guangzhou MINO Automotive

Personalized Customization Industry Equipment Co., Ltd.2
Integrated Terminal-Edge-Cloud Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced
66 Interconnection Technology and System for Technology, Chinese Academy of
IT/OT Convergence Sciences
Industrial Interconnection Platform for the
67 Gree Electric Appliances, Inc. of Zhuhai
Large-Scale Manufacturing Industry
2 Translator's note: Guangzhou MINO Automotive Equipment Co., Ltd. (广州明珞装备股份有限公司) is now
known simply as Guangzhou MINO Co., Ltd. (广州明珞股份有限公司).