STAKEHOLDER BRIEF 2
Expanding Equitable Work-based
Learning Opportunities
In 2021, the Project on Workforce launched the College-to-Jobs Initiative, a multi-year
research effort designed to examine the connections between postsecondary education
and the workforce. The initial phase of research culminated in the College-to-Jobs
Playbook, a comprehensive review of the evidence and implementation of programs
that connect students to meaningful careers. Through our research, we identified
six themes that warranted further exploration. This brief explores the second theme:
expanding work-based learning. We convened expert discussion groups to dive into
each theme and conducted additional research to produce memos detailing actionable
recommendations for three main stakeholder groups in the college-to-work ecosystem:
educators, employers, and policymakers.
Jump to Recommendations
Policymakers ............................................................ 4
Higher education ........................................................ 6
Employers ............................................................... 8
High-quality work-based learning (WBL) experiences improve students’
on-the-job skills and lead to higher future earnings.1 Unfortunately,
WBL opportunities are not universally accessible, particularly for
students from under-resourced backgrounds.2 In this brief, we identify
actions that colleges, employers, and policymakers can take to broaden access to
1 equitable WBL in college.

Stakeholder Brief 2: Expanding Equitable Work-based Learning Opportunities
What is Work-Based Learning?
Definition: Learning that exposes students to the knowledge, skills, and experiences
required for a given career field, occurring in a workplace setting or an environment
closely resembling the workplace.
Includes: Internships, apprenticeships, subsidized youth employment programs, co-
ops, and experiential learning programs.
Why it matters: Students who engage in different types of WBL are more likely to
complete college,3 develop skills crucial for the workplace (e,g., durable skills),4 build
social capital,5 and experience greater career satisfaction.6 WBL is advantageous for
employers as well, allowing them to establish direct pipelines to skilled talent pools.7
Challenges to Forming WBL Programs
Insufficient resources
Compensating students who participate in WBL experiences outside of the classroom
is crucial to ensuring all students can participate,8 but many postsecondary institutions
and employers are hesitant or unable to pay students.9 In addition, developing and
administering high-quality WBL experiences can be resource-intensive, and some
institutions and employers are unable or unwilling to invest in such programs.
Information gaps
Many employers are unaware of the business benefits of WBL and the steps required to
establish WBL programs with colleges, preventing opportunities from materializing.10
Students may also be unaware of certain WBL opportunities and processes, causing
them to miss out on valuable experiences.
Stakeholder misalignment
Coordinating programs across different stakeholders (i.e. employers and educators) is
important for aligning WBL with student learning goals and industry requirements, but
it can be difficult to communicate and collaborate across silos.11
Equity and access challenges
WBL can advance economic opportunity for students from marginalized backgrounds,
but ensuring that those opportunities are accessible to all students requires additional
attention, and, at times, resources.12 Programs should address barriers, such as
inadequate transportation, childcare, and scheduling constraints, which may prevent
2 certain learners from engaging in WBL experiences.13

Stakeholder Brief 2: Expanding Equitable Work-based Learning Opportunities
Guiding Principles
Compensate students for their work
Paying students for WBL ensures that all individuals, regardless of their available
resources, have the opportunity to participate. Pay also incentivizes employers to fully
commit to delivering high-quality programs that mutually benefit both students and
businesses alike.
Establish cross-sector partnerships that integrate work and learning goals
Cross-sector partnerships enable WBL experiences to more closely align work tasks
with learning goals.14 Successful WBL programs often require substantial dedicated
resources, which can be shared through cross-sector partnerships.
Design opportunities with a focus on equity
Stakeholders must center equity and inclusion when designing WBL experiences. For
example, they can build in flexible scheduling options, offer wraparound supports like
transportation and childcare, and train managers to be mindful of cultural differences in
norms and expectations. They should also be intentional about recruiting students from
underrepresented backgrounds, who may not be aware of the opportunities.
Collect and share disaggregated data
Stakeholders should collect and report participant data from WBL programs to
contribute to a shared understanding of what practices work best and why. Data should
be broken down by race, gender, and socioeconomic status to identify disparities in
access or outcomes and allow for targeted support.

Stakeholder Brief 2: Expanding Equitable Work-based Learning Opportunities
Recommendations
Policymakers
1 Launch a Federal Work Study (FWS) Pilot that aligns student career interests with
work opportunities.
Approximately 90 percent of FWS opportunities take place on-campus,15 removed
from many real-world career pathways. The Department of Education should create a
pilot program to test practices that align FWS opportunities with career pathways that
lead to quality jobs, both on- and off-campus. The pilot should increase the amount
of money awarded to each student. Policymakers should also experiment with new
funding formulas that take into consideration the proportion of Pell-eligible students at
the institution. This would expand access to FWS funds for institutions like community
colleges, which have historically had limited allotments.
2 Award grants for paid internship and apprenticeship programs in critical industries,
with funding dedicated to wraparound services.
State governments should consider establishing grants that subsidize internship and
apprenticeship programs in key industries, with funding dedicated to subsidizing
wraparound supports, such as childcare, transportation, and housing. Funding should
be targeted at small-sized businesses, which benefit more significantly from additional
financing to develop such programs.
EXAMPLES
With funding from The CARES Act, the state of Texas established two Work-based
Learning Opportunity Grants directed at the creation and expansion of internship and
apprenticeship programs.16 In Florida, the state subsidizes fees or tuition for students
enrolled in the Florida College System, state university, or school district workforce
education program who also participate in registered apprenticeship programs.17
3 Expand subsidized youth employment programs.
Subsidized youth employment programs (SYEPs) have a track-record of improving
academic and employment outcomes for at-risk youth.18 A significant portion of SYEPs
rely on city or county general funds, which are vulnerable to budget volatility.19 The
federal government should establish reliable federal funding streams, either through
WIOA or standalone legislation, to expand access to subsidized youth employment
across the country.

Stakeholder Brief 2: Expanding Equitable Work-based Learning Opportunities
4 Require that federal- and state-run internship programs compensate interns.
Many internships are offered through state and federal agencies, but not all of these
experiences are compensated.20 State and federal governments should require–and
appropriate funding for– fair pay for interns.
5 Establish a tax credit to help small businesses establish high-quality WBL programs.
Small businesses often lack the resources required to establish quality paid internship
programs. Introducing a federal tax credit aligned with the criteria set by the U.S. Small
Business Administration (SBA) could help alleviate this burden, while encouraging
employers to develop robust programs. The credit could be styled after the Work
Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC), which is currently available to employers for “Summer
Youth Employees” – individuals aged 16 or 17 who are employed between May 1 and
September 15.21
EXAMPLE
In 2017, the United Kingdom introduced an Apprenticeship Levy, which places a
0.5% payroll tax on large employers, in turn granting employers access to funds for
apprenticeship training costs.22
6 Collect disaggregated national- and state-level data on WBL programs.
Federal and state agencies should collect systems- and student-level data on WBL,
providing transparency around key indicators and outcomes. The federal government
might do so by including questions on WBL on employment surveys administered by the
U.S. Census Bureau. Policymakers might also mandate that such data be collected as a
requirement for accessing government funds.

Stakeholder Brief 2: Expanding Equitable Work-based Learning Opportunities
Higher Education Institutions
Establish processes and structures that facilitate the development and
integration of WBL across the institution.
1 Designate a single school unit to play a leadership role in WBL (e.g. Career Services),
granting that unit the authority to make important decisions.
For WBL to become an institutional priority, colleges must establish a dedicated unit
responsible for designing and implementing policies and programs that encourage
WBL on campus. This unit should serve as the direct contact for employers and be
responsible for:
 Building partnerships with regional and national employers.
 Managing on- and off-campus internship opportunities, as well as career-oriented
FWS opportunities.
 On-campus interviewing and employer events.
 Developing employer guidelines for designing WBL programs.
 Forming partnerships with faculty to embed WBL into their curricula.
 Collecting data on student internships and other WBL opportunities.
2 Develop a plan for incorporating WBL into every students’ college journey.
Create a university-wide plan that outlines the goals, steps, and resources required to
integrate WBL into the student experience. This might include requiring students to enroll
in WBL courses as part of their core curriculum, recognizing internships on academic
transcripts, and/or incentivizing faculty to introduce WBL into their classrooms.
3 Integrate WBL into coursework.
Faculty should embed experiential and WBL experiences into their curricula, providing
students with an applied understanding of work-related projects and foundational
skills, such as effective teamwork and the application of critical thinking.
4 Embed mentorship programs into on-campus jobs.
There is growing evidence that mentors can promote college students’ career self-
efficacy, leading to positive outcomes with respect to career selection, job application,
professional skill development, and growing networks.23 By embedding mentorship into
on-campus employment, institutions can enhance students’ professional development
and complement their classroom learning.

Stakeholder Brief 2: Expanding Equitable Work-based Learning Opportunities
5 Establish financial support mechanisms to compensate student interns.
Colleges should establish dedicated funding pools that students can access to
subsidize their internship experiences. Funding allocations should prioritize students
working in unpaid internships or those requiring additional financial assistance.
Colleges should consider establishing automatic qualification for students who
are Pell-eligible, removing the administrative hurdles associated with applying for
funding. As highlighted in Matthew Hora’s research, Sacramento State University in
California established the Gaining Access to Internships (GAIN) Fund that awards
low-income students who participate in unpaid academic internships or internships
that do not cover living expenses up to $1,500 a semester.24
6 Award credit for WBL experiences.
Many students engage in work experiences outside of the classroom that equip them with
valuable skills and knowledge. Colleges should recognize and award credit for current
and past work, if it is aligned with postsecondary learning goals. Various methods exist
for assessing prior work, including examinations and faculty reviews.25 Credit for such
learning not only accelerates students’ progress towards obtaining credentials, but offers
significant cost savings and can boost learners’ completion rates.26
7 Limit internship postings on campus or school-affiliated platforms to paid opportunities.
To encourage employers to pay their student workers, higher education institutions
should favor posting paid opportunities, while limiting the promotion of unpaid work
opportunities on their campuses.

Stakeholder Brief 2: Expanding Equitable Work-based Learning Opportunities
Employers
1 Incorporate internships, co-ops, and apprenticeships into the business growth strategy.
In today’s highly competitive labor market, employers face significant challenges
recruiting talent for key roles. Paid internships, co-ops, and apprenticeships can serve
as direct pipelines for skilled talent, playing a key role in a sustainable business growth
strategy. To incentivize employee participation in WBL programs, companies should tie
such activities to career advancement opportunities. This will signal to employees that
their time is valued.
2 Compensate students for WBL.
Although students are learning on the job, they are also providing labor and services
that contribute to the success of the organization. Employers should compensate
student workers for these contributions. This will ensure that students who do not have
the resources to devote to unpaid work can participate in valuable WBL experiences,
while enabling businesses to build more diverse talent pipelines. Additionally, pay
demonstrates that the company is willing to invest in its employees, a factor that many
individuals prioritize when making career decisions.27
3 Build partnerships with colleges, with a focus on HBCUs and MSIs, and align student
work opportunities with degree programs.
Employers should proactively forge partnerships with regional colleges, particularly
HBCUs and MSIs, designing programs that meet industry needs and add value over
students’ lifetime. Work experiences should align with learning goals, which enables
academic institutions to award credit for the experience. Partnerships at the institutional
level can manifest in the form of formal co-op programs (e.g. Northeastern’s co-op
model) and apprenticeship programs. Employers can also leverage student-connected
portals, such as Handshake,28 to recruit students for WBL.
4 Design WBL programs intentionally, with an eye towards quality.
WBL programs should include meaningful job tasks that build foundational and
technical career skills for students and add value for businesses. Students should be
paired with trained supervisors and exposed to career and networking opportunities
across the organization. For students who do not have previous exposure to
professional environments, guidance and mentorship is particularly valuable and helps
foster stronger connections to the workplace.

Stakeholder Brief 2: Expanding Equitable Work-based Learning Opportunities
5 Leverage federal, state, and local resources to finance WBL programs.
Many states offer funds that workforce boards, education institutions, and employers
can tap into to finance student internship and apprenticeship opportunities.
Employers should explore whether their chambers of commerce or industry
associations have established or are willing to organize funds dedicated to student
WBL experiences. Participating in regional industry partnerships provides a
coordinated way to address talent needs and alleviate the administrative burden
involved in forming multiple educator-employer relationships.29 Intermediaries can
also help bridge employers and colleges, assist with program administration, and
provide funding and wraparound services. Examples of intermediaries already doing
this work include CareerWise30 and OneTen.31
EXAMPLE
The Greater Washington Partnership is an alliance of cross-sector employers in
the Washington D.C. area. Identifying that there would be a dearth of digital tech
talent by 2025, the partnership launched its CoLAB program, bringing together
institutions of higher education with employers to build pathways that incorporate
WBL opportunities.32 The Next Generation Sector Partnership Training Manual is
one resource employers can use to understand the steps and best practices for
forming industry partnerships.33

Stakeholder Brief 2: Expanding Equitable Work-based Learning Opportunities
Additional Resources
“Unpaid internships and inequality: A review of the data and recommendations for
research, policy, and practice. Policy Brief #2,” Center for Research on College-
Workforce Transitions, University of Wisconsin-Madison
In this policy brief, the Center for Research on College-Workforce Transitions outlines
policy solutions and recommendations for expanding paid internship opportunities.
Work-based Learning Toolkit, U.S. Department of Education
The U.S. Department of Education has created a toolkit that offers state and local
program administrators information on developing WBL experiences. The toolkit
provides guidelines and resources on creating a state WBL strategy, encouraging
employer engagement, collecting data, and scaling effective programs.
“Making Work-based Learning Work,” Jobs for the Future (JFF)
This paper from JFF addresses challenges to the wider adoption of WBL and offers a
compelling framework to apply to design effective WBL practices.
“The Power of Work-Based Learning”, Strada Education Foundation
In this report, Strada releases key findings from three national surveys that examined
the applied connections between education and work, revealing the benefits of WBL.
“Learning While Earning: The New Normal”, The Center on Education and the
Workforce (CEW), Georgetown University
In this report, CEW profiles the 14 million college students who are working while
learning, presenting the challenges that working learners face and offering policy
solutions to help these students succeed.

Stakeholder Brief 2: Expanding Equitable Work-based Learning Opportunities
Endnotes
1 Deming, David, Joseph B. Fuller, Rachel Lipson, Ali Epstein, Kerry McKittrick, and Emma Catalfamo. “Delivering on the Degree: The College-
to-Jobs Playbook.” Harvard Kennedy School, . 
2 Patrick, Susan, Khamiah Alderman, and Laurie Gagnon. “Expanding Student Access to Work-Based Learning: Federal Policy
Recommendations.” Aurora Institute, . 
3 Torpey-Saboe, Nichole, Elaine W. Leigh, and Dave Clayton. “The Power of Work-Based Learning.” Strada Education Foundation, March 16,
2022. 
4 Patrick, Susan, Khamiah Alderman, and Laurie Gagnon. “Expanding Student Access to Work-Based Learning: Federal Policy
Recommendations.” Aurora Institute, . 
5 Ross, Martha, Richard Kazis, Nicole Bateman, and Laura Stateler. “Work-Based Learning Can Advance Equity and Opportunity for
America’s Young People.” Brookings Institution, . 
BrookingsMetro_Work-based-learning_Final_Report.pdf.
6 Torpey-Saboe, Nichole, Elaine W. Leigh, and Dave Clayton. “The Power of Work-Based Learning.” Strada Education Foundation, March 16,
2022. 
7 Spaulding, Shayne, Ian Hecker, and Emily Bramhall. “Expanding and Improving Work-Based Learning in Community Colleges: Better Data
and Measurement to Realize Goals for Students and Employers.” Urban Institute, . 
publication/101781/expanding20and20improving20work-based20learning20in20community20colleges.pdf.
8 National Association of Colleges and Employers (NACE). “Unpaid Internships And The Need For Federal Action,” 2022. 
naceweb.org/about-us/advocacy/position-statements/6bcb7e07-b277-41a2-bc09-1bca8c2bfd58.
9 Hora, Matthew T. “Unpaid Internships & Inequality: A Review of the Data and Recommendations for Research, Policy and Practice.” Center
for Research on College-Workforce Transitions at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, . 
uploads/2022/04/CCWT_Policy-Brief-2_Unpaid-Internships-and-Inequality-1.pdf.
10 Holzer, Harry J., and Robert I. Lerman. “Work-Based Learning to Expand Opportunities for Youth.” Challenge 57, no. 4 (): 18–31.

11 “Work-Based Learning Ecosystems: Improving Opportunity for All by Integrating School, Community, and the Workplace.” GPS Education
Partners and Getting Smart, 2021. 
Ecosystems_WhitePaper_GettingSmartandGPSEd_1121.pdf.
12 Ibid.
13 Cahill, Charlotte. “Making Work-Based Learning Work.” Jobs for the Future, . 
WBL_Principles_Paper_062416.pdf.
14 Mezera, Danielle, and Quentin Suffren. “Building Cross-Sector Partnerships to Support Career and Technical Education Pathways:
A Playbook for State Policymakers.” ExcelinEd, . 
CTEPlaybook2.BuildingCrossSectorPartnerships.May2018.pdf.
15 “Notice Inviting Postsecondary Educational Institutions to Participate in Experiments under the Experimental Sites Initiative.” U.S.
Department of Education, May 23, 2019. 
16 Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board. “Work-Based Learning Opportunity Grants,” 2022. 
supporting-our-institutions/institutional-grant-opportunities/work-based-learning-opportunity-grants/.
17 Wilson, Bryan, and Sapna Mehta. “Skills in the States: Work-Based Learning Policy.” National Skills Coalition, . https://
nationalskillscoalition.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/WBL-Learning-Policy-50-State-Scan.pdf.
18 Ross, Kyle. “Congress Must Bolster Youth Employment Programs To Secure America’s Economic Future.” Center for American Progress,
April 24, 2023. 
economic-future/.
19 Ross, Martha, and Richard Kazis. “Youth Summer Jobs Programs: Aligning Ends and Means.” The Brookings Institute, . https://

20 Hora, Matthew T. “Unpaid Internships & Inequality: A Review of the Data and Recommendations for Research, Policy and Practice.” Center
for Research on College-Workforce Transitions at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, . 
uploads/2022/04/CCWT_Policy-Brief-2_Unpaid-Internships-and-Inequality-1.pdf.
21 Internal Revenue Service. “Work Opportunity Tax Credit.” Accessed April 2, 2024. 
employed/work-opportunity-tax-credit.
22 HM Revenue & Customs. “Pay Apprenticeship Levy,” September 12, 2023. 
23 Deming, David, Joseph B. Fuller, Rachel Lipson, Ali Epstein, Kerry McKittrick, and Emma Catalfamo. “Delivering on the Degree: The College-
to-Jobs Playbook.” Harvard Kennedy School, . 
24 Hora, Matthew T. “Unpaid Internships & Inequality: A Review of the Data and Recommendations for Research, Policy and Practice.” Center
for Research on College-Workforce Transitions at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, . 
uploads/2022/04/CCWT_Policy-Brief-2_Unpaid-Internships-and-Inequality-1.pdf.
25 “Embedding Credit for Prior Learning in Career Pathways: Policy Benchmark Tool.” Advance CTE, 2021. 
ED625848.pdf.
26 Ibid.
27 Sigelman, Matt, Joseph B. Fuller, Nik Dawson, Alex Martin, and Gad Levanon. “The American Opportunity Index.” The Burning Glass Institute,
the Harvard Business School Project on Managing the Future of Work, and the Schultz Family Foundation, .
28 Handshake. “Handshake,” 2024. 
29 Mean, Monica, and Gabriella C. Gonzalez. “How Work-Based Learning Can Bring Employers and Students Together,” July 24, 2019. https://

11 30 CareerWise USA. “CareerWise,” 2024. 

Stakeholder Brief 2: Expanding Equitable Work-based Learning Opportunities
31 One Ten. “Homepage.” Accessed April 2, 2024. 
32 Greater Washington Partnership. “Greater Washington Partnership,” 2024. 
33 Next Generation Sector Partnership Community of Practice. “Training Manual,” 2020. 
Acknowledgements
The Project on Workforce thanks the members of the expert discussion group, whose
insights informed this memo: Jay Ash, Mary Churchill, LaNiesha Cobb Sanders, Brian Epp,
Matthew Hora, Brandon-Rashad Kenny, Kira Khazatsky, Daniel Kuehn, Amy Loyd, Mary
12 Alice McCarthy, Brittany Motley, Tim Regele, Mitchell Stevens, and Garrett Warfield.