Master and
Servant
Defense AI in Germany
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, Joseph Verbovszky
DAIO Study 23|12

About the Defense AI Observatory
The Defense AI Observatory (DAIO) at the Helmut Schmidt University in Hamburg
monitors and analyzes the use of artificial intelligence by armed forces. DAIO comprises
three interrelated work streams:
Culture, concept development, and organizational transformation in the context of
military innovation
Current and future conflict pictures, conflict dynamics, and operational experience,
especially related to the use of emerging technologies
Defense industrial dynamics with a particular focus on the impact of emerging
technologies on the nature and character of techno-industrial ecosystems
DAIO is an integral element of GhostPlay, a capability and technology development
project for concept-driven and AI-enhanced defense decision-making in support of fast-
paced defense operations. GhostPlay is funded by the Center for Digital and Technology
Research of the German Bundeswehr (dtec.bw). dtec.bw is funded by the European Union
– NextGenerationEU.
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von

Master and
Servant
Defense AI in Germany
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, Joseph Verbovszky
DAIO Study 23|12

About the Authors
Dr. Heiko Borchert is DAIO’s co-director. He is Associate Fellow at the Center for Advanced
Security, Strategic and Integration Studies (CASSIS, Bonn), subject matter expert at the
Hague Center for Strategic Studies, and runs a strategic affairs consulting boutique. He
studied international relations, business administration, economics, and law at the Universi-
ty of St. Gallen, where he also got his Ph.D. His Twitter account is @HeikoBorchert.
Torben Schütz is a PhD candidate at the Helmut-Schmidt-University and Associate Fellow at
the German Council on Foreign Relations (DGAP). As a DAIO Research Fellow, he oversees
the team’s work on conflict pictures and conflict dynamics. Torben Schütz has worked for
the German Council on Foreign Relations and the Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik/German
Institute for International and Security Affairs. He holds a master’s degree in political science
from Leibniz University Hannover. His Twitter account is @_schuetzt.
Joseph Verbovszky is DAIO’s Research Fellow for defense technology-industrial affairs.
Before joining DAIO, he worked in the areas of international coordination and strategic
analysis at different defense companies. He holds a master’s degree in international
relations and economics from the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies
(SAIS). He graduated with a PhD on German Structural Pacifism from the University of the
Bundeswehr München. His Twitter account is @warkhorse.
Acknowledgments
For this study we have conducted interviews with more than a dozen high-ranking
Bundeswehr and industry experts, who remain anonymous. We are immensely grateful for
their insights and suggestions, but remain solely responsible for any errors in fact, analysis,
or omission.
Design
Almasy Information Design Thinking
Imprint
Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, and Joseph Verbovszky, Master and Servant. Defense AI in
Germany. DAIO Study 23/12 (Hamburg: Defense AI Observatory, 2023).
Defense AI Observatory | Chair of Political Theory | Helmut Schmidt University
Holstenhofweg 85 | 22043 Hamburg | T +49 40 6541 2776
 | contact@defenseai.eu | @Defense_AIO
ISSN (online): 2749–5337
ISSN (print): 2749–5345
4 MASTER AND SERVANT

Content
1 Summary ..................................................................................................................... 6
2 Thinking About Defense AI ....................................................................................... 9
2.1 Structural Pacifism Shapes Defense Technological Imaginaries ....................................11
2.2 Future Conflict Picture ...............................................................................................13
2.3 Digitalization and Software-Defined Defense .............................................................15
2.4 Defense AI ................................................................................................................16
2.5 Ethics and Defense AI ................................................................................................21
3 Developing Defense AI. ........................................................................................... 23
3.1 Development Priorities and Projects...........................................................................24
3.2 Germany’s Defense AI Ecosystem ..............................................................................29
4 Organizing Defense AI ............................................................................................. 34
4.1 Joint Approaches ......................................................................................................35
4.2 Single Service Approaches ........................................................................................36
5 Funding Defense AI ................................................................................................. 38
6 Fielding and Operating Defense AI. ....................................................................... 41
7 Training for Defense AI ............................................................................................ 44
8 Conclusion. ................................................................................................................ 48
Literature ...................................................................................................................... 52
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 5

1 Summary
The German Ministry of Defense (MoD), the Bundeswehr, and the defense tech-
nology and industrial base understand the importance of artificial intelligence (AI)
in shaping the contours of the future strategic environment and the use of military
power. Since the late 1990s, this defense ecosystem has been in a continuous
process of transformation that reflects changes in the geostrategic landscape, is
influenced by technological advances, and shaped by socio-political requirements.
However, arguing that the Bundeswehr must change is often easier than defining
how it needs to change and what goal the change is meant to achieve.
This is the context that shapes Germany’s approach to defense AI. Numerous
projects have been launched, structures and processes are being reorganized,
money has been earmarked, and training is underway or being readjusted. Over-
all, however, the path ahead remains murky – with the obvious risk that action
remains without traction. Like other organizations that embark on a whole-scale
transformation process, the German defense establishment struggles to link the
envisioned future with the status quo and is thus caught in a “master and servant”
logic that will be painful to overcome.
First, the metaphor describes the struggle to readjust Germany’s strategic culture
amid war in Europe. Germany’s strategic culture is input-driven. Socio-political
acceptance of military power trumps everything. This prevailing attitude is best
illustrated by the idea that defense AI serves “humanitarian precision,” as one
interview partner put it: accelerating defense decision-making serves the purpose
of a value-conscious “citizen in uniform” – otherwise the Bundeswehr would not
be considered a legitimate instrument of power providing decision-makers politi-
cal options.
Second, defense trumps offense with most of the current defense AI studies, con-
cepts, and projects aiming at augmenting the survivability rather than the lethality
of the Bundeswehr. In this regard, the use of force is repackaged as the “sharp end
of digitalization” while the overall defense administration remains geared towards
peace-time tasks rather than the return of the use of force in Europe. Therefore,
the Bundeswehr operates in a bifurcated world: the armed forces need to envision
the future defense environment while procrastinating future concepts and pro-
jects into today’s procedures and processes – the master – to induce incremental
change.
Third, three decades of political neglect have served as a particularly cruel master
when it comes to innovation. German armed forces preoccupied with the need
6 MASTER AND SERVANT

to survive – politically, rather than militarily – simply did not have the strategic
bandwidth to consider the added value of technology beyond the primary goal
of ensuring basic military functions. The “tyranny of the status quo” has pinned
socio-technological imaginaries to what matters here and now. Force planners
could (and would) not request, what they did not know. This triggered a kind of
technology blindness that has – unintentionally – been reinforced by a technology
agnostic approach to capability development that describes capability require-
ments in generic terms. The extent to which synchronizing concepts and technol-
ogy development can ignite leapfrogs in capability development thus remains
underexploited.
Against this background defense AI is seen as a tool – the humble servant – sub-
ordinate to human will power and decision-making. The belief that humans must
always remain in the loop dominates political discourse and structures the debate
on ethics and defense AI. As a result, Germany adopts a “non-intrusive” onboard-
ing process to incrementally add AI elements to large defense development and
procurement projects. This makes it difficult to assess what defense AI is all about
and whether it delivers what is expected.
Simultaneously, Germany’s defense AI thinking is heavily influenced by US ideas.
The need for AI to succeed in a “hyperwar environment,” increasing reference to
multi-domain operations, and the adoption of different combat cloud concepts
can be traced back to US concepts that influence thinking in NATO. Germany’s
“administrative gold-plating,” however, implies that the US emphasis on perfor-
mance and lethality is being tamed and made palatable for a German defense
audience that is risk averse. Consequently, defense AI is mainly understood as
a capability multiplier that improves the efficiency and effectiveness of existing
military processes.
This sets the framework for numerous projects that explore the benefits and risks
of defense AI. Along Germany’s capability value chain – consisting of Command,
Control, Computers, Communications or C4 (Führung), Intelligence, Surveillance
and Reconnaissance or ISR (Aufklärung), precision effects (Wirkung), and support
(Unterstützung) – most of the current defense AI projects focus on C4 and ISR. Pro-
jects focusing on providing recognized operational pictures at joint and services
levels are (politically) more palatable than exploring the benefits of defense AI for
precision effects. Given the clear hierarchy between men and AI, the focus is on
decision-making support and step-by-step improvement of existing technologies
with the help of AI.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 7

In this context, governance plays a major role. A great deal of attention is being
devoted to adapting today’s structures for a digital world with the MoD and the
military services operating at different levels of ambition and diverging speed. This
creates risks for Bundeswehr jointness as existing mechanisms for synchronization
seem weak or are not yet fully used to implement proper strategic guidance.
Whether the new defense AI implementation strategy, that is expected by then
end of 2023, can alleviate the situation, remains to be seen.
Apart from providing basic funding to key defense research and technology (R&T)
organizations, most of Germany’s defense R&T projects are tied to ongoing pro-
curement projects. Thus, it is very difficult to assess the level of defense AI-related
funding. While the more than €400M that the new five-year Sondervermögen
has earmarked for R&T and AI may seem substantial, this amount also includes
investments in related digital infrastructure. Based on an analysis of the non-pub-
lic budgets of various current development projects, we contend that Germany
currently spends around €50M per year on AI-related software development.
The true status of the Bundeswehr’s fielding and operating of defense AI is difficult
to grasp. An open-source intelligence system for crisis early warning that uses
AI for data analytics and predictive analysis is one of the most prominent current
examples. Other examples include AI-based radar warning receivers to protect
Bundeswehr helicopters, intelligent image processing for missiles, and enterprise
applications in the fields of warehouse management or medical services.
Using AI in the defense environment also affects military education and training.
The Bundeswehr’s Command and Staff College (Führungsakademie der Bunde-
swehr) is about to review its curriculum with the goal to incorporate AI elements
as of 2024. In addition, the University of the Bundeswehr/Hamburg is setting up
a new AI bachelor’s and master’s degree course. Individual services also explore
opportunities for AI-enhanced simulation-based training. Moreover, different
initiatives have been launched to train defense AI algorithms.
In sum, Germany has embarked on a defense AI journey. Individual projects have
been started, but substantial homework remains to be done. This includes, first,
the need to be more precise about the contribution AI is expected to make in
achieving future capability growth. Second, Germany’s – currently non-existent –
defense industrial policy needs to be updated with regard to defense AI. Third,
the German MoD needs to be more outspoken about its international defense AI
ambition. Finally, more thought needs to be given on how to create a framework
to certify, qualify, and approve future defense AI solutions.
8 MASTER AND SERVANT

2 Thinking
About
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 9

The 2018 artificial intelligence (AI) strategy of the German government describes
how Germany wants to use AI to advance national and European competitive-
ness. Technological advances and global changes, the need to understand AI as
a “key enabling technology”, as well as the “democratic desire to anchor such a
far-reaching technology (…) in an ethical, legal, cultural and institutional context”
are the pillars driving the federal governments AI policy.1 The strategy differen-
tiates between “strong” and “weak” AI and interprets the latter as “solution(s)
of specific problems using methods from mathematics and computer science,
whereby the systems developed are capable of self-optimisation” with a focus on
the use of this type of AI in deduction systems, knowledge-based systems, pattern
analysis and pattern recognition, robotics and autonomous systems as well as
smart multimodal human-machine interaction.2 The 2020 update of the German AI
strategy extends previous lines of effort on building human capacities, establishing
research structures, advancing research and transfer structures, creating an appro-
priate regulatory framework, and supporting networking.3
The German AI strategy and its update remain silent on the use of AI for defense
and security. The same is true for the 2018 Concept of the Bundeswehr,4 the 2021
strategic guidance of then Minister of Defense Kramp-Karrenbauer, and the 2021
coalition treaty. Only the 2019 concept paper on “AI for use in the area of respon-
sibility of the Ministry of Defense” fills the void. This fact is disenchanting, but it is
not surprising.
The country’s strategic culture tames the Bundeswehr’s technology appetite. This
creates tensions. The Bundeswehr recognizes that technology is changing the
future battlefield. It also embraces allied concept ideas to signal its willingness to
cooperate with partners. However, culture, the current organizational set up, and
the lack of robust technology leadership pin the Bundeswehr down to the status
quo. In this context defense AI has a hard time blossoming. Rather the focus is on
incremental evolution most often tied to large procurement projects that apply
defense AI as part of broader functionalities. This makes it difficult to understand
Germany’s overall defense AI ambition and the added value AI is expected to
deliver for the German Bundeswehr.
1 ArtificialIntelligenceStrategy,p.4.
2 Ibid.,pp.4–5
3 ArtificialIntelligenceStrategyoftheGermanFederalGovernment.2020Update.
4 ThisdocumentonlyreferstoAIinrelationtodatamininganddataanalytics.See:KonzeptionderBundeswehr,footnote48.
10 MASTER AND SERVANT

2.1 Structural Pacifism Shapes
Defense Technological Imaginaries
Germany’s security policy is characterized by a structural pacifism5 in which the
need to reconcile competing elements of Germany’s post-war security identity
with a byzantine policy process leads to the prioritization of security policy con-
formity over effectiveness (performance).
Resulting from the trauma of WWII, the nascent Federal Republic of West Ger-
many “reinvented itself” in opposition to its authoritarian past.6 The formation of
Germany’s post-war identity relied heavily on fantasy7 – a narrative scenario that
promises the impossible fulfillment of a complete identity – and, more importantly,
on negative contingency – the projection of catastrophe into the future, which is
meant to be avoided. In his seminal work on the history of the Federal Republic,
Frank Biess demonstrates how negative contingency in the form of German Angst
served to stabilize German democracy by emphasizing its fragility.8
While conducive to internal stability, negative contingency retards German security
policy. It appears primarily in the form of “The Lessons of History,” such as “Never
Again War,” “Never Again Alone” and “Never Again Auschwitz,” which prescribe
modes of behavior that prevent a return of German authoritarianism and preserve
post-war Germany’s non-belligerent identity. Unfortunately, the “Lessons of Histo-
ry” are often contradictory and open to interpretation, leading to uncertainty over
the best way forward. Reconciling them therefore presents itself as the “right way”
to do security policy, i.e., most conform with Germany’s identity.9
Reconciling competing interpretations of German post-war identity is made more
difficult by the byzantine logic of German security policy decision-making. Myriad
actors are involved in the decision-making process, all of whom come with their
own domestic political interests. The most relevant interests include those of the
Chancellery, the Foreign Office, the Defense Ministry, the Ministry of Economics,
the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry of Development; the interests of the
coalition parties and, finally, the interests of small parliamentary groups within
parties or individuals who can gather enough support to form blocking minorities
on a given issue.10 Decisions over the use of force, specifically deployment and
5 Verbovszky,GermanStructuralPacifism.
6 Stengel,ThePoliticsofMilitaryForce,p.102.
7 Eberle,DiscourseandAffectinForeignPolicy,p.46.
8 Biess,Frank,RepublikderAngst,p.31.
9 Verbovszky,StructuralPacifism,p.29.
10 Ibid.,p.35.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 11

the annual defense budget, are managed by completely separate decision pro-
cesses, with deployment lead primarily by the foreign office and the budget by
the finance ministry and finance committee.11 Furthermore, the defense budget is
constitutionally allocated out of the annual budget, subjecting it to further domes-
tic political interests.12 As a result, force planning (budget) at the political level lags
behind operations and their requirements.13
The need to resolve myriad domestic political interests in a way that conforms with
Germany’s post-war non-belligerent identity leads to a security policy dominated
by inputs. Security policy decision are done via “reverse consensus,” i.e., even
before going into respective committees for deliberation they are designed to be
consensus-capable in the final vote.14 The prioritization of this “right way” to do
security policy leads to a highly conformist policy, which is, at best, inconsistently
effective.
Beyond the scope of security policy, elements similar to structural pacifism are
also observable in other aspects of German society, in particular, Germany’s
skepticism toward technological change. One powerful tool for measuring the
impact of cultural and political factors is the use of socio-technological imagi-
naries, i.e., “ collectively held, institutionally stabilized, and publicly performed
visions of desirable futures, animated by shared understandings of forms of social
life and social order attainable through, and supportive of, advances in science
and technology.”15 They “play an important role in the development, assessment
and regulation of cutting-edge technologies.”16 This approach has already been
applied to demonstrate Germany’s attitudes toward developments in the fields of
nanotechnology17 and space technology.18
Common themes emerge across these diverse fields and the afore-presented
national AI strategy: both nanotechnology and AI are seen as crucial technologies
to retain a competitive economic advantage and preserve Germany’s wealth,19
while both nanotechnology and space technology are viewed as advantageous to
analyze and improve the environment.20 In none of the three technology fields do
military applications receive any particular attention. Additionally, risks within the
respective technology fields are prominently covered and preemptive regulation is
11 Ibid.,p.30.
12 Art.87a,para.1Grundgesetz.
13 Verbovszky,StructuralPacifism,p.204.
14 Ibid.,p.38.
15 Jasanoff,“FutureImperfect,”p.4.
16 Burri,“ImaginariesofScienceandSociety,”p.233.
17 Ibid.
18 Kober/Schütz,DenWeltraumordnen–Zukunftsvorstellungenund(New)SpaceGovernance.”
19 Burri,“ImaginariesofScienceandSociety,”p.237;ArtificialIntelligenceStrategy,p.8
20 Burri,“ImaginariesofScienceandSociety,”p.237,Kober/Schütz,“DenWeltraumordnen.”
12 MASTER AND SERVANT

at the forefront of political action: from space debris21 to risks of nanotechnology
in food or cosmetics22 to ever-present warnings about defense AI in the German
discourse.23 Lastly, at least in the cases of nanotechnology and AI, the government
wants to establish a discourse with the wider public. However, the fact that this
discourse needs to be framed from the outset in terms of negative contingencies
significantly limits opportunities to step out of the existing narrative or to break
new ground.
2.2 Future Conflict Picture
Strategic culture shapes how the Bundeswehr thinks about the future. Its capstone
document Future Operating Environment 2035 discusses the likely future battle-
field.24 Fast-paced adversarial action and the amalgamation of different forms of
conflicts that evolve in complex and chaotic environments are considered a key
characteristic. Advances in technology, international power shifts, new forms of
decentralized organization, and the long-term consequences of climate change on
the battlefield are key drivers shaping the future battlefield.
Considering these developments, future military action needs to put more em-
phasis on accelerating data gathering, analysis, and application, requires a com-
prehensive recognized operational picture, depends on shorter sensor to shooter
cycles, and demands more flexible and partially automated measures of response.
Strategic depth and delivering effects at greater distance become more important
and should go hand in hand with developing counter-Anti Access/Area Denial
(A2AD) capabilities and capacities.
Technologies play a major role in shaping these trends and implementing effective
battlefield solutions.25 Digitalization and automation are important, the paper
argues. AI and unmanned systems are getting more critical in view of automating
processes and operating in risk-prone areas. More emphasis is needed on superior
sensing capabilities, new weapon systems as well as directed energy weapons
primarily for defensive purposes. New concepts of deterrence will be needed to
counter adversarial hypersonic weapons.
21 Kober/Schütz,“DenWeltraumordnen.”
22 Burri,“ImaginariesofScienceandSociety,”p.239.
23 Seeforexample:MehrFortschrittwagen,p.145.
24 FutureOperatingEnvironment2023,pp.7–11.
25 Seealso:KriegderZukunft.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 13

The 2022 Operational Guidance for the Armed Forces by the Chief of Defense
(CHOD) underpins these reflections.26 This capstone document highlights the
need for new innovative solutions to be “battle ready” and emphasizes the press-
ing need to assess sensor data “on the edge” to counter adversarial jamming.27 In
particular, this guideline posits:
In addition to modern sensors as well as C2 and precision effects, the network
infrastructure – i.e., the ability to transmit data, store it and make it available
and usable for planning and decision-making processes of all kinds – will be
decisive in the future. The interoperability of data clouds is a prerequisite for
future systems. AI will play an increasingly important role, linking all fields of
technology and thus also having military relevance. AI applications that sup-
port data correlation and data processing on behalf of the Commander and his
command aides will become increasingly relevant. Since it is likely that adver-
saries will exploit these technological capabilities, it is imperative to participate
in these developments.28
In this context, the Operational Guidance also fully embraces the idea of Multi-Do-
main Operations (MDO) and adopts the current working definition of NATO.29 Fur-
thermore the capstone document contends that the core idea driving MDO is not
new. But today’s focus provides opportunities to link capabilities across domains,
advance operational tempo, and impose dilemmas on the adversary by precise
direct and indirect effects.30 Therefore the MoD’s Directorate-General for Planning
has tasked the Planning Office of the Bundeswehr at the end of 2022 to start
national MDO implementation with the goal of submitting a respective document
to the CHOD by mid-2024.31
26 OperativeLeitlinienfürdieStreitkräfte(OpLLSK).
27 Ibid.Para.297–298.
28 “NebenmodernenSensorensowieFührungs-undWirkmittelnwirdkünftigdieNetzwerkinfrastruktur,d.h.dieBefähigung,Daten
zuübertragen,siezuspeichernundfürPlanungs-undEntscheidungsprozesseallerArtverfüg-undnutzbarzumachen,entsc-
heidendsein.DieInteroperabilitätsolcherDatencloudsistVoraussetzungfürkünftigeSysteme.KIwirddabeizunehmendeine,
alleTechnologiefelderverbindendeRollespielenunddamitauchmilitärischrelevant.KI-Anwendungen,dieden(Truppenführer)
undseineFührungsgehilfenbeiderKorrelationundVerarbeitungderMassendatenunterstützen,werdenzunehmendrelevanter.
Daanzunehmenist,dassgegnerischeAkteureihretechnologischenMöglichkeitenausschöpfenwerden,kommteszwingend
daraufan,andiesenEntwicklungenteilzuhaben.”See:Ibid,para.295.
29 “Orchestrationofmilitaryactivitiesacrossalldomainandenvironments,synchronizedwithnon-military,toenabletheAlliance
todeliverconvergingeffectsatthespeedofrelevance.”See:Ibid,para.286.
30 Ibid.,para.290.
31 Interview,28February2023.
14 MASTER AND SERVANT

2.3 Digitalization and Software-Defined Defense
The need to digitize armed forces put forward by the CHOD’s Strategic Guidance
is not new. In fact, Network-Centric Warfare or Network-Enabled Operations, the
state-of-the art military concepts in the early 2000s, strived on the idea of trans-
ferring private industry success in digitizing enterprise processes into the military
domain. As Antoine Bousque argues, the focus on international crisis management
and counter insurgency put this approach to a hard reality test, which ended badly
and led its temporary demise.32 The resurgence of military peer-to-peer conflicts,
the growing emphasis on MDO, and attempts to distribute military capabilities
among manned and unmanned platforms and binding them together via a digital
lifeline has rejuvenated defense digitalization.
The German MoD’s current Strategic Guideline on Digitalization is right in ar-
guing that the Bundeswehr’s unique selling proposition lies in preparing and
using armed forces. In doing so, Network-Enabled Operations and the ability to
contribute to MDO are key. That’s why a seamless and powerful ICT federation
is indispensable.33 Therefore, defense digitalization makes the armed force more
assertive, increases the Bundeswehr’s operational capability as a whole and on the
digitized battlefield, and supports administrative action.34
As of recently, the emphasis on digitalization has boosted software-defined de-
fense as a new concept. This concept rests on detaching the hardware aspects of
military capabilities from the software aspects with the goal to connect the latter
in “data-centric, multi-modal, multi-domain, adaptative battle networks.”35 Gen
Michael Vetter, the MoD’s Chief Information Officer, backs software-defined de-
fense as a new way of ensuring future capability growth by “digitally upgrading”
legacy systems. For example, he refers to Ukraine’s use of a self-developed app
to enhance the target assignation process of the Panzerhaubitze 2000 as a repre-
sentative use case that illustrates how digital solutions enable Ukrainians to quickly
engage the adversary and change position after firing without being targeted by
the adversary.36
32 Bousquet,TheScientificWayofWarfare,pp.199–219.
33 StrategischeLeitlinieDigitalisierung,p.7.
34 Färber,“DigitalisierungderBundeswehr,”p.225.
35 Soare/Singh/Nouwens,Software-definedDefence,p.2.
36 AudiostatementbyGenMichaelVetter,publishedviaWelchering,“VonderBundeswehrzurdigitalenVerteidigungsarmee?”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 15

This understanding also underpins the MoD’s 2021 data strategy.37 The Bundes-
wehr joins the chorus of many other armed forces in EU/NATO nations38 and
calls data “an asset of significant value” that enables information and effects
superiority.39 That’s why the data strategy is geared towards providing data of high
quality and accessibility to strengthen the mission-readiness and resilience of IT
and weapon systems, reduce life-cycle costs of IT and weapon systems, boost
the use of data across the Bundeswehr, increase the use of data, and enable data
analytics.40
The challenge, however, rests in synchronizing reality with the Bundeswehr’s digital
ambition. Today, the Bundeswehr effectively operates in two worlds – old and new
– requiring soldiers to envision the future while procrastinating future concepts
and projects into legacy procedures and processes as the only means available to
induce incremental change. This creates obvious tensions between “feelgood”
digitalization, operated to convey the image of a techno-savvy and thus also
attractive employer, and defense digitalization meant to meet the Bundeswehr’s
operational performance requirements.41
2.4 Defense AI
Joint Thinking
Defense digitalization provides the umbrella for defense AI. The 2019 concept
paper on “AI for use in the area of responsibility of the Ministry of Defense”
discussed above is Germany’s current defense AI capstone document. Although
other concept papers refer to defense AI, this paper discusses in detail the general
goals of using defense AI, the operationalization for the Bundeswehr as well as the
requirements (e.g., organization, human resources, legal aspects, IT hard/software
aspects) to be met. In doing so the paper follows the data-centric approach out-
lined above, for example, when arguing right at the start that “the successful use
of AI by the Bundeswehr depends on the quantity and quality of the data used to
enhance learning.”42 The document applies a very generic definition of
37 DatenstrategieGBBMVg.
38 Layton,EvolutionnotRevolution,p.10;Payne,BrightProspects–BigChallenges,pp.10–11;Kahn,RiskyIncrementalism,pp.
13–15;Engen,WhentheTeethEattheTail,pp.14,16.
39 DatenstrategieGBBMVg,para.106,102.
40 Ibid.,para.206.
41 Interviews,25March2022and6February2023.
42 “DerErfolgdesEinsatzesvonKIinderBundeswehrstehtdabeiimdirektenZusammenhangmitderQuantitätundQualitätder
Daten,mitdenendieselerntbzw.umgeht.”See:KünstlicheIntelligenz.NutzungimGeschäftsbereichesBundesministeriums
derVerteidigung,p.2.
16 MASTER AND SERVANT

AI as a technology that uses machines with sophisticated algorithms taking on
tasks that require – some sort of – intelligence to accomplish tasks that have
previously required primarily or exclusively human decision-making or action.43
The concept document builds on the national AI strategy’s differentiation between
weak and strong AI and argues that strong AI “could lead to the development of
autonomous weapon systems that individually set their respective goals of action
and thus operate with maximum freedom of maneuver.”44 Germany, however,
rejects the use of lethal autonomous weapon systems (see section 2.5).
Picking up the weak vs strong AI distinction might serve to align defense AI
thinking with the national AI strategy, but doubts remain that it will add value in
the defense context. First, this understanding focuses more on the socio-political
acceptability rather than the performance and the impact of defense AI. Second,
this dichotomy builds on commercial practices that strive on abundant, largely
unrestricted, and readily available data. Such a data-centric approach, although
prevalent in the German MoD and across the international defense establishment,
is problematic given the lack of defense-relevant data. It also reinforces an IT-cen-
tric understanding of defense AI with a prime focus on the hardware infrastructure
needed to process data. By contrast, the US Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) advocates a more nuanced approach based on three waves of
AI (Box 1), a differentiation that could be used to describe in detail what type of
defense AI is needed to achieve what type of capability growth.45
Box 1: Three Waves of AI According to DARPA
“EarlyworkinAIemphasizedhandcraftedknowledge,andcomputerscientistsconstructed
so-calledexpertsystemsthatcapturedthespecializedknowledgeofexpertsinrulesthatthe
systemcouldthenapplytosituationsofinterest.Such“first wave” AI technologieswerequite
successful–taxpreparationsoftwareisagoodexampleofanexpertsystem–buttheneedto
handcraftrulesiscostlyandtime-consumingandthereforelimitstheapplicabilityofrules-
basedAI.
43 “Technologie(...)beiderMaschinenmithochentwickeltenAlgorithmenAufgabenübernehmen,fürderenBewältigungeine-
wieauchimmergeartete-IntelligenznotwendigistunddiebishervorallemoderausschliesslichmenschlicherEntscheidungs-
findungoderHandlungbedurfte.”Ibid.,p.6.
44 Ibid.,pp.8–9.
45 ThisnotionisalsogainingprominenceinNATOwiththemostrecentscienceandtechnologytrendsreportmakingexplicit
referencetoit.See:Science&TechnologyTrends2023–2043.Volume2,pp.27–28.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 17

Thepastfewyearshaveseenanexplosionofinterestinasub-fieldofAIdubbedmachinelearn-
ingthatappliesstatisticalandprobabilisticmethodstolargedatasetstocreategeneralized
representationsthatcanbeappliedtofuturesamples.Foremostamongtheseapproachesare
deeplearning(artificial)neuralnetworksthatcanbetrainedtoperformavarietyofclassifica-
tionandpredictiontaskswhenadequatehistoricaldataisavailable.Thereinliestherub,howev-
er,asthetaskofcollecting,labelling,andvettingdataonwhichtotrainsuch“second wave” AI
techniquesisprohibitivelycostlyandtime-consuming.
DARPAenvisionsafutureinwhichmachinesaremorethanjusttoolsthatexecutehuman-pro-
grammedrulesorgeneralizefromhuman-curateddatasets.Rather,themachinesDARPA
envisionswillfunctionmoreascolleaguesthanastools.Towardsthisend,DARPAresearch
anddevelopmentinhuman-machinesymbiosissetsagoaltopartnerwithmachines.Enabling
computingsystemsinthismannerisofcriticalimportancebecausesensor,information,and
communicationsystemsgeneratedataatratesbeyondwhichhumanscanassimilate,under-
stand,andact.Incorporatingthesetechnologiesinmilitarysystemsthatcollaboratewithwarf-
ighterswillfacilitatebetterdecisionsincomplex,time-critical,battlefieldenvironments;enable
asharedunderstandingofmassive,incomplete,andcontradictoryinformation;andempower
unmannedsystemstoperformcriticalmissionssafelyandwithhighdegreesofautonomy.DAR-
PAisfocusingitsinvestmentsonathird wave of AIthatbringsforthmachinesthatunderstand
andreasonincontext.”
Source:
Furthermore the document portrays a holistic defense AI approach that takes into
account societal discourse and political preferences, defense capability needs
and process improvements, multinational capability needs and interoperability,
advances in defense digitalization, the capacities of the defense research and
technology networks as well as civil and commercial progress in further developing
the technology.46 The last aspect is of particular relevance as it pushes the MoD to
the backseat of AI development:
AI is not an explicit military capability, and the Bundeswehr is not the driver of
AI-related innovation. Given its economic relevance, private companies shape
technology developments. As a consequence, the future use of AI by the
Bundeswehr is shaped largely by adapting civil and commercial developments
and applications.47
46 KünstlicheIntelligenz.NutzungimGeschäftsbereichdesBundesministeriumsderVerteidigung,pp.10–11.
47 “KIistkeineexplizitemilitärischeFähigkeitunddieBundeswehristimBereichKInichtderTreiberderInnovation.Derwirtschaft-
lichenBedeutungvonKIentsprechendsindhierPrivatunternehmenTreiberderTechnologieentwicklung.DerkünftigeEinsatzvon
KIinderBundeswehrleitetsichdamitzueinemgrossenAnteilausderAdaptionvonzivilen/kommerziellenEntwicklungenund
Anwendungenab.”See:KünstlicheIntelligenz.NutzungimGeschäftsbereichdesBundesministeriumsderVerteidigung,p.13.
18 MASTER AND SERVANT

Against this background the concept document mainly refers to gains in efficiency,
effectiveness, and process improvements as the key imaginaries when describing
the goals of using defense AI:
AI will enable a new degree of network-enabled capabilities. In extreme cases,
AI could revolutionize core aspects of the future use of force by improving the
precision and accelerating the speed of the sensor to shooter chain. This could
also provide additional options to reorganize the chain in more flexible ways,
enhance new degrees of automation and data transmission and data man-
agement. Finally, AI could also offer new ways of delivering precision effects
in hybrid teams consisting of human operators and AI support. Thus, AI could
become decisive in ensuring a military actor’s battlefield survivability.48
While the document also discusses potential areas of applications of defense AI, it
refrains from describing how exactly defense AI is expected to enhance the Bunde-
swehr’s key capabilities and how AI-enhanced initial and full operational capabilities
(IOC, FOC) would look like in practice. Rather the document argues that AI should
be introduced with the help of broadly defined pilot projects that can quickly
expose the Bundeswehr to defense AI,49 without specifying which capability areas
should be used to achieve what kind of capability gain with the help of defense AI.
Despite numerous initiatives, the big picture for German defense AI remains
blurry. The strategic rationale underpinning defense AI is fuzzy, and it is unclear
how defense AI will augment capability growth over the next decades. Conse-
quently, current efforts seem to be “lost in detail” as there is a gap between
high-level guidance and ongoing projects. This gap is meant to be closed by a
new defense AI implementation strategy that the Armed Forces Digitalization
Center is expected to submit by the end of 2023.50
Service Thinking
In this context Germany’s military services express different levels of ambition
when it comes to using defense AI. Already back in 2017–18, the Germany Army
published a series of concept notes outlining the future digital battlefield and
the role of AI.51 In 2019, the Germany Army Concepts and Capability Develop-
48 “MitKIkanninderZukunfteineuerGradvernetzterOperationsführungerreichtwerden.ImExtremfallkönnteKIsogar
wesentlicheAspektekünftigerKriegsführungrevolutionieren,indembspw.DieFunktionskettevomSensorzumEffektorbzw.
dasGefechtnochweitauspräzisereundschneller,aberauchweiträumigerundvariablergestaltetwerdenkann,neueGradeder
AutomatisierungundDatenübertragungsowieVerarbeitungerreichtodervölligneueWirkkonzepteinMischformen(hybride
TeamsausMenschundKI-Unterstützung)ermöglichtwerden.DamitkönnteKIentscheidendfürdieÜberlebensfähigkeitjedes
AkteursaufdemGefechtsfeldderZukunftwerden.”See:Ibid.,p.17.
49 Ibid.,p.15.
50 Interview,6February2023.
51 WiekämpfenLandstreitkräftekünftig?;DigitalisierungvonLandoperationen.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 19

ment Office published a fully-fledged defense AI position paper. It argued that
that defense AI would help render basic services more efficient, improve com-
bat-ready capabilities, and overcome existing capability gaps.52 In so doing the
paper reflects US and NATO discourse on the digital and accelerated battlefield
(hyperwar), talks about operating at machine speed, taking decisions on the edge,
and using AI to coordinate and synchronize a growing number of sensors and
effectors.53 Moreover, the paper outlines four lines of efforts to use defense AI to
further improve defense AI for human resources and material management, and
enhance training and education.54
The German Luftwaffe seems convinced that without AI today’s means of com-
mand and control will be insufficient to operate air power within the next 15 years.
The Luftwaffe expects defense AI to synchronize information for Recognized Air
Pictures (RAP), optimize flight routes, mission planning and mission management,
will coordinate target acquisition, and submit proposals on how to design and
implement plans of attack. The German Luftwaffe is taking baby steps in using
defense AI, but its thinking is highly aligned with the US Air Force vision of using
AI to set up Advanced Battle Management Systems (ABMS) to enable to conduct
of Joint All Domain Operations (JADO).55
The German Navy, by contrast, lags behind. So far, defense AI has played only a
subordinate role. The service considers itself as technology driven as the Luftwaffe,
but dire savings plans have limited the Navy’s capability development priorities
to what is absolutely needed to ensure its survival. In the past, this even led the
Navy to divest leading technology applications from aboard its ships to save costs.
The current Navy leadership attempts to lead a conceptual turnaround to provide
more leeway to innovation and change also by establishing a respective innova-
tion cell with the Navy leadership team (see section 4.2). In this context the Navy
warms up to defense AI, which has gained traction as of last year. As more defense
AI use cases become known, sailors seem to become more aware how defense AI
could offer added value aboard their ships.56
The Cyber and Information Domain Service has an instrumental understanding of
defense AI that is directly related to its core tasks (see section 4.2). As this service
plays a key role in providing common operational pictures (see section 3.1) it
emphasizes the role of AI in providing analytical support and rendering digital pro-
cesses more efficient and effective. As such AI is part of the so-called “Analytics
52 KünstlicheIntelligenzindenLandstreitkräften,p.10.
53 Ibid.,pp.5–7.Seealso:Brendecke/Doll/Kallfass,“DerFührungsprozessvonmorgen,”p.71.
54 KünstlicheIntelligenzindenLandstreitkräften,p.12.
55 AutorenteamLuftwaffe,“DerEinflusskünstlicherIntelligenzbeiFührungvonLuftoperationenderZukunft”,pp.65–68.
56 Interviews,23February2023and14March2023.
20 MASTER AND SERVANT

and Simulation” cluster which combines different methods such as pattern recog-
nition, decision support, machine learning, and simulation.57
2.5 Ethics and Defense AI
The German emphasis on applying military power only in a well-established,
normatively underpinned, and rules-based framework is a direct consequence of
its strategic culture discussed in section 2.1. It implies that ethics plays a formative
role for developing and using defense AI and puts a focus on arms control to
shape the use of AI and other emerging technologies, as the 2021 coalition treaty
underlines.58 In addition, the MoD’s 2019 defense AI concept paper is unmistak-
able when it posits that the MoD “can – on its own – neither lead nor shape the
societal debate on AI as well as its risks and benefits, because the military use of
AI constitutes only a small portion of a much broader topic.”59 Rather the MoD
needs to engage in a multi-stakeholder process to shape the boarder public
discourse on AI.
In this regard, leading officers make it amply clear that – in their view – defense
AI should always play a subordinate role to human decision-makers. This position,
however, is almost always tied to the role of lethal autonomous weapon systems,
leading to a somewhat precarious focus of defense AI on this very specific appli-
cation.60 For example, Gen Dr. Ansgar Rieks, Deputy Chief of the Luftwaffe, states
that “we don’t want automated command of warfare. (…) We don’t want autono-
mous weapon systems we can no longer control.”61 RADM Christian Bock, Director
Education (Ausbildung), at the German Command and Staff College, contends in
a co-authored paper that “humans must remain in control of decision making as
AI cannot replace human innovation, surprise, human values, personal experience,
trust and emotions, and camaraderie.”62 Such statements serve to show that the
Bundeswehr leadership holds a collective vision, stabilize institutional thinking63
about defense AI, and publicly communicate the socio-technical imaginary that
shapes Germany’s dealing with defense AI.
57 “VonBigDatazuKI:ZweiteAusbaustufedesGemeinsamenLagezentrumsCIR;”Färber,“DigitalisierungderBundeswehr,”p.231.
58 MehrFortschrittwagen,p.146.
59 “DergesellschaftlicheDiskurszumGesamtthemaKIunddiemitderenAnwendungverbundenenChancenundRisikenkannnicht
alleinedurchdasBMVggesteuertodergestaltetwerden,dadiemilitärischenAnwendungsbereichenureinenkleinenTeildesGesa-
mtthemasdarstellen.”See:KünstlicheIntelligenz.NutzungimGeschäftsbereichdesBundesministeriumsderVerteidigung,p.10.
60 “ThedebateonresponsibleAIinamilitarycontextshouldnothaveapredominantfocusonethicalissuesregarding(lethalautono-
mousweaponsystems.”See:Meerveld/Lindelauf/Postma/Postma,“TheirresponsibilityofnotusingAIinthemilitary,”p.4.
61 Ehlke,“InterviewmitGeneralleutnantDr.AnsgarRieks,”S.18
62 “DerMenschmussalleindeshalbTeilderEntscheidungenbleiben,weilKIinkeinerPhasedenMenschenmitdessenInnova-
tion,Überraschungsfähigkeit,Werten,persönlichenErfahrungen,VertrauenundEmotionalität,insbesonderederKameradschaft
ersetzenkann.”See:Bock/Schmarsow,“GedankenzumEinsatzvonKIbeimmilitärischenFührenundEntscheiden”,p.154.
63 Formoreontheroleofinstitutionalthinkingandtacitknowledgeinfacilitatingorpreventingmilitaryinnovation,see:Jensen/
Whyte/Cuomo,InformationinWar,pp.35–36,40–46.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 21

Germany’s strong focus on ethics in relation to technology also influences the
narrative used to justify the use of defense AI. In response to our question about
the strategic purpose of using defense AI, one interview partner argued that it’s
all about “humanitarian precision.” Humanitarian precision, in turn, combines the
reality of a post-heroic and risk-averse society with the need for speed on the
battlefield. Humanitarian precision thus is a political currency as it provides the
Bundeswehr legitimation in the eye of political decision-makers and thus makes
the armed forces an accepted political instrument.64 “The sharp end of digitaliza-
tion” is a similar rhetorical figure used by members of the Bundeswehr65 to de-
scribe the added value of digitalization in advancing precision effects.
However, demanding respect for ethical principles and normative guidelines in
technology development is one thing, implementing adequate approaches to do
so is a different thing. So far, the MoD’s guidance on implementing ethical guide-
lines has remained vague, while in practice different initiatives emerge:
At the international level the new ISO/IEC/IEEE 24787–7000:2022 standard
defines a process for value-based engineering also applicable for defense.66
Members of the NATO Data and Artificial Intelligence Review Board (DARB)
sympathize with using this standard, which is also currently explored by the
GhostPlay consortium (see section 3.1).67
At the national level the German Association for Electrical, Electronic, and In-
formation Technologies (VDE) has submitted a standard to ensure AI trustwor-
thiness that shall lead to an AI Trust Label. The standard can be used across all
industry sectors and is based on specifying values, measurable criteria, indica-
tors, and observables.68
At the corporate level companies work on project-specific solutions. One
German example is the independent panel of experts on the responsible use
of new technologies in the context of the Future Combat Air Systems (FCAS).69
Among other things, this approach shall lead to creating a so-called FCAS
Ethical AI Demonstrator envisaged to provide a scenario-based simulation
environment which can illustrate ethical dilemmas and possible options in
solving them.70
64 Interview,22February2023.
65 Interview,22February2023.Seealso:Rieks,“DigitalisierungderStreitkräfte,”p.104.
66 Formoreonthestandard,see:
67 Interview,7February2023.Seealso:Hofstetter/Verbovszky,HowAILearnstheBundeswehr’s“InnereFührung.”
68 “KannKünstlicheIntelligenzwertekonformsein?”
69 
70 Koch,“ElementsofanEthicalAIDemonstratorforResponsiblyDesigningDefenceSystems.”
22 MASTER AND SERVANT

3 Developing
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 23

The German MoD and the Bundeswehr have embarked on exploring the oppor-
tunities of defense AI. Numerous projects have been kicked off, but it remains
difficult to understand how individual projects will contribute to future capability
growth. In addition, structural pacifism has led to a bifurcated national ecosystem
favoring knowledge stovepipes rather than an integrated approach.
3.1 Development Priorities and Projects
At the time of writing this study, a national defense AI capability roadmap has not
been publicly released. The MoD’s leading Directorates-General (see section 4.1)
might have a clear understanding what ongoing defense AI development activities
are meant to achieve but such a perspective has not been publicly communicat-
ed. Therefore, Bundeswehr’s defense AI development priorities remain opaque.
Consequently, this section provides our assessment of more than a dozen ongoing
projects that have been selected to illustrate the diversity of current activities.71
We structure these projects along the Bundeswehr’s capability value chain – with
some projects crossing several capability areas – and highlight the primary domain
on which the respective projects focus (Table 1).
Command, Control, Computers, Communications, and Cyber (C4/C5)
Generating new and supporting existing Common Operational Pictures (COP) with
the help of AI is a major focus area. This priority extends previous activities started
in the early 2000s when the strive for Network-Enabled Operations shaped Bun-
deswehr transformation.72 As in the past, COPs are considered central to acting
swiftly and precisely.73 AI is expected to deliver new functionalities with regard to
assessing mass data, pattern recognition, and computing suggestions for cours-
es of action.74 Defense AI in support of COPs is important because this area of
application is considered inconspicuous and in line with the dominant socio-tech-
nical imaginary thus giving the Bundeswehr freedom to explore AI’s strengths and
shortfalls.75 COPs also constitute an ongoing capability gap,76 which will become
even more important to close given the Bundeswehr’s growing emphasis on the
need of being MDO capable.
71 Werespectinformationclassificationlevelsandthusremaingenericindescribingtherelevantprojects.Wheneverpossible,we
providereferencestopublicsourceforadditionalinformation.
72 Borchert,“TheRockyRoadtoNetworkedandEffects-BasedExpeditionaryForces,”pp.83–107.
73 OperativeLeitllinienfürdieStreitkräfte,para.271.
74 KünstlicheIntelligenz.NutzungimGeschäftsbereichdesBundesministeriumsderVerteidigung,pp.17–18.
75 Interview,28February2023.
76 Interview,23February2023.
24 MASTER AND SERVANT

Table 1: Selected German Defense AI Development Projects
Command, Control,
Intelligence,
Computers, Precision
Surveillance, Support
Communications, Effects
Reconnaissance
Cyber (C4/5)
(Führung) (Aufklärung) (Wirkung) (Unterstützung)
Commonoperational Militaryinternetof WildHornets: FCASfocuson
pictures thingsfortactical AI-enhancedcapability navigation,cyber
reconnaissance developmentforair- security,training,and
Subseasituational (MITA) launchedeffects lifecyclecosts
picture
Automatedassess- Electromagnetic
Spacesituational mentofsensordata resistanceof
awareness unmannedsystems
AIclassifierfor (ESAS)
AirC2 hydroacoustic
signatures MissionLab
AirCombat
ManagementSystem
(ACMS)
FCASsituational
awareness
AIforNextGenerationWeaponSystem(NGWS)
ErzUntGlas:Glassbattlefield
AuGe:Automatedterrainevaluationtosupport
operationalplanning
Ostflanke:WideAreaISR
FCAS“killchain”andFutureCombatMissionSystem(FCMS)
MainGroundCombatSystem(MGCS)
GhostPlay:DigitaltwinofthefutureAI-drivenbattlefield
Land Domain Naval Domain Air Domain Cyber Domain Others
Source:Authors’compilation.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 25

Although useful, the COP focus is also problematic. For one it is challenging to
fuse management and military relevant data into overall pictures as the underlying
data sets fall into different levels of classification. In addition, current operational
picture applications are not yet seamlessly linked to the emerging crisis early
warning system that the Bundeswehr is already using (see section 6).77 Finally, the
focus on COP tends to reinforce a centralized and hierarchical understanding of
command and data management which can render military decision-making brittle
in view of adversarial attempts to own the electromagnetic domain.
The Bundeswehr’s military services have specific COP needs. The Navy, for ex-
ample, wants to create a subsea situational picture by fusing data from various
military sensors with geoinformation and information about key offshore and
subsurface infrastructure. AI is meant to be used for object recognition, modelling,
and new modes of data visualization.78 Space Situational Awareness satisfies a
similar need for a different domain with BWI and the Cyber Innovation Hub of the
Bundeswehr (CIHBw) exploring the use of defense AI to forecast space weather
and project orbital movements of objects to avoid space collisions.79
The Luftwaffe launched a study to assess the role of AI in its command and control
process. Project AirC2 evaluates the contribution of AI in increasing C2 efficiency
and tempo and looks at the added value of AI in enhancing air C2 education and
training. In addition, the Air Combat Management System (ACMS) project evalu-
ates the use of AI to anticipate adversarial action, produce recognized air pictures,
and recommend future courses of action.80
Defense AI is also a major issue for the Future Combat Air System (FCAS) and the
Next Generation Weapon System (NGWS). FCAS has identified a total of eight
use cases for defense AI. Situational awareness strives to establish a common
relevant operational picture with AI to “support orientation, decision making, and
planning; either for a human operator using tactical displays or for automated
functions directly assessing (…) digital data.”81
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR)
Using defense AI for tactical-level reconnaissance constitutes the core of project
MITA.82 It focuses on wide area surveillance with the help of an AI-augmented
sensor grid and automated data fusion. The goal is to produce a COP that illus-
77 Interview,18March2022.
78 Interview,23February2023.
79 “WieKIbeiderVorhersagedesWeltraumwettershilft.”
80 Interview,25March2022.
81 Azzanoetal.,“TheresponsibleuseofAIinFCAS.”
82 MITAstandsfor“MilitaryInternetofThingsfürtaktischeAufklärung”ormilitaryinternetofthingsfortacticalreconnaissance.
26 MASTER AND SERVANT

trates adversarial troop movements in 3D and identifies adversarial intruders in
real-time. BWI and Helsing have been working on this project, which was demon-
strated in a live experiment at the end of 2022.83
Defense AI for ISR is also of interest for the Germany Navy. In cooperation with
the University of the Bundeswehr/Hamburg, the Navy is developing AI-augmented
solutions to assess sensor data and classify hydroacoustic signatures.84
Precision Effects
Wild Hornets uses and develops AI tactics for aggressors and defenders to evalu-
ate existing concept ideas. To this purpose the project will develop tactics for air-
launched effector swarms that target an adversarial high-value asset and test the
feasibility of using air-launched effectors against next generation ground-based air
defense solutions. Wild Hornets is a cooperation project that involves the Germa-
ny Army Concepts and Capability Development office and team GhostPlay (see
below).
Support
Several FCAS use cases look into the use of defense AI for supportive functions. AI
shall enable complex guidance and flight control behavior to navigate unmanned
platforms. Improving the detection of anomalies and adversarial activities shall
improve cyber security and resilience. System operator training shall become AI
augmented, and AI-based big data analytics could improve production, mainte-
nance, and logistics thus reducing life cycle costs.85
Within dtec.bw (see section 3.2), ESAS at the University of the Bundeswehr/
Hamburg uses AI, simulation, and numerical modelling to advance existing test
and validation methods to improve the electromagnetic resistance of unmanned
systems.86 The MissionLab at the University of the Bundeswehr/Munich creates a
center of competence to test mission technologies such as mission planning/man-
agement systems, intelligent sensor systems or adaptive assistance systems with
experimental simulation and flight trials thereby also using AI.87
83 BWI,“GeneralinspekteurlässtsichKI-gestützteAufklärungvorführen.”
84 PresentationattheUniversityoftheBundeswehr/Hamburg,15March2022;writtencommunication,22July2022.
85 Azzanoetal.,“TheresponsibleuseofAIinFCAS.”
86 ESASstandsfor“elektromagnetischeStörfestigkeitautonomerSysteme.”Formore,see:
hsu/projekt-esas/projekt-esas(lastaccessed27March2023).
87 Formore,see:
2023).
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 27

Cross-Functional Projects
Defense AI can improve situational awareness and situational understanding by
improving the C2-ISR link. This, for example, is a key national R&T priority for
NGWS with a focus on sensor data fusion, sensor resource management, and the
integration of both elements. This project also explores options for a so-called
AI Backbone that would provide a “single set of algorithms” to support different
tasks and establish an open and unitary framework to facilitate the comprehensive
use of defense AI. Different companies are involved with Helsing, Schönhofer
Sales and Engineering, and IBM leading the AI Backbone workstream.88
In addition, ErzUntGlas89 explored options how to improve and accelerate inter-
actions between existing land systems with unmanned aerial systems (UAS) and
AI. Several UAS were used as sensor carriers to produce a recognized operational
picture that was integrated into the Army’s C2 system via SitaWare Frontline. The
project ran from 2019 to 2021 and was meant to support the German-Franco
Main Ground Combat System (MGCS). The procurement office BAAINBw worked
in tandem with Atos, Krauss-Maffei Wegmann, RAFAEL and Aeronautics.90 With
a similar goal AuGe91 looks at the role of AI in automatically assessing and incor-
porating terrain specifics into operational planning with the aim of using terrain
features for tactical advantages.92
Different initiatives focus on the role of defense AI in the so-called “kill chain.”93
Eastern Flank, for example, is a follow-on project to MITA funded by the new
Sondervermögen. It combines the use of defense AI for modular effector systems
with a UAS-based surveillance system. Automating the handover of targeting data
to different effectors is one of the capabilities to be developed.94 Developing a
more effective “kill chain” also constitutes a core element of FCAS and the Future
Combat Mission System (FCMS). AI is expected to support the detection and
identification of potential targets, improve threat analysis and weapon aiming and
facilitate a platform-agnostic sensor-to-shooter management.95 The same is true
for MGCS, which is to build a federated multi-asset approach to deliver future land
power. AI is expected to contribute to situational awareness, manned-unmanned
teaming, multi-sensor data fusion, and sensor-effector resource management.96
88 Interview,2March2023.
89 ErzUntGlasstandsfor“ErzeugungeinesgläsernenGefechtsfeldszurUnterstützungdynamischerOperationen”orproducinga
“glassbattlefield”tosupportdynamicoperations.
90 Wiegold,“Studiefürs‘gläserneGefechtsfeld’DrohnenundKI”;“Live-DemonstrationAufklärungim‘GläsernenGefechtsfeld’.”
91 AuGestandsfor“AutomatisierteGeländebeurteilungimmilitärischenFührungsprozesszurBeschleunigungderEntscheidungs-
findung”orautomatedterrainevaluationaspartofthemilitarycommandprocesstoacceleratedecision-making.
92 Interview,14November2022.
93 The“killchain”isapopularmilitarytermtodescribethelinkbetweenC4/C5,ISRandprecisioneffects.
94 Interview,14November2022.
95 Azzanoetal.,“TheresponsibleuseofAIinFCAS;”
96 Dean,“MainGroundCombatSystem(MGCS):AStatusReport.”
28 MASTER AND SERVANT

GhostPlay is also cross-functional but has a different focus. This project leverages
defense AI to develop tactics. It develops defense decision algorithms (Play) for
defender and aggressor tactics thereby using a powerful simulation environment
(Ghost). GhostPlay’s original focus envisions a Suppression of Enemy Air Defense
(SEAD) scenario with swarms of unmanned aerial systems targeting a high value
asset protected by ground-based air defense. Both sides use AI developed tactics
to outsmart each other. The “ability to learn tactical behavior in cooperation with
other machines and/or humans” constitutes the projects’ AI research focus.97
GhostPlay is part of dtec.bw with the University of the Bundeswehr/Hamburg as
the lead and a consortium including Hensoldt, 21strategies, and Borchert Consult-
ing & Research.
3.2 Germany’s Defense AI Ecosystem
The 2020 capstone document of the German government on supporting the
security and defense industry has identified AI as a national key technology.98 The
problem, however, is that the implications of this categorization are unclear. In ad-
dition, Germany’s techno-industrial ecosystem is bifurcated, with defense-relevant
actors being mostly segregated from the remaining ecosystem. Germany’s key
policy documents reflect this spilt and maintain an artificial separation between
the civilian and military domain even in areas of application with obvious dual
use potential.99 Therefore the German Bundeswehr has access to only a limited
spectrum of the country’s techno-economic power. Overall, the defense AI eco-
system, as a sub element of the national ecosystem, rests on four building blocks
(see Table 2 on next page).
Bundeswehr
The Bundeswehr constitutes the ultimate end user, whose requirements shape
defense products. Seamless exchange with the remaining partners of the defense
AI ecosystem would be needed to optimally synchronize each partner’s activities.
This, however, is undercut by civil-military dichotomy that maintains knowledge
and technology stovepipes that are challenging to penetrate.
As we discuss in more detail in section 4, the Bundeswehr has established new
entities to advance defense digitalization, such as the so-called Systems Centers
97 Borchert/Brandlhuber/Brandstetter/Schaal,FreeJazzontheBattlefield,p.11.
98 StrategiepapierderBundesregierungzurStärkungderSicherheits-undVerteidigungsindustrie,p.3.
99 Borchert/Schütz/Verboszky,“UnchainMyHeart,”pp.433,437–438,447;Hagebölling/Barker,Ethikundeinsatzfähig,p.6;
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 29

Table 2: Selected Actors in Germany’s Defense AI Ecosystem
Bundeswehr Research and Defense IT and
Technology Industrial Players Consulting
Organizations Companies
Army Fraunhofer Seg- Established Players • Accenture
• Testandexperi- ment for Defense • Airbus • Atos
mentationunits and Security (VVS) • AtlasElektronik • CapGemini
• SystemsCenterfor • Diehl • Conet
German Aerospace
DigitalizationLand • ESG • IBM
Center
Domain • Hensoldt • MSGPlaut
Bundeswehr • IABG • PwC
Navy
Universities in • KMW • SAP
Luftwaffe Hamburg and • MBDA
Munich • Plath
Cyber and Information
• Rheinmetall
Service (CIR) dtec.bw
Defense
• Centerfor
• Rhode&Schwarz
Digitalization
• SchönhoferSales
Joint Support Service andEngineering
(Streitkräftebasis) • tkMS
Medical Command New Players
(Sanitätsdienst der • 21strategies
Bundeswehr) • AlephAlpha
• DataMachine
BWI
Intelligence
• Cyberand
Solutions
InnovationHub
• HAT.tec
(CIHBw)
• Helsing
• Traversals
Source:Authors’compilation.
30 MASTER AND SERVANT

(Systemzentren) for single services. Some service-specific institutions also have a
cross-functional task, such as the Center for Digitalization of the Bundeswehr. This
center is key to develop Germany’s CIR capabilities, provides software develop-
ment and IT integration capabilities for the Bundeswehr, and is in charge of de-
veloping the Bundeswehr’s capabilities for military intelligence, electronic warfare,
and geoinformation.100
Moreover, the Cyber Innovation Hub of the Bundeswehr serves as a transmission
mechanism to accelerate digital solutions that originate from within the Bunde-
swehr and to spin-in outside digital innovation.101 BWI is the Bundeswehr’s own
system house that supports digitalization in the fields of infrastructure provision,
application development, and strategic advice.102 Finally, the German Army
also uses its test and experimentation unit as a testbed for rapid technology
insertion and experimentation as well as synchronized concept and technology
development.103
Research and Technology Organizations (RTO)
RTO constitute the second pillar of the defense AI ecosystem. Here bifurcation be-
comes most obvious. More than 70 universities and universities of applied scienc-
es adhere the voluntary civil clause that prevents them “from engaging in defense
research and cooperating with the defense industry.”104 This also means that the
Bundeswehr will not directly benefit from the German government’s decision to
set up six centers of competence on AI105 and “providing funding for the estab-
lishment of 100 new professorships in AI at German universities.”106 Furthermore,
the German Research Center for AI (DFKI), which has been pioneering AI research
since the late 1980s, does not engage in defense either.107
To some extent the Bundeswehr can close the gap by relying on research and
technology conducted at its universities in Hamburg and Munich. Activities at
these two locations have received a boost thanks to a €500M budget to set up the
Digitalization and Technology Research Center (dtec.bw) that is meant to advance
defense digitalization.108 Beyond dtec.bw, the lion’s share of Germany’s defense
100 Formore,see:
zentrum-digitalisierung-der-bundeswehr(lastaccessed27March2023).
101 Formore,see:
102 Formore,see:
103 “Test-undVersuchskräfteinMunsteraufgestellt.”
104 Borchert/Schütz/Verbovszky,“UnchainMyHeart”,p.437.
105 Formore,see:
che-intelligenz_node.html(lastaccessed27March2023).
106 ArtificialIntelligenceStrategyoftheGermanFederalGovernment.2020Update,p.10.
107 Formore,see:
108 Formore,see:
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 31

research falls on the Fraunhofer Society and the German Aerospace Center.109 The
so-called Fraunhofer Segment for Defense and Security combines the dedicated
know how of twelve RTO with expertise in radar techniques, communication and
information processing, high-speed dynamics, optronics, and applied optics to
name but a few areas of core expertise.110 The German Aerospace Center mirrors
some of these areas of expertise and contributes additional capacities in the fields
of AI safety and security as well as well as in-depth aerospace research activities.111
Defense Industrial Players: Old and New
The defense industry forms the third pillar of the defense AI ecosystem. Most of
Germany’s key defense companies are involved in developing or adopting AI for
defense purposes in one way or another. More recently, several new players with
a dedicated focus on AI and defense AI have entered the market. Some of them
originate from the commercial world and join forces with incumbent defense
players:
21strategies specializes in developing large scale multi-agent reinforcement
learning to compute optimal decision-making strategies under uncertainty in
the context of national security, capital markets, and supply chains. The com-
pany originates from the finance industry and has been deploying its technolo-
gy in trading and risk hedging. 21strategies works on GhostPlay, Wild Hornets,
FCAS, and NGWS. Hensoldt cooperates with 21strategies.112
Aleph Alpha is working on large language models and develops generative
AI solutions to support public and private sector applications. Among others,
Aleph Alpha is working on defense AI solutions for FCAS.113
Data Machine Intelligence Solutions develops data modeling and visualization
solutions, inter alia, with a focus on solutions for mission planning and man-
agement as well as simulation technologies. Data Machine Intelligence Solu-
tions also contributes to FCAS’s defense AI work stream.114
HAT.tec focuses on developing technologies in support of human-autonomy
teaming, with a focus on automated reasoning, planning and decision-making.
HAT.tec also works on defense AI solutions for FCAS.115
Helsing develops AI for real-time information processing and turning unstruc-
tured sensor data into common operational pictures. The company is head-
109 TogetherwithFrance,GermanyalsomaintainstheGerman-FrancoResearchInstituteSaint-Louiswithafocusonenergetic
andadvancedprotectivematerials,flighttechniquesforprojectiles,lasertechnologiesaswellasprotectiontechnologies,
security,andsituationalawareness.Formoreonthisinstitute,see:
2023).
110 Formore,see:
111 Formore,see:
112 Formore,see:
113 Formore,see:
114 Formore,see:
115 Formore,see:
32 MASTER AND SERVANT

quartered in Germany with subsidiaries in France and the United Kingdom.
Helsing works on defense AI for FCAS, NGWS and MITA. Helsing cooperates
with Rheinmetall Defense Electronics, Saab, and MBDA.116
Traversals uses AI for open-source intelligence to analyze and assess global
events, identify potential threats, and assessing multilingual information.
Traversals AI Dynamic Frontline Monitoring, for example, uses AI-enhanced
technologies to provide a 24/7 near-real time operational picture of the
Ukrainian-Russian front line.117
Overall, a recent market survey by the Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate
Action suggests that more than 6,600 AI startups employing 149,000 people have
been established in Germany since 1995.118 As of this total around 400 AI compa-
nies are members of the German AI Association. So far, however, this association
also adheres to the civil clause restricting cooperation with the MoD and the
Bundeswehr. But rumors have it that compliance with the voluntary self-binding
rule is about to expire soon.119
IT and Consulting Companies
IT and consulting companies form the final fourth pillar of the German defense AI
ecosystems. These companies are instrumental in supporting concept develop-
ment, providing hardware infrastructure and computer processing capacities as
well as assisting the synchronization of digitalization and organizational change.
116 Formore,see:
117 Formore,see:
118 Accordingtothesurveyaround58%ofallstartupsworkonsoftwareandITservicesfollowedbyconsulting,advertisingand
financialservices(approximately19%)andengineeringandresearchanddevelopmentservices(around7%).See:KI-Startups
inDeutschland,pp.6,12.
119 Interview,14February2023.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 33

4 Organizing
Defense AI
34 MASTER AND SERVANT

The Bundeswehr is in its early days to adjust its organizational fitness to future de-
fense AI requirements. The 2019 capstone document acknowledges that a strong
Bundeswehr-common approach with joint responsibility for capability develop-
ment is needed to counter the risks of duplication, parallel structures, crowd-
ing-out effects, and fragmentation.120 So far, however, tensions exist between top
down-driven and decentralized service-specific approaches.
4.1 Joint Approaches
At the ministerial level there are two sources of power advancing defense AI. On
the one hand, defense AI is part of the Bundeswehr’s digitalization approach with
the Directorate-General for Cyber/IT shaping the respective agenda. CIT I 2, in
particular, is responsible for research and technology as well as innovation man-
agement related to Cyber/IT, while CIT II 8 is responsible for the Bundeswehr’s
IT systems as well as analysis and simulation. In 2019 the German MoD has also
established a Digital Council (Digitalrat), which advises the Minister of Defense
and provides impulses to advance defense digitalization.121 On the other hand, the
Directorate-General for Planning implements the Bundeswehr’s integrated plan-
ning. In this regard defense AI is part of the toolbox needed for the Bundeswehr’s
future development. Therefore, Plg I 2 plays a key role with the leading desk
officer for defense AI who also chairs the Bundeswehr’s defense AI community, a
semi-formalized network set up to advance information sharing related to defense
AI activities.
Tensions arise from the fact the Bundeswehr’s military services follow different
digital levels of ambition and enjoy great leeway in implementing their respective
digital agendas while the Directorate-General for Cyber/IT shapes the broad
guidelines and the idea of a Bundeswehr-common AI backbone (see section
3.1). This creates a “wait and see” atmosphere as the services need to strike a
balance between following through on their own agendas and supporting a joint
agenda, which might come at the cost of sacrificing service-specific resources for
joint tasks. A cluster approach that respects joint and service-specific interests
could work, observers say, but very much depends on the willingness of the actors
involved and the availability of extra resources. This situation creates a vacuum,
which nurtures the rise of “local kingdoms,” that strive to advance activities within
their own areas of responsibility with insufficient levels of information exchange
and coordination across the services.122
120 KünstlicheIntelligenz.NutzungimGeschäftsbereichdesBundesministeriumsderVerteidigung,p.20.
121 ErsterBerichtzurDigitalenTransformationdesGeschäftsbereichsdesBundesministeriumsderVerteidigung,p.16.
122 Interviews,25March2022and14March2023.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 35

In this context tensions are likely to be reinforced by the ambition to set up a
Bundeswehr Multi Domain Combat Cloud (MDCC) as a key digital instrument to
enable Bundeswehr MDO (see section 2.2).123 In essence, cloud-based approaches
are considered key to synchronize service specific operational pictures.124 As such
the MDCC will emerge in parallel with domain specific cloud concepts for future
airpower (FCAS) and land power (MGCS) solutions. In addition, the FCAS combat
cloud is likely to compete with the F-35 cloud concept that will be relevant for the
Bundeswehr given its recent decision to procure the US fighter jet. So far, it is un-
clear how all these cloud concepts will be aligned and how the duality of national
and multinational cloud approaches will affect cloud-based defense AI services.
4.2 Single Service Approaches
Against this background, the Bundeswehr services operate at different levels to
bring organizations in line with defense AI requirements.
Army
The Army’s program on digitalizing land-based operations (D-LBO) is the service’s
capstone program to create a whole-of-service digital federation for future op-
erations.125 Within this context, the Army’s 2019 AI concept paper offers a vision
to set up an AI steering group with the Army Command that would oversee the
work of the so-called Army AI Work Bench at the Army Concepts and Capabilities
Development Office. This work bench is meant to serve as the overall coordina-
tion mechanism for all Army AI activities and liaise with industry and academia. In
addition, the Army would create a development center mainly focusing on training
defense algorithms and developing key data models as well as an AI data center
that would take care of Army data, provide data expertise and data scientists.126
Elements of this vision will be realized with the Army’s forthcoming Systems Center
for Digitalization (Systemzentrum Digitalisierung Dimension Land). It combines
elements of a data center with software development, tests as well as validation
and verification. The center is going to be the powerhouse for all things digital
of the Army and is thus also likely to play an important defense industrial role by
strengthening digital sovereignty with defense software developed in Germany.127
123 Färber/Bibow,“DieMultiDomainCombatCloudfürdievernetzteOperationsführung,”pp.55–58.
124 Interview,22February2023.
125 Forageneraloverview,see:
accessed27March2023).
126 KünstlicheIntelligenzindenLandstreitkräften,p.14–15,19–20.
127 Interview,22February2023.Formoreonthecenter,see:SystemzentrumDigitalisierungDimensonLand,para.301–315.
36 MASTER AND SERVANT

Luftwaffe
The German Luftwaffe is exploring the impact of defense AI on future air power.
So far, the service has taken organizational baby steps with one desk officer in the
Luftwaffe Command being in charge of the subject matter. The Luftwaffe also con-
siders defense AI as part of its broader digitalization agenda and as an important
enabler to advance air power innovation. Tensions exist here as well as the service
has two responsible officers for digitalization (Deputy Air Chief) and innovation
(desk officer, LTC level). Both have pledged to inform each other but given “split”
responsibilities true leadership on defense AI remains yet to be developed.128
Navy
The new Chief of the Navy puts great emphasis on naval innovation. He has cre-
ated the position of a Commissioner for Innovation, Digitalization, Empowerment,
and Agility (ID:EA)129 at the Naval Command. This new position is to bridge the
digitalization/innovation divide and push both agendas. Defense AI is part of the
ID:EA tasks and will benefit from a vast network of naval reservists that is to be ex-
panded. Overall, the current focus is on breaking up existing structures by creating
opportunities for new digital naval projects outside existing planning processes
that are considered too cumbersome to deal with.130
Cyber and Information Domain Service
The Cyber and Information Domain Service, established in 2017, operates and
protects the Bundeswehr’s IT infrastructure, is engaged in electronic warfare, pro-
vides satellite-based imagery reconnaissance data, and operates the Bundeswehr
Geoinformation Center.131 Its Center for Bundeswehr Digitalization and Cyber
and Information Service Capability Development (Zentrum Digitalisierung Bunde-
swehr und Fähigkeitsentwicklung Cyber- und Informationsraum) pools software
analysis and software development expertise.132 With regard to defense AI, the
Electronic Warfare Battalion 912, for example, plays an important role as its own
AI laboratory is exploring the use of AI to calculate flight paths or analyze radio
communications.133
128 Interview,25March2022.
129 TheNavyChiefannouncedhisintentiontocreatethispositioninApril2022.Formore,see:InspekteurderMarine–Absicht
2022,p.5.
130 Interviews,23February2023and14March2023.
131 Formore,see:
March2023).
132 Fleischmann,“DasZentrumDigitalisierungderBundeswehrundFähigkeitsentwicklungCyber-undInformationsraum,”p.36.
133 Formore,see:
tive-lern-und-entwicklungsumgebung-5514392(lastaccessed27March2023).
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 37

5 Funding
Defense AI
38 MASTER AND SERVANT

Most recently, the 2020 decision to spend €500M on setting up the dtec.bw and
the 2022 decision on the new €100bn special fund (Sondervermögen)134 have
increased the Bundeswehr’s financial leeway to some extent. But how much the
Bundeswehr135 spends on defense AI is difficult to gauge, as defense R&T projects
are integrated into ongoing and future procurement programs with overall pro-
gram costs not disclosing individual R&T amounts. Thus, we suggest three levels
of analysis to get a basic understanding of current funding priorities:
Digital infrastructure
Investments in the Bundeswehr’s digital infrastructure are essential to imple-
ment the digitalization ambition discussed above. Consequently, roughly
20% of the special fund are about to be spent on this focus area.136 The 2023
Sondervermögen budget plan further specifies that €8.5bn have been ear-
marked for D-LBO, almost €4.5 for satellite-based communications, €3.5bn for
equipment, and €2.6bn for the German Mission Network.137
Defense research and technology
Germany’s 2023 budget law has earmarked around €330M on defense re-
search and technology. The fact that this budget line has been cut by almost
€200M compared to 2022 has created controversies and push back from
leading RTO and defense industrial associations. In addition, the budget
foresees approximately €515M on defense development and experimenta-
tion, which includes key weapons developments projects. Furthermore, the
MoD can spend around €40M on methods such as Concept Development &
Experimentation, modeling and simulation and innovation competitions, and
around €25M on disruptive innovation in cybersecurity and key technologies.
In addition, the defense budget also supports key research and technology
organizations like the German-Franco Research Institute St. Louis (€24M), the
German Aerospace Center (€50M), and the Fraunhofer Society (€90M).138
Defense AI
Specific figures for defense AI spending are even harder to come by. Two
sources provide rough indications. The Sondervermögen law earmarks a total
of €422M for research, development and AI, with AI focusing on surveying and
134 Thefive-yeardurationhasbeendefinedbythespeciallawontheSondervermögen.See:§1GesetzzurFinanzierungder
BundeswehrundzurErrichtungeines“SondervermögensBundeswehr”undzurÄnderungderBundeshaushaltsordnung.
135 Bycontrast,theGermangovernmenthaspledgedtospend€5bnuntil2025toimplementthenationalAIstrategy.See:https://

html(lastaccessed27March2023).
136 GesetzzurFinanzierungderBundeswehrundzurErrichtungeines“SondervermögensBundeswehr”undzurÄnderungder
Bundeshaushaltsordnung,p.1034.
137 GesetzüberdieFeststellungdesBundeshaushaltsplansfürdasHaushaltsjahr2023,Einzelplan14,pp.69–70.
138 Ibid.,pp.45,48–49.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 39

safeguarding wide areas (Eastern Flank).139 The 2023 Sondervermögen budget
law breaks this focus area down to a €16M increment without further specify-
ing the AI amount.140 We speculate that the respective amount is in the lower
single-digit range. In addition, several dtec.bw projects focus on developing
defense AI. Taken together, the total four-year budget of three AI projects141
at the University of the Bundeswehr/Hamburg is about €20–30M, or €5–7.5M
per year. The MissionLab at the University of the Bundeswehr/Munich operates
on a total budget worth around €20M, or around €5M per year. In addition,
we speculate that the German MoD spends a lower two-digit million amount
per year on developing AI for NGWS. Considering these figures and adding
a calculated reserve for projects unknown at the time of writing, we assume
that the MoD currently spends around €50M per year on defense AI software
development.142
139 GesetzzurFinanzierungderBundeswehrundzurErrichtungeines“SondervermögensBundeswehr”undzurÄnderungder
Bundeshaushaltsordnung,p.1033.
140 TherespectivebudgetlineincludesspendingondefenseAIaswellaslandandsea-basednavigationandmobilenavigation
inaNavigationWarfare(NAVWAR)environment.
141 ThisincludesprojectsGhostPlayandESASdiscussedinsection3.1andthe(K)ISSprojectthatdevelopsAI-baseddiagnosis
solutionsfortheInternationalSpaceStation.
142 Thisisaroughestimateasmostfiguresarenotpubliclyavailable.
40 MASTER AND SERVANT

6 Fielding and
Operating
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 41

Explicit defense AI features and requirements have been defined for major future
defense systems, but they remain to be developed. In-service defense systems use
AI applications but a clear delineation between software-enabled analytics and
automation and proper AI is difficult to draw. Consequently, the true status of the
Bundeswehr’s fielding and operating of defense AI is difficult to grasp. Overall, the
following overview of selected projects is in line with the development priorities
discussed in section 3.1.
Command, Control, Computers, Communications, and Cyber (C4/C5)
The German MoD’s crisis early warning system is one of the most prominent
defense AI use cases. The application currently in use with the Directorate-General
for Strategy and Operations constitutes the MoD’s contribution to the federal
government’s activities on crisis early warning. The Metis institute for strategy and
foresight143 at the University of the Bundeswehr/Munich supports the respective
activities with analyses and research on AI for early warning.
The so-called Preview system analyses open-source intelligence (OSINT) for early
warning. AI is providing data analytics and predictive analysis. Preview currently
uses more than 60 indicators for early warning. The system is transparent, i.e.,
users can zoom in on each indicator’s quantitative assessment, track assessment
changes over time, and provides access to the sources that underpin assessment
results. Preview is a multi-language solution that also offers back casts to validate
the feasibility of current assessments with a database reaching back to 2015.
As Preview is an OSINT solution, classified and open date are not yet fused. In
addition, a link between crisis early warning and the Bundeswehr’s activities on
establishing common operational pictures has yet to be established.144
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR)
In early 2022, the Bundeswehr decided to equip all NH90 helicopters with a new
protection suite that also includes AI-based components. The Hensoldt solution
is using the company’s Kalaetron Radar Warning Receiver, which uses AI for big
data analysis to quickly detect new threat patterns and with a very low false alarm
rate.145
Since 2018, BWI has been experimenting with the use of AI in combination with
radar technology already in use on construction sites to see through walls. An
intelligent algorithm shall detect humans as individuals or groups and identify the
143 
144 Interviews,18and21March2022.Formore,see:Schurad,“MitkünstlicherIntelligenzderZukunftaufderSpur,”pp.10–12.
145 “HensoldtpräsentiertRadarwarneraufKI-Basis;”“HensoldtequipsBundeswehrNH90helicopterwithstate-of-the-artprotec-
tionsystems.”
42 MASTER AND SERVANT

current state of motion (walking, standing, or sitting). The feasibility of this applica-
tion has been demonstrated, but a decision about the final use by the Bundeswehr
is pending.146
Precision Effects
The IRIS-T air-to-air missiles developed by Diehl and in use with the Luftwaffe
is using intelligent image processing to detect and defeat adversarial infrared
decoys when engaging a target.147 We assume that the same technology would
be used for the Interactive Defence and Attack system for Submarines (IDAS), a
technology project with thyssenkrupp Marine Systems, that was withdrawn from
the Sondervermögen funding list after the Federal Audit Office criticized spending
priorities.148 Its funding now depends on the availability of money from the regular
defense budget.
Similar technologies are also likely to underpin the Rolling Airframe Missile (RAM),
that the German Navy is using to protect frigates and class K130 corvettes.149
Originally developed by Raytheon in cooperation with Diehl and MBDA Germany,
the missile uses “a new image-scanning seeker with autonomous (infrared) all-the-
way guidance” and “requires no shipboard support after launch.”150
Support
Different defense AI use cases fall into the support category. The Bundeswehr’s
Joint Support Service, for example, has been experimenting with the use of AI for
an early warning system to support national crisis management. It has also been
using AI applications to support warehouse functions.151 The Medical Command
uses civilian AI applications for decision support of doctors in the fields of analyt-
ics, diagnostics, and individual therapies.152 In addition, BWI has been developing
BundesWEAR, an app with AI features that offers individual measurements, sug-
gests the best fitting clothing size, and offers online orders for home or barracks
deliveries. The Bundeswehr is evaluating the app for future use.153
146 Ilg,“Militär-Projekt:MitkünstlicherIntelligenzdurchWändeschauen.”
147 Penney,“Short-rangesquareoff.”
148 Inparticular,theFederalAuditOfficewarnedofoverspendingandarguedthatdevelopmentandprocurementtasksshouldnot
bemixed.Formore,see:Wiegold,“NachRechnungshof-Kritik:WenigerProjekteimBundeswehr-Sondervermögen;”https://

March2023).
149 “DeutscheMarine:Vertragfür600RAMBlock2Bunterzeichnet;”
swehr/seesysteme-bundeswehr/korvette-k130(lastaccessed27March2023).
150 “SeaRAMAnti-ShipMissileDefenceSystem;”
accessed27March2023).
151 “HeimatschutzdurchkünstlicheIntelligenz;”“BWIentwickeltinnovativeKI-LösungenfürdieBundeswehr.”
152 KünstlicheIntelligenzimGeschäftsbereichderBundesregierung,p.11.
153 “BWIentwickeltinnovativeKI-LösungenfürdieBundeswehr.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 43

7 Training for
Defense AI
44 MASTER AND SERVANT

“Train as you fight” is a well-established mantra among armed forces. But if you
don’t know how AI will fight, it is hard to train for it. Furthermore, reconciling
yet unknown AI tactics with Germany’s Cold War legacy negative contingency
“Train to fight so you don’t have to” will be an additional challenge specific to the
Bundeswehr.
The consequences of defense AI for training are manifold. Armed forces need to
address the dynamics that AI-enhanced training systems can generate. They also
need to understand to what extent defense AI is improving existing technologies
and capabilities that can expand adversarial and allied leeway. In addition, defense
AI can produce new – also non-conventional – battlefield behavior that needs to
be incorporated by way of training. Defense AI also adds an additional layer of
complexity in terms of trust and confidence to underpin successful cooperation.
This is not only relevant for so-called manned-unmanned teaming in a traditional
“master and servant” context with the unmanned partner following human guid-
ance. It becomes even more important in a future environment in which context
and consequence aware reasoning systems operate autonomously (see Box 1).
Right now, the Bundeswehr is in the very early stage of exploring these oppor-
tunities and addressing the respective consequences. The MoD’s 2019 capstone
document on defense AI leaves no doubt that the Bundeswehr needs to put more
emphasis on teaching MINT154 courses and apply the respective skills as qualifica-
tion criteria for recruiting. The document is also cognizant of the fact that the use
of defense AI will lead to greater differentiation among individual career paths
and reinforce the need to offer specialist career tracks to attract talent. Among
other areas of expertise, future members of the Bundeswehr will need broad and
specialized AI expertise, software development know-how, improved MINT knowl-
edge, and interdisciplinary know-how to develop solutions for human-machine
interaction, the document contends.155
At the joint level the Bundeswehr Command and Staff College (Führungsakade-
mie) is in the process of adapting its curriculum. In view of updating and adapting
the curriculum in autumn 2024, stocktaking is currently underway to define the
future role defense AI is going to play – both as an instrument for training and
education and as a subject that future officers need to understand. As of , the College will establish and launch a digital open space learning environ-
ment. The modular set up could also be used to create interfaces for integrating
wargaming, serious gaming, and AI-enhanced training solutions.156
154 MINTstandsformathematics,informatics,naturalscience,andtechnology.
155 KünstlicheIntelligenz.NutzungimGeschäftsbereichdesBundesministeriumsderVerteidigung,p.21–22.
156 Interviews,22February2023.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 45

In parallel, the University of the Bundeswehr/Hamburg is working on a new AI
bachelor’s and master’s degree course. The program aims at teaching technical
basics in the fields of mathematics and informatics as well as adjacent technology
areas such as sensors, acoustics, or information technology. In addition, the new
program would also embed defense-relevant AI in the broader societal context
with building blocks focusing on law, ethics, sociology, and political science.157
Against this background, different service-level activities are under way, too:
The Army’s 2019 concept paper put a focus on the role of defense AI in live
and constructive training simulations and AI-augmented learning analyt-
ics.158 Consequently, the Army is exploring options to develop an AI-based
learning management system that uses data analytics to track individual
learning progress and adjusting teaching plans commensurate with individual
achievements.159
AI is explored to be used for new tactics, techniques, and procedures related
to air defense and dogfight scenarios also with a view on playing computer
generated blue and red forces.160 In addition, the Luftwaffe’s AirC2 project
(see section 3.1) also has a training component that looks at using AI to train
Luftwaffe operators in advancing and improving planning cycles.161
So far, the Navy is not using defense AI for training. The service is, however,
mulling the idea of using AI-based training for sea-based signals intelligence.
This project would build on the insights gained from the Army’s aforemen-
tioned learning management system and adapt it to the needs of automated
processes on fleet service ships.162
In addition to joint and service-level activities different initiatives have been
launched to train defense AI algorithms:
The Luftwaffe, for example, has procured an off-the-shelf software product
to teach air power gaming. While the primary purpose was to improve the
respective planning and operating procedures, data generated by using the
software is also used as a basis to train future defense AI algorithms.163
The Army is working on using simulation-based training with reinforcement
learning to train neural networks with the goal of enhancing the autonomous
behavior of unmanned systems in battlefield scenarios. Furthermore, the Army
also looks at reinforcement learning to train neural networks to command
157 Interview,25February2023.
158 KünstlicheIntelligenzindenStreitkräften,p.12.
159 Interview,7March2023.
160 Interview,7March2023.
161 Interview,25March2022.
162 Interviews,22February2023and14March2023.
163 Interview,25March2022.
46 MASTER AND SERVANT

battlefield units. Another focus area of the Army emerges from the need to
generate training data for AI-enhanced image recognition.164 Satisfying the
need for high-quality data is also a task that new organizations such as the
Army’s Systems Center for Digitalization will need to accomplish.165
164 Interview,7March2023.
165 SystemzentrumDigitalisierungDimensionLand,para.335.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 47

8 Conclusion
48 MASTER AND SERVANT

Currently, German defense AI is a grassroot movement. Motivated people push
projects to bring defense AI into the Bundeswehr. Structural and procedural
provisions are in place to bring about change. Right now, however, change is first
and foremost about closing fundamental capability gaps that emerged during the
past three decades. The Bundeswehr may want to operate at the technological
edge, but existing shortfalls inhibit Germany’s armed forces from doing so. New
concepts that leverage emerging technologies are bound back by the resistance
of a Bundeswehr bureaucracy solidly grounded in the status quo.
This is no surprise. As we have argued, Germany’s handling of defense relevant
technologies in general and defense AI in particular is locked-in a “master and
servant” logic that is deeply rooted in the country’s strategic culture and organ-
izational set up (structural pacifism). Consequently, Germany prioritizes security
and technology policy options, which comply with its non-belligerent post-war
identity. Domestic socio-political legitimization of the use of force is consistently
more important than the impact that can be achieved by using it. This preference
will undoubtedly continue to determine political visions on future roles of defense
AI and the panorama of technologies deemed acceptable for military use. This
narrows future development options and limits the impact of defense AI to an evo-
lutionary trajectory from the start. Since innovation in a tightly regulated defense
market relies heavily on capability-pull by the Bundeswehr, its muted technology
appetite does not bode well for the defense industry, too.
Consequently, broadening the footprint and strengthening the influence of the
defense AI grassroot movement will require the MoD to do some heavy lifting.
We see the need to work along four major lines of efforts: sharpen expectations
regarding the added value defense AI is expected to deliver; define the role of
defense AI in Germany’s defense industrial policy; flesh out Germany’s internation-
al defense AI ambition; and adjust the current system of certifying, qualifying, and
approving defense AI solutions.
The Bundeswehr needs to be more precise on how defense AI will boost Bundeswehr
capabilities. So far, this link is vague at best, also because today’s capability defini-
tion must be technology agnostic. This, however, cements preferences for existing
technologies and technology concepts. Remedying this shortfall requires the
Bundeswehr to be more explicit about what level of maturity defense AI is expect-
ed to reach when and to the benefit of which capabilities and missions.
One way of delivering this roadmap is for capability developers to link first, second,
and third wave AI to the Bundeswehr’s four capability domains. This guidance could
be used to delineate Bundeswehr-common and service-specific defense AI capability
goals. Based on this overview the Bundeswehr could identify current defense AI
shortfalls. Prioritizing mitigation measures can lead to creating a roadmap to address
these shortfalls via national or multinational R&T projects and procurement programs.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 49

In so doing, the Bundeswehr should put a premium on fully leveraging ongoing
projects using AI for computer generated forces and high-performance simulation
environments. This would combine past efforts on modelling and simulation with
defense AI to create a new instrument in support of capability development as
well as R&T and procurement management. These environments should be linked
to existing test and verification units of the Bundeswehr to accelerate concept
development and technology insertion. To this purpose, the Army’s existing test
units should be turned into a permanent Bundeswehr-common test lab to advance
defense AI and defense digitalization.
Defense AI has yet to find its proper role in Germany’s – non-existent – defense indus-
trial policy. As discussed, the government’s capstone document on supporting the
security and defense industry calls AI a national key technology but the defense
AI concept of the MoD argues that “the Bundeswehr is not the driver of AI-related
innovation.” These statements are conflicting and detrimental to the overall goal
of using AI to improve Germany’s competitiveness.
First, few commercial operators match the needs of the Bundeswehr for defense
AI that is context and consequence aware while being almost “data abstinent”
to deny adversaries the opportunity to dominate the electromagnetic spectrum.
By voluntarily ripping itself off the role as a major force to spearhead technology
development, the Bundeswehr effectively drops out as a demanding launch cus-
tomer for cutting-edge defense AI solutions made in Germany.
Second, delegating the capacity to produce innovative defense AI solutions to
private industry creates a perfect catch 22 if the majority of Germany’s startup AI
community considers itself bound by the voluntary civil clause. In addition, there
is a mismatch between the interest of commercial companies in seizing current
defense business opportunities and private investor’s reluctance to fund defense
companies given the current ambivalences of the European social taxonomy.166
Third, commercial companies working on defense AI thereby using a tech stack
also fit for commercial applications might face undue international business
development risks as it remains fuzzy how Germany’s existing export and dual-use
regulation schemes will consider defense AI algorithm exports.
Finally, the Bundeswehr and industry need to specify the “terms and conditions”
on which the future defense data ecosystem will operate. This requires striking a
balance between the Bundeswehr’s interest in unrestricted data access, industrial
preferences for data monetization, and the general need to incentivize a data
166 Borchert/Schütz/Verbovzsky,“‘UnchainMyHeart’,”p.433,434,445,446.
50 MASTER AND SERVANT

sharing dynamic that also involves stakeholders that have not been involved in
generating original data.167
The German MoD needs to define its international defense AI ambition. So far,
Germany’s international defense AI ambition is embryonic at best. This may reflect
the fact that the Bundeswehr is only about to explore how to best use defense AI.
But the lack of a specific international vision contrasts with the defense leadership
role Chancellor Scholz has emphasized since delivering his 2022 Zeitenwende
speech and the fact that NATO and the EU are stepping up defense AI activities.
So how could a defense AI framework nation look like? Three points of departure
are feasible. First, the Bundeswehr could concentrate on hardware-focused activ-
ities to advance multinational defense AI by offering international partners access
to its new digitalization centers and high-performance infrastructure that are being
established. These infrastructure components could be valuable multinational
assets if Germany manages to provide the respective hardware-enabled services
on the battlefield. Second, a software-defined framework nation would focus on
specific applications. For example, the Bundeswehr could think about red force
training with AI-augmented opponents or AI-enhanced red teaming to support
multinational capability development. AI-based decision policies that support
decentralized multi-agent systems such as FCAS and MGCS could be another
option. Third, the Bundeswehr could turn its strong focus on ethics into an asset
by combining value-based engineering with simulation to offer partners a new
digital test lab for the responsible use of defense AI.
The Bundeswehr needs to reflect upon how to certify, qualify, and approve future
defense AI solutions. This is nothing but a daunting task because today’s system
benefits the so-called original equipment manufacturers (OEM) in their role as
effective gatekeepers that can resist modifications of existing defense products.168
Their powerful role, however, is likely to undermine software-defined defense if
software-induced modifications change the overall characteristics of a defense
solution for which the OEM – not the software developer – bears ultimate re-
sponsibility. Although there is no easy way out of this dilemma an AI-enhanced
simulation environment could provide an option to test the characteristics and the
performance of future defense AI solutions. The resulting digital twin could be
augmented, for example, with mission-critical data gathered during international
Bundeswehr operations as well as AI-enhanced red force elements.
167 Formoreonthisaspect,see:GutachtenderDatenethikkommissionderBundesregierung,pp.145–148.
168 Interview,14March2022.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 51

Literature
“AntwortdesParlamentarischenStaatssekretärs “KannKünstlicheIntelligenzwertekonformsein?
ThomasSilberhornvom8.Dezember2020”,Schrift- VDESPECalsGrundlagekünftigerEntwicklungen,”VDE
licheFragenmitdeninderWochevom7.Dezember PressRelease,25April2022,
2020eingegangenenAntwortenderBundesregierung, presse/pressemitteilungen/ai-trust-label(lastaccessed
DrucksachedesDeutschenBundestags19/25159, 27March2023).
11.Dezember2020,S.83,
de/btd/19/028/1902816.pdf(lastaccessed27March “Live-DemonstrationAufklärungim‘Gläsernen
2023). Gefechtsfeld’,”EuropäischeSicherheitundTechnik,
22December2021,
“BigData”undSoftwarezurVorhersagevon gen/31593/live-demonstration-aufklaerung-im-glaeser-
“Krisen”beiderBundeswehr.AntwortderBundes- nen-gefechtsfeld/(lastaccessed27March2023).
regierung,DrucksachedesDeutschenBundestags
19/3459,19July2018 “SeaRAMAnti-ShipMissileDefenceSystem,”Naval
btd/19/034/1903459.pdf (lastaccessed27March Technology,30June2014,
2023). gy.com/projects/searam-anti-ship-missile-defence-sys-
tem/(lastaccessed27March2023).
“BWIentwickeltLösungenmitkünstlicherIntelli-
genzfürdieBundeswehr”,EuropäischeSicherheitund “Test-undVersuchskräfteinMunsteraufgestellt,”
Technik,27January2022, PressRelease,Bundeswehr,17December2020,
meldungen/32112/bwi-entwickelt-loesungen-mit-kuen- 
stlicher-intelligenz-fuer-die-bundeswehr/(lastaccessed aktuelles/test-und-versuchskraefte-in-munster-auf-
27March2023). gestellt-4960224(lastaccessed27March2023).
“DeutscheMarine:Vertragfür600RAMBlock2B “TruppesetztaufZukunftstechnologie‘Künstli-
unterzeichnet,”EuropäischeSicherheitundTechnik, cheIntelligenz’”,Bundeswehr-Journal,3January
11November2022, 2021,
gen/37952/deutsche-marine-vertrag-fuer-600-ram-block- truppe-setzt-auf-zukunftstechnologie-kuenstliche-intelli-
2b-unterzeichnet/(lastaccessed27March2023). genz/(lastaccessed27March2023).
“HeimatschutzdurchkünstlicheIntelligenz.Die “VonBigDatabisKI.ZweiteAusbaustufedesGe-
BundeswehraufdemWegindieZukunft,”Bundeswehr, meinsamenLagezentrumsCIR”,Bundesministeriumder
14April2021, Verteidigung,2.September2020,
elles/meldungen/heimatschutz-durch-kuenstliche-intel- swehr.de/de/organisation/cyber-und-informationsraum/
ligenz-bundeswehr-zukunft-5054820(lastaccessed27 aktuelles/von-big-data-bis-ki-zweite-ausbaustufe-des-
March2023). glz-cir-1826878(lastaccessed27March2023).
“HensoldtequipsBundeswehrNH90helicopterwith “WieKIbeiderVorhersagedesWeltraumwetters
state-of-the-artprotectionsystems,”EuropeanDefence hilft,”Gloem.de,7December2021,
Review,21January2022, de/news/anzeige-wie-ki-bei-der-vorhersage-des-wel-
hensoldt-equips-bundeswehr-nh90-helicopter-with-state- traumwetters-hilft-2112–161343.html(lastaccessed27
of-the-art-protection-systems(lastaccessed27March March2023)
2023).
ArtificialIntelligenceStrategy(Berlin:The
“HensoldtpräsentiertRadarwarneraufKI-Basis,” FederalGovernment,2018),
hartpunkt.de,14May2019, gie-deutschland.de/home.html?file=files/downloads/
hensoldt-praesentiert-radarwarner-auf-ki-basis/(last Nationale_KI-Strategie_engl.pdf&cid=729(lastaccessed
accessed27March2023). 27March2023).
52 MASTER AND SERVANT

ArtificialIntelligenceStrategyoftheGermanFederal SociotechnicalImaginariesandtheFabricationofPower
Government.2020Update(Berlin:TheFederalGov- (Chicago/London:TheUniversityofChicagoPress,
ernment,2020), 2015),pp.233–253.
de/home.html?file=files/downloads/Fortschreibung_
KI-Strategie_engl.pdf&cid=955(lastaccessed27March BWI,“GeneralinspekteurlässtsichKI-gestützte
2023). Aufklärungvorführen,”pressrelease,7December2022,

AutorenteamLuftwaffe,“DerEinflusskünstlicher teur-laesst-sich-ki-gestuetzte-aufklaerung-vorfuehren
IntelligenzbeierFührungvonLuftoperationenderZuku- (lastaccessed27March2023).
nft”,Wehrtechnik,II/2021,pp.65–68.
Dani,Enrico,“DigitalisierunglandbasierterOpera-
Azzano,Massimoetal.,“Theresponsibleuseof tionen.SachstandundWeiterentwicklung”,Europäische
artificialintelligenceinFCAS.Aninitialassessment”, SicherheitundTechnik,71:2(February2022),pp.40–43.
FCASForum,February2020,
articles/responsible-use-of-artificial-intelligence-in-fcas DatenstrategieGBBMVg(Berlin:Bundesministerium
(lastaccessed27March2023). derVerteidigung,2021).
Biess,Frank,RepublikderAngst.Eineandere Dean,SindeyE.,“MainGroundCombatSystem
GeschichtederBundesrepublik(München:Rowohlt, (MGCS):AStatusReport,”EuropeanSecurity&Defence,
2019). 23January2023,
cles/29122/main-ground-combat-system-mgcs-a-status-
Bock,ChristianundMatthiasSchmarsow,“Gedanken report/(lastaccessed27March2023.
zumEinsatzvonKünstlicherIntelligenzbeimmil-
itärischenFrühenundEntscheiden”,inNorbertLammert DigitalisierungvonLandoperationen(Stausberg:
undWolfgangKoch(Hrsg.),BundeswehrderZukunft. KommandoHeer,2017).
VerantwortungundKünstlicheIntelligenz(Berlin:Kon-
rad-Adenauer-Stiftung,2023),pp.138–158. Eberle,Jakub,DiscourseandAffectinForeign
Policy:GermanyandtheIraqWar(NewYork:Routledge,
Borchert,Heiko,“TheRockyRoadtoNetworkedand 2019).
Effects-BasedExpeditionaryForces:MilitaryTrans-
formationintheBundeswehr”,inTerryTerriff,Frans Ehlke,Tobias,“InterviewmitGeneralleutnantDr.Ans-
Osing,andTheoFarrell(eds.),ATransformationGap? garRieks,StellvertreterdesInspekteursderLuftwaffe”,
AmericanInnovationsandEuropeanMilitaryChange cpmForumfürRüstung,StreitkräfteundSicherheit,
(Stanford:StanfordUniversityPress,2010),pp.83–107. 3/2021,pp.16–19.
Borchert,Heiko,ChristianBrandlhuber,ArminBrand- Engen,RobertC.,WhentheTeethEattheTail,A
stetter,andGaryS.Schaal,FreeJazzontheBattlefield. ReviewofCanada’sDefenceArtificialIntelligence.DAIO
HowGhostPlay’sAIApproachEnhancesAirDefense. Study23/09(Hamburg:DefenseAIObservatory,2023),
DAIOStudy22/03(Hamburg:DefenseAIObservatory, 
2022), March2023)
accessed27March2023).
ErsterBerichtzurDigitalenTransformationdes
Bousquet,Antoine,TheScientificWayofWarfare.Or- GeschäftsbereichsdesBundesministeriumsderVertei-
derandChaosontheBattlefieldsofModernity(London: digung(Berlin:BundesministeriumderVerteidigung,
Hurst&Company,2022). 2019),
itale-transformation-geschaeftsbereich-bmvg-143246
Brendecke,Jan-Wilhelm,ThomasDoll,DanielKall- (lastaccessed27March2023).
fass,“DerFührungsprozessvonmorgen.WieKünstliche
IntelligenzenFührungsprozessbeschleunigenkann”, Färber,MichaelundLarsBibow,“DieMultiDomain
EuropäischeSicherheitundTechnik,69:10(October CombatCloudfürdievernetzteOperationsführung”,
2020),pp.68–71. EuropäischeSicherheitundTechnik,71:11(),pp.55–58.
Burri,RegulaValérie,“ImaginariesofScience
andSociety:FramingNanotechnologyGovernancein Färber,Michael,“DigitalisierungderBundeswehr,”
GermanyandtheUnitedStates,”inSheilaJasanoffand inNorbertLammertundWolfgangKoch(Hrsg.),
Sang-HyunKim(eds.)DreamscapesofModernity– BundeswehrderZukunft.VerantwortungundKünstliche
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 53

Intelligenz(Berlin:KonradAdenauerStiftung,2023),pp. service/publikationen/gutachten-der-datenethikkom-
224–235, mission-langfassung-1685238(lastaccessed27March
nft(lastaccessed27March2023). 2023).
Fleischmann,Armin,“DasZentrumDigitalisierung Heiming,Gerhard,“AusschüssesegnenWirtschafts-
derBundeswehrundFähigkeitsentwicklungCyber- planzumSondervermögenab,”EuropäischeSicherheit
undInformationsraum:‘UnserBeitragalsTreiberder undTechnik,2June2022,
DigitalisierungderBundeswehr’,”inCIR2.0:VonderIdee meldungen/34634/ausschuesse-segnen-wirtschaft-
zurDimension(Bonn:cpmCommunicationPresseMar- splan-zum-sondervermoegen-ab/(lastaccessed27
keting,2022),pp.34–38, March2023).
resource/blob/5519316/29945909e7ed8cc36f2c9ff-
4ecd53186/download-sonderheft-cir-2–0-data.pdf(last Hofstetter,YvonneandJosephVerbovszky,HowAI
accessed27March2023). LearnstheBundeswehr’s“InnereFührung.”Value-Based
EngineeringwithIEEE7000TM-2021.DAIOStudy23/10
FörderungvonKünstlicherIntelligenzfürdieBunde- (Hamburg:DefenseAIObservatory,2023),
swehr.AntwortderBundesregierung.Drucksachedes seai.eu/daio_study2310(lastaccesed27March2023)
DeutschenBundestags19/10803,11June2019,https://
dserver.bundestag.de/btd/19/108/1910803.pdf(last Ilg,Peter,“Militär-Projekt:MitkünstlicherIntelligenz
accessed27March2023). durchWändeschauen,”heiseonline,18July2022,

FutureOperatingEnvironment2035(Berlin:Bunde- stlicher-Intelligenz-durch-Waende-schauen-7182283.
sministeriumderVerteidigung,2019). html(lastaccessed27March2023).
Gäbelein,Wolfgang,“DieBundeswehrunddas InspekteurderMarine–Absicht2022(Rostock:
GefechtsfeldderZukunft:Entwicklungsperspektiven Marinekommando,2022),
inVerbindungmitKünstlicherIntelligenzausderSicht de/organisation/marine/aktuelles/inspekteur-marine-ab-
desVerteidigungsplaners”,inNorbertLammertand sicht-2022–5400502(lastaccessed27March2023).
WolfgangKoch(eds.),BundeswehrderZukunft.Verant-
wortungundKünstlicheIntelligenz(Berlin:Konrad-Ade- Jasanoff,Sheila,“FutureImperfect:Science,
nauer-Stiftung,2023),pp.120–137. Technology,andtheImaginationsofModernity,”in
SheilaJasanoffandSang-HyunKim(eds.),Dreams-
GesetzüberdieFeststellungdesBundeshaushalt- capesofModernity.SociotechnicalImaginariesandthe
splansfürdasHaushaltsjahr2023,Einzelplan14, FabricationofPower(Chicago/London:TheUniversity
BundesgesetzblattTeilI,Nr.54,19December2022,pp. ofChicagoPress,2015),pp.1–33.
2485,
bk=Bundesanzeiger_BGBl&jumpTo=bgbl122s2485.pdf Jensen,BenjaminM.,ChristopherWhyte,andScott
(lastaccessed27March2023). Cuomo,InformationinWar.MilitaryInnovation,Battle
Networks,andtheFutureofArtificialIntelligence(Wash-
GesetzzurFinanzierungderBundeswehrundzur ington,DC:GeorgetownUniversityPress,2022).
Errichtungeines“SondervermögensBundeswehr”und
zurÄnderungderBundeshaushaltsordnung,Bundes- Kahn,LaurenA.,RiskyIncrementalismDefense
gesetzblatt2022,Teil1,Nr.23,6July2022,p.1030, AIintheUnitedStates.DAIOStudy23/07(Hamburg:
 DefenseAIObservatory,2023),
component.Text_0&tocf=&qmf=&hlf=xaver.component. daio_study2307(lastaccessed15March2023).
Hitlist_0&bk=bgbl&start=%2F%2F*%5B%40node_
id%3D%271034878%27%5D&skin=pdf&tlevel=-2&no- KI-StartupsinDeutschland.EineUntersuchung
hist=1&sinst=0E04B990(lastaccessed27March2023). zuUnternehmensgründungenimBereichKünstliche
Intelligenz(Berlin:BundesministeriumfürWirtschaft
GrundgesetzfürdieBundesrepublikDeutschland undKlimaschutz,2022),
vom19.Dezember2022,BundesgesetzblattIS.2478, TAL/Redaktion/DE/Digitalisierungsindex/Publikationen/
 publikation-download-ki-startups.html(lastaccessed27
2023). March2023).
GutachtenderDatenethikkommissionderBundesre- Kober,KlemensandTorbenSchütz,“DenWeltraum
gierung(Berlin:DatenethikkommissionderBundesregi- ordnen.Zukunftsvorstellungenund(New)Space
erung2019), Governance,inMoritzBrake,EnricoFels,AntjeNötzold,
54 MASTER AND SERVANT

andAndreaRotter(eds.),StrategischerWettbewerbim reservistenverband.de/magazin-loyal/kuenstliche-in-
Weltraum.Politik,SicherheitundWirtschaftimAll(Wies- telligenz-in-der-bundeswehr/(lastaccessed27March
baden:SpringerVS,forthcoming). 2023).
Koch,Wolfgang,“ElementsofanEthicalAIDemon- OperativeLeitlinienfürdieStreitkräfte(Berlin:Gener-
stratorforResponsiblyDesigningDefenceSystems,” alinspekteur,2022).
25thInternationalConferenceonInformationFusion,
4–7July2022, Payne,Kenneth,BrightProspects–BigChallenges.
ment/9841387(lastaccessed27March2023). DefenceAIintheUnitedKindgom.DAIOStudy22/04
(Hamburg:DefenseAIObservatory,2022),
KriegderZukunft?!OperativeHerausforderungendes seai.eu/daio_study2204(lastaccessed27March2023).
Multi-DomainBattlefieldfürdieBundeswehr.Lehrgang
Generalstabs-/Admiralstabsdienst(LGAN)2020–Stu- Penney,Stewart,“Short-rangesquare-off,”Flight-
dienphase.HintergrundinformationPresse(Hamburg: Global,27June2000,
FührungsakademiederBundeswehr,2022), short-range-square-off/32654.article(lastaccessed27
bundeswehr.de/de/organisation/weitere-bmvg-diensts- March2023).
tellen/fuehrungsakademie-der-bundeswehr/mediathek/
ueber-krieg-der-zukunft-5462696(lastaccessed27 Rieks,Ansgar,“DigitalisierungderStreitkräfte:Ein
March2023 (nichtnur)technischerBlick,”inNorbertLammertand
WolfgangKoch(eds.),BundeswehrderZukunft.Verant-
KünstlicheIntelligenzimGeschäftsbereichder wortungundKünstlicheIntelligenz(Berlin:Konrad-Ade-
Bundesregierung.AntwortderBundesregierungaufdie nauer-Stiftung,2023),pp.102–119.
KleineAnfragederAbgeordnetenAnkeDomscheit-Berg,
Dr.PetraStitte,NicoleGohlke,weitererAbgeordneter ScienceandTechnologyTrends2023–2043.Across
underFraktionDIELINKE,BundestagDrucksache thePhysical,Biological,andInformationDomains.
20/430,14January2022, Volume2(Brussels:NATOScienceandTechnology
btd/20/004/2000430.pdf(lastaccessed27March2023) Organization,2023),
ic_fl2014/assets/pdf/2023/3/pdf/stt23-vol2.pdf(last
KünstlicheIntelligenzindenLandstreitkräften.Ein accessed27March2023).
PositionspapierdesAmtsfürHeeresentwicklung(Köln:
AmtfürHeeresentwicklung,2019). Schurad,Dirk,“MitkünstlicherIntelligenzderZukunft
aufderSpur”,Hardthöhen-Kurier,38:4(August2018),S.
KünstlicheIntelligenz.NutzungimGeschäftsbereich 10–12,
desBundesministeriumsderVerteidigung(Berlin:BMVg, fullhhkemags/2018–04/index_20.html#page=11(last
2019). accessed27March2023).
Layton,Peter,EvolutionnotRevolution.Australia’s Soare,Somina,PavneetSinghandMeiaNouwens,
DefenceAIPathway.DAIOStudy22/02(Hamburg: Software-definedDefence:AlgorithmsatWar(London:
DefenseAIObservatory,2022), IISS,2023),
daio_study2202(lastaccessed27March2023). per/2023/02/software-defined-defence(lastaccessed
27March2023).
Meerveld,H.W.,R.H.A.Lindelauf,E.O.Postma,
andM.Postma,“TheirresponsibilityofnotusingAIin Stengel,FrankA.,ThePoliticsofMilitaryForce:
themilitary”,EthicsandInformationTechnology,25:1 Antimilitarism,IdeationalChangeandPost-ColdWar
(January2023),article14, GermanSecurityDiscourse(AnnArbor:Universityof
article/10.1007/s10676–023–09683–0(lastaccessed MichiganPress,2020).
27March2023)
StrategiepapierderBundesregierungzurStärkung
MehrFortschrittwagen.Koalitionsvertrag2021– derSicherheits-undVerteidigungsindustrie(Berlin:Bun-
2025(Berlin:SPD/Bündnis90/DieGrünen/FDP,2021), desregierung,2019),
 DE/Downloads/S-T/strategiepapier-staerkung-sicher-
koalitionsvertrag-2021–1990800(lastaccessed27 its-und-verteidigungsindustrie.html(lastaccessed15
March2023). March2023).
Müller,Björn,“KünstlicheIntelligenzinder StrategischeLeitlinieDigitalisierung(Berlin:Bunde-
Bundeswehr,”Loyal,8.November2021, sministeriumderVerteidigung,2017).
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 55

SystemzentrumDigitalisierungDimensionLand
(Berlin:BundesministeriumderVerteidigung,2022):
Verbovszky,Joseph,GermanStructuralPacifism.
PhDDissertation(Munich:UniversityoftheBundeswehr,
2022).
WehrwissenschaftlicheForschungJahresbericht
2020.WehrwissenschaftlicheForschungfürdeutsche
Streitkräfte(Bonn:BundesministeriumderVerteidigung,
2021).
Welchering,Peter,“VonderBundeswehrzurdigitalen
Verteidigungsarmee?”,Deutschlandfunk,11February
2023,
software-defined-defence-konzept-soll-die-bundeswehr-
umkrempeln-dlf-68c615bf-100.html(lastaccessed27
March2023).
Welchering,Peter,“WieKI-Systemediemilitärische
Ausbildungverändern”,Deutschlandfunk,2.Februar
2022,
telligenz-wie-ki-systeme-die-militaerische-100.html(last
accessed27March2023).
WiekämpfenLandstreitkräftekünftig?Thesenpapier
(Strausberg:KommandoHeer,2017).
Wiegold,Thomas,“NachRechnungshof-Kritik:Weni-
gerProjekteimBundeswehr-Sondervermögen,”Augen
geradaus!,28October2022,
net/2022/10/nach-rechnungshof-kritik-weniger-pro-
jekte-im-bundeswehr-sondervermoegen/(lastaccessed
27March2023).
Wiegold,Thomas,“Studiefürs‘gläserneGefechts-
feld’:DrohnenundKI”,Augengeradeaus?,14April2019,

glaeserne-gefechtsfeld-drohnen-ki/(lastaccessed27
March2023).
56 MASTER AND SERVANT

Defense AI Observatory Studies
23|12 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, and Joseph Verbovszky, Master and Servant. Defense
AI in Germany
23|11 Katarzyna Zysk, High Hopes Amid Hard Realities. Defense AI in Russia
23|10 Yvonne Hofstetter and Joseph Verbovzsky, How AI Learns the Bundeswehr’s
“Innere Führung.” Value-Based Engineering with IEEE7000TM-2021
23|09 Robert C Engen, When the Teeth Eat the Tail: A Review of Canada’s Defence Artificial
Intelligence
23|08 Çağlar Kurç, Enabling Technology of Future Warfare. Defense AI in Turkey
23|07 Lauren A. Kahn, Risky Incrementalism. Defense AI in the United States
22|06 Yvonne Hofstetter, Wie KI Innere Führung lernt. Wertbasierte Technik mit
IEEE7000TM-2021
22|05 Andrea Gilli, Mauro Gilli, and Ivan Zaccagnini, Exploring the Benefits of a New Force
Enabler: Defense AI in Italy
22|04 Kenneth Payne, Bright Prospects – Big Challenges. Defense AI in the United
Kingdom
22|03 Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber, Armin Brandstetter, and Gary S. Schaal, Free
Jazz on the Battlefield. How GhostPlay’s AI Approach Enhances Air Defense
22|02 Peter Layton, Evolution not Revolution. Australia’s Defence AI Pathway
21|01 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, Joseph Verbovszky, Beware the Hype. What Military
Conflicts in Ukraine, Syria, Libya, and Nagorno-Karabakh (Don’t) Tell Us About the
Future of War