July 25, 2022
Starliner Launches to Space Station. Photo by: NASA
The Private Sector’s Assessment of U.S.
Space Policy and Law
BY Alyssa Goessler
exploration on the same priority level of any other
The United States’ space sector has evolved significantly
domestic policy goal.1 The National Aeronautics and
over the past sixty years. Originally the exclusive domain
Space Administration (NASA)’s spending peaked as a
of states, space activities are increasingly impacted by
percentage of total government spending in 1966 at
the growing role of the private sector. International
roughly 4.5 percent; by the end of the following decade,
space law dictates that all commercial activities in space
it dropped to just shy of one percent.2 This created a lull
must obtain the authorization and ongoing supervision
in U.S. space operations that persisted until the 1980’s,
of a state, which typically takes the form of a license.
when President Reagan’s National Space Policy called
U.S. space companies are therefore beholden to U.S.
for the adoption of regulatory measures that would
space policies and regulations.
enable the U.S. commercial space sector to thrive. The
These policies and regulations have fluctuated in Commercial Space Launch Act and the Land Remote-
tandem with shifting government priorities. Following
Alyssa Goessler was a research intern for the Aerospace
the success and high cost of the Apollo Program, for
Security Project at the Center for Strategic and International
example, President Nixon chose to place space
Studies in Washington, D.C.
1 "Statement By President Nixon on the Space Program," 1970, via 
 budgets-us-spending-space-travel
2 Simon Rogers, "NASA Budgets: US Spending on Space Travel Since
1958 UPDATED," The Guardian,
AEROSPACE.CSIS.ORG | 1

Sensing Commercialization Act are two prime examples A list of all questions asked during the interviews is
of pro-private industry laws from this era of space included in Appendix 1.
commercialization.
The companies that participated varied in both
While several new laws have since emerged, the bedrock specialization and longevity. The author interviewed on-
of U.S. commercial space law remains in the end of the orbit service providers, launch providers, and space
twentieth century. In order to see how this model of situational awareness data providers. Some of the
space governance has stood the test of time, this paper companies have or pursue federal contracts. Three
provides insight from representatives of U.S. space quarters of the companies interviewed can be classified
companies. Their views and policy preferences vary, but as “new space” companies, meaning that they were
an overarching theme is the struggle to align a legacy founded after the year 2000. The remaining two are “old
regulatory system with an increasingly diverse space space” companies that have been in the business since
environment. Emerging space activities frequently lack the early days of the U.S. commercial space sector.
a clear regulatory home, and U.S. national security goals
sometimes conflict with U.S. commercial goals in space. Summary of Company Insights
Many company representatives commented that current
regulatory mechanisms were designed for the space Several themes emerged from the interviews conducted
environment of the past, and they identify several areas with U.S. space companies’ representatives. They are
for improvement. summarized below in no particular order.
Methodology 1) The Proper Style of Policymaking
A handful of interviewees expressed their vision of the
ideal version of policymaking. During a discussion of
The author of this report conducted eight virtual
different approaches to space traffic management, one
interviews with employees of U.S. space companies who
interviewee emphasized that the government’s duty is
were familiar with the company’s regulatory and policy
to set the standards. The operational side, however,
preferences. Their job titles included export control
should be left to the private sector:
specialist, vice president for government affairs, director
of government relations, policy research analyst, and
We’re at a crossroads now. We understand the
more. In about half of the interviews, more than one
legacy model where the government did
company representative participated. Interviewees
everything for everybody based on taxpayer
were provided with the following questions in advance
dollars. Now you have private investment that is
of the conversation:
able to go faster, reach farther, do it quicker, but
we do not have the authority to regulate or
• Which laws and policies most strongly affect
govern or set the standards. From a commercial
your day-to-day workload?
• Are there areas where you want to see more aspect, we want the government to declare
regulation or policy guidance? what the standards are and then get out of the
• Are there areas where you want to see less
way.
regulation or policy guidance?
• Has your business been affected by political Operations, they argued, are most efficiently conducted
elections at the federal, state, or local level?
by the private sector. Leaving the operational side to the
private sector also encourages innovation.
| 2

Another interviewee made a similar comment relating to Broadly speaking, company representatives agreed that
the regulation of technology, advocating for behavior- the primary duty of the government in the space sector
based regulation rather than technology-based is to enhance safety and minimize risk— both material
regulation: and financial risk. A representative of a startup company
commented that their company advocates for “for
There is a role for the government to set
smart regulation: regulation that is not too prescriptive
regulatory expectations of operators. What you
and has the ability to iterate upon itself.” This
want to avoid is regulation that locks in a
regulation, they explained, acts as a baseline for
specific set of technologies as opposed to
assessing how risky their operations are. Risk
expectations for performances of behavior.
assessment that is grounded in policy and regulation
They cited the example of space debris management: enables their company to achieve different business
goals such as obtaining insurance, attracting
Instead of saying ‘you need to ensure that you
investment, and closing business cases.
have x type of thruster propulsion on your
spacecraft,’ say instead ‘you should be able to
Similarly, a government relations representative of
demonstrate maneuverability to conduct
another startup noted that “the thing a commercial
collision avoidance, and the method that you
entity needs out of policy is stability more than anything
choose to do that is entirely up to you.’
else.” If policy questions “linger” too long, investors will
This style of regulating, they noted, would be able to be scared off, stymying the company’s growth. This
achieve desired policy goals without being prescriptive representative cited NASA’s 2020 announcement of its
on a certain technology, “because that's how solicitation of a private company to secure space
regulations get outdated really quickly.” They noted resources as an apt example.3 The representative said
that they were pleased by how much progress has been that additional policy demonstrations will be needed for
made in terms of updating regulation and policy but forthcoming missions to the moon and Mars. In-situ
added that there is much work left to be done. Moving resource utilization is a necessary precondition of long-
forward, they argued, the U.S. government needs to term interplanetary exploration, and, they argued, there
take a more proactive and nuanced approach to is not yet enough policy precedent to unleash private
regulating emerging technologies. sector research and development (R&D) and
investment.
2) Balancing Risk and Innovation
The companies diverged on their characterization of the
Representatives of a company with many years of
proper role of government in the space sector. This
experience in the industry strongly emphasized the
divergence was more pronounced on specific policy and
government’s vital role in ensuring safety. Discussing
regulatory issues, such as the ideal model for the
various FAA regulations, they mentioned that “a lot of
Federal Aviation Authority (FAA)’s licensing process.
these regulatory processes were put there for a reason
Despite this divergence, some general principles were
because something bad happened.” They cited the 2003
echoed by the majority of interviewees.
3 Jim Bridenstine, “Space Resources are the Key to Safe and 
Sustainable Lunar Exploration,” NASA, September 10, 2020, the-key-to-safe-and-sustainable-lunar-exploration/
| 3

Columbia and 1986 Challenger disasters as examples.4 dormant in the U.S. This interviewee theorized that the
They continued: “The bureaucracy of being safe does U.S. would likely have more companies specializing in
not stifle growth. You’re safe for a reason. You fly safe remote sensing today had we not had restrictive policy
because you’re protecting people going on board these in the early days.
crafts or you’re protecting people on the ground. We
Balancing risk and innovation is an ongoing challenge
need a regulatory safety culture to maintain the
for another startup representative, who said:
commercial space sector.”
You want to modernize regulatory expectations
This company specifically voiced concern regarding
and requirements and do away with ones that
some new space companies’ efforts to deregulate or
are no longer appropriate. But you also do not
block regulation. “One thing that has really changed [in
want to allow for a blank slate, wild west where
the industry] is the amount of money spent on
lobbying.” Citing the database Open Secret,5 they noted there are no expectations, no safety provisions,
or no control of the risk that operators pose.
that major space companies are pouring millions of
dollars into their political action committees and
Risk, they added, must be known to the fullest extent
lobbying efforts. The increase in spending on lobbying is
possible, controllable, and reliably limited. This degree
a worrying trend in their view, as they fear it will
of risk assessment, they argued, empowers R&D by
undermine the culture of safety that characterizes U.S.
ensuring companies can attract the funding necessary
space operations. “This isn’t the wild west,” they added,
to continue innovation.
“and even though Congress is promising to accept more
risk and NASA is saying they will accept more risk...we all
3) Interagency Friction: “Who holds the talking
accept risk, until someone dies.” They expressed their
stick?”
trepidation regarding not only loss of life, but also
The author asked each company to discuss any time
industry-wide slowdowns. High profile incidents can
when their ability to do business was affected by
lead to overregulation by Congress—an outcome that
interagency dynamics. Most interviewees could not
can harm the prosperity of the whole sector, not just a
think of a specific example or incident, but several noted
single company.
the tension between certain national security goals and
commercial or civil goals in the space domain. One
While acknowledging the vital role of risk minimization
launch provider, for example, noted that their efforts to
and safety precautions in the sector, some companies
achieve contracts with foreign entities were warmly
emphasized that this must be balanced with the need to
welcomed by folks in the Department of State (DoS), but
encourage R&D and innovation. Citing the evolution of
that they encountered more scrutiny from the
remote sensing policy in the U.S., one startup
Department of Defense (DoD). The State Department
representative noted that early U.S. regulation
has historically advocated for the diplomatic use of
prohibited the industry’s growth in its early days.
space to achieve U.S. goals across policy topics,
Remote sensing took off in foreign markets while lying
4 The Challenger and Columbia disasters occurred in 1986 and 2003, changed NASA forever; Elizabeth Howell , Daisy Dobrijevic,
respectively, and each took the lives of nine NASA astronauts. Read “Columbia Disaster: What happened and what NASA learned,”
more about these disasters at: Elizabeth Howell, “Space shuttle Space.com, October 11, 2021, 
Challenger and the disaster that changed NASA forever,” Space.com, columbia-disaster.html
February 1, 2022, Space shuttle Challenger and the disaster that
5OpenSecrets, 
| 4

including nuclear non-proliferation. While the DoD also Another company working with non-Earth imaging
desires this end goal, it is generally less inclined towards technology described a challenging regulatory
sharing capabilities or technology with other states. DoS experience that was “largely driven by interagency
export regulations also limit the ability of companies to dynamics”:
achieve foreign partnerships, particularly with states in
There are some elements of the government
the Middle East. This interviewee noted, however, that
that are very concerned about what can be seen
political will can often overcome these export control
by this technology, and other elements are not
limitations, citing a lucrative sale to a state in the Middle
so concerned about it. The challenge we faced
East that was achieved thanks to governmental buy-in
there was that our only view into this was
at the federal level. It is therefore evident that while
through [the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
different agencies may share some policy goals, their
Administration (NOAA)], so we did not get to
preferences for achieving those goals can relay mixed
interact directly with the agencies that were
messages to private sector entities.
raising the concerns so that we could
An export control specialist noted that much of their understand the concerns, how we can address
time was dedicated to trying to figure out which them, and maybe do things in a different way so
capabilities the different parts of the U.S. government that it is not a concern.
want to guard. “For me, that is one of the biggest
Despite these difficulties, companies broadly seemed to
challenges because you have so many different players
understand national security concerns and desired to be
who are involved in the decision-making process and
a part of the solution. Their specific challenges emerged
you have different camps in the government when it
largely from an inability to interact directly with the
comes to certain technologies.” They therefore work to
individuals voicing the concerns so that they could
predict which of the involved agencies will have
efficiently adjust course.
concerns with the export of different systems so that
they can prepare for possible pushback.
4) Growing Pains: Technology Continues to Outpace
Regulation
The lack of transparency surrounding
Nearly every interviewee noted the difficulty of
intragovernmental dialogue was a source of great
regulating an industry that is rapidly evolving. One
difficulty for some space companies. One launch
company representative with both public and private
company discussed an incident where their team was
sector experience noted that “government policy is
trying to make progress on a regulatory issue and ended
incapable of moving fast enough to stay in front of
up getting “a bit of a run around”:
where investment is leading us.” Several interviewees
We were trying to resolve an issue but then after commended the evolution of export control regulation
several weeks we realized that issue did not and FAA licensing over the years, while noting there
exist, and we did not know where the holdup remains room for progress. Respondents were
was. I think a lot of it was really interagency sympathetic to the challenges faced by policymakers
communication. I do not think that we were and had some specific insight for addressing this
intentionally misled...and I don’t know if your challenge. These discussions also highlighted
average space company deals with this kind of challenges produced by interagency dynamics—
incident.
| 5

specifically, the challenge of identifying who should take liaising with multiple agencies and going through
the lead on certain regulations. several licensing processes.
One interviewee who works for a launch company noted In discussing the mission authorization question, one
that in export control, “some of the guidance has not representative expressed some optimism for novel in-
kept up with the technology.” They specifically space activities that do not fall under an established
identified the existence of certain commercially jurisdiction:
available off-the-shelf (COTS) products as an area where
It is still something that each of those entities
U.S. export control law needs to catch up. Cubesat
has been very proactive in wanting to enable as
deployers, for example, are available commercially with
much as they can, while inflicting as little of a
only slight calibration needed to match them to the
burden as possible on the company trying to
interface. At present, they noted, cubesat deployers are
pioneer these new types of activities. Because
caught under International Traffic in Arms Regulations
(ITAR) regulation,6 but the respondent believes their they know how much private investment has
gone into the tech development, they know how
commercial availability warrants their migration to
Export Administration Regulations (EAR).7 much tech transfer has come from other areas of
the government like NASA and [the Air Force
Often I see things held by [the Department of] Research Laboratory] and other entities.
State that should probably be moved to [the
Despite these good intentions, the interviewee noted
Department of] Commerce, but because State is
that the present “piecemeal, fragmented licensing
overwhelmed, they haven’t gotten to it. Cubesat
approach” needs to be streamlined if the U.S. wants to
deployer is one example where I would want
empower a thriving commercial space economy.
clear guidance.
Streamlining licensing, they noted, can help space
Two companies specializing in on-orbit servicing companies achieve timelines that are more “befitting of
expressed concerns regarding the government’s ability commercial investment.” “We have a lot more
to efficiently regulate their activities because they work processing power than we did thirty years ago,” they
with niche, emerging technology. Both had specific noted. “You can build satellites a lot more cheaply and
recommendations for a revision of the U.S.’s approach faster—and to the same standards of safety—than we
to mission authorization. In the U.S., mission could thirty years ago.” While the interviewee had no
authorization for private space activities has historically expressed preference for which agency should take the
come from the FAA for launches, and the FCC for lead on this type of streamlined licensing, they noted
communications activities. Companies that specialize in that the selected agency should act as a “shepherd” of
on-orbit servicing have no clear regulatory home, often the process, helping to minimize regulatory hurdles.
6 The International Trade and Arms Regulation governs the 7 The Export Administration Regulation governs the export of dual-
manufacture, sale, and distribution of items listed on the U.S. use items, and is overseen by the Department of Commerce. Learn
Munitions List, and is overseen by the U.S. Department of State. more about EAR at: “The Export Administration Regulations - EAR,”
Learn more about ITAR at: Jeff Petters, “What is ITAR Compliance? Office of the Vice President for Research, MIT,
Definition and Regulations,” October 10, 2018, 
 control/information-documents/export-control-
regulations/export#off-canvas,
| 6

A representative of a different on-orbit servicing noting that maintaining entity registration to be eligible
company also advocated for streamlining the licensing for contracts “can be a bit of a headache,” and post-
process. They specifically advocated for “a single agency award tracking also adds to the difficulty. They
for licensing space missions,” which, they argued, would simultaneously acknowledged the possible missed
only become more necessary “as space missions opportunity cost of not pursuing federal contracts: “If
become more and more diverse in terms of their you do not target those government contracts, you’re
capabilities.” They characterized the current licensing losing a big portion of potential revenue. Especially with
scheme as “too restrictive for modern space activities.” the way that the U.S. is really trying to expand their
space capability as of recent.” Contracts and the
On the topic of emerging technology and its regulation,
regulations surrounding them were not mentioned by
a representative of an established space company
the older space companies, excluding a brief reference
commented that “U.S. policies just are not keeping up.”
to COVID protocol which will be discussed in the
Noting the number of new entrants into the space
following section.
domain, as well as the proliferation of new technologies,
they commented that “now is the time” to start having 5) Business and Politics
conversations on the commercialization of space and its The majority of interviewees did not believe that their
regulation. The interviewee also discussed the 2019 business had been affected by elections at the federal,
Space Policy Directive on Emerging Technologies, which state, or local level. Some noted that tax laws do change
they had personally submitted a comment on: between presidents, which naturally affects business,
but this tax impact is not unique to the space industry.
That came out in 2019, and we still have not
“Tax law changes with the wind here in DC,” one
seen a draft of all the comments that everybody
respondent added. Others noted that presidential
submitted...we are still waiting. What I thought
priorities in space may shift, but that broadly speaking,
was important three years ago regarding
U.S. space policy is consistent across presidential
changes to the export regulation, for example,
administrations. This is in part due to the fact that civil
has changed so drastically to what we are
space priorities are largely determined by NASA’s
looking at today. My comments today would be
decadal survey. Similarly, defense budgets are set far in
very different than they were then.
advance of the actual release of funding. Despite this
general perception of insulation from electoral politics,
Companies that had been awarded federal contracts
respondents did provide some interesting insights on
often provided specific insight on federal acquisitions
the overlap of their business and politics that are worth
regulation (FAR) and export control. One young space
exploring.
company deemed FAR to be “excessive for a start-up to
comply with” and expressed their preference for “Other
One respondent who works for a launch company said
Transaction Authority” (OTA) contracts over FAR-based
they did not observe any major shifts in U.S. space
contracts. The same company noted that the
policy between elections except for flagship programs.
“significant amount of time required to get employees
As an example, they mentioned that they worked on
[sensitive compartmented information] indoctrinated
four different shuttle replacement programs during their
after a government contract is signed…limits the speed
first five years in the industry. “But general space policy
and agility of a startup.” A different startup that has
does not change much,” they added.
been awarded federal contracts echoed this sentiment,
| 7

“In terms of local politics,” they continued, “there is We have factories, and in order to build a rocket,
certainly a lot of influence, particularly by appropriators you must have people in person. We had
in the current space centers.” They provided Huntsville, government customers that mandated certain
Alabama—which has a large aerospace and defense requirements and built them into our contracts.
sector—as an example. Huntsville today is “highly COVID was a very political issue, obviously, and
developed, largely due to political influence. You can was driven in different directions by democrats
bring appropriations into an area via politics.” They and republicans. That definitely affected our
added a fascinating footnote about the inversion of business.
politics in the space industry:
Another launch company with federal contracts had a
The space industry tends to be counterintuitive similar COVID experience that was made more complex
to politics because the red states tend to have by state-level politics. They were also beholden to
big NASA installations and the blue states do COVID policies that were baked into their contracts. The
not. Therefore, red states are focused on big company is headquartered in a state that was notorious
government programs and blue states are for its opposition to any government-mandated COVID
focused on commercialization. You tend to see a policies.
reversal of traditional politics.
We were kind of stuck in the middle. We’re all
Representatives of two launch companies identified headquartered and physically located in [the
COVID as a politicized issue that definitively affected state] and the state tells us not to do anything,
their businesses. The first representative began their while the federal government says you must do
comment by noting that generally political elections do all this stuff. When it comes to politics and our
affect the space industry, largely via the president’s business, it’s less about elections themselves
ability to put their mark on NASA priorities: and more about who wins and the stereotypical
posturing of political parties at federal, state, or
[Presidential impact] is increasingly on the NASA
local level. They will have different approaches
side, because that discretionary budget is easily
to things that affect the industry.
influenced by any administration. They come in
with these large NASA priorities because they While the majority of respondents did not believe
have less discretionary spending to make an elections affected their business, one representative of
impact on defense spending, which is set in an established space company strongly disagreed with
motion for nearly a ten-year period. And the this sentiment. “In the export and import areas, when
population responds to it immediately, so it is we have a change in administration at the presidential
one of those areas where you get a good level, it’s huge,” they commented. As a global business,
political bounce by talking about NASA or they viewed shifting presidential preferences in terms of
science or climate change or planetary research regional policies as a major variable. “Specifically with
or going back to the Moon or onwards to Mars.” the Middle East, there was a very different shift between
the previous administration and the current
Moving on to COVID, this interviewee discussed how
administration.” Relating to space policy specifically,
COVID policies placed on federal contractors made them
they commented that
more vulnerable to political winds:
| 8

You will have one president that may push Space is the future and we need to start thinking
space harder than another one, given their through these tough policy issues. And there are
priorities. But when it comes to defense issues, other spacefaring nations that are very active,
elections absolutely have an impact in terms of like China and Russia. If we want to sell systems,
who is getting what sales through congressional we of course prefer to sell them to allies. But
notification for ITAR and EAR, and what is going China and Russia are off selling to whomever.
through for [Foreign Military Sales].
This respondent also noted how U.S. restrictions on
6) Foreign Threats and Cybersecurity collaboration with China on space issues affects their
China dominated the respondents’ input relating to ability to achieve partnerships that could advance R&D:
foreign threats. This was unprompted insight: the
Even working with U.S. universities that have
author did not ask respondents to assess foreign
foreign professors or foreign students is a
adversaries of the U.S. and/or their impact on business.
challenge. Because it is considered an export,
Cyber also emerged as an issue that stands to impact
we have to get an authorization. A student here
the industry in coming years. Several respondents
on a student visa from China, for example, could
relayed their concerns about cybersecurity
not support the program.
infrastructure, both in terms of its present weakness in
the U.S. as well as the difficulty of implementing federal
A seasoned launch company repeatedly expressed
cyber policies.
concerns about Chinese infiltration of the U.S.
commercial space industry and of U.S. government
A representative of a launch company discussed how
space programs. They first expressed concerns
U.S. restrictions on selling rocketry to some countries
regarding Chinese efforts to obtain valuable intellectual
has created a market opportunity for China. They noted
property (IP) by buying up smaller Silicon Valley
that their company’s “ability to export [to the Middle
companies via venture capital (VC). “I think that is a
East] is challenged by that region’s lack of membership
topic that people are downplaying for obvious reasons,”
in the [Missile Technology Control Regime],” a
they added, “and it should not be ignored.”
nonbinding export control regime that aims to limit the
proliferation of missile technology. As a member state to
Their concerns regarding Chinese activities also
this regime, the U.S. prohibits companies from selling
extended into the cyber domain. Their company has
missile technology to any state that is not party to the
been busy bolstering their information technology (IT)
MCTR. The interviewee noted that this does not always
systems “because if there is an attack on us from China,
achieve the end of nonproliferation, because “Chinese
what they would get is pretty tremendous and could
rockets are up for sale.” They continued: “We are stuck
impact our country’s national security.” Another
in a position where our nonproliferation regime creates
representative of the same company added that, in their
proliferation for the other countries. They cannot buy
view, U.S. taxpayers are “subsidizing Chinese R&D” by
our rockets, but they can go buy the Chinese rockets.”
virtue of all the investment in NASA and its partners that
China is able to capitalize off of by infiltrating weak IT
Another established space company echoed the
systems. This representative added that such measures
concern about Chinese competition in the context of the
would naturally be more difficult for smaller companies
U.S.’s slowness to rollout proactive space policies:
to implement:
| 9

If I’m a small company and I want to work with Another theme relating to foreign threats and the U.S.
the U.S. Government, they are going to give me a space industry was raised by an export specialist in a
list of firewall requirements and regulations that seasoned space company. Discussing the topic of U.S.
I have got to meet in order to work with the protectionism, they expressed a concern that efforts to
government. But to do that, I’m not going to be “buy American” will inhibit their company’s supply
able to pay my employees for the next month. chain security. While the interviewee understood the
So, there has got to be a balance— regulatorily value of not relying on foreign assets for national
speaking. You cannot quell innovation, but you security reasons, they also were “very concerned about
have to protect the data and your company’s IP. closing that market off to international capabilities for
That IP may eventually end up in a U.S. certain components, because we want to make sure
government defense system.” that we have sufficient suppliers in our supply chain for
cost and schedule reasons.” They continued:
A small startup echoed concerns about cybersecurity,
but also noted that present cyber requirements for When we look at certain components, I need to
federal contractors “require the expenditure of be sure we have two to three sources that we
considerable resources.” They identified the can get bids from...and in some areas when you
Cybersecurity Maturity Model Certification, the Joint look at components, there are components
Special Access Program Implementation Guide, and the where an international source has a better
Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program all product than is made in the U.S. So, you want to
as bearing excessively difficult compliance standards for be sure to continue to have that supply chain
small businesses. When asked if there were areas where base.
the company wanted to see more regulation, the
This same export specialist also highlighted the
company said they supported more regulatory
difficulty of balancing the need to protect U.S.
requirements “surrounding threat-based preventions,
technology with the need to remain competitive
detections and remediation that would be driven by
internationally.
threat intelligence.” They characterized current cyber
compliance standards as “cost-prohibitive” and “years
Countries do not want to be told how they can
behind the latest cybersecurity trends,” arguing that
use their assets. A lot of times— especially with
threat-based prevention was the proper path forward.
imaging spacecrafts— there are the conditions
that fall upon the country who is procuring the
A larger startup added that “the cybersecurity
system if they buy from the U.S. That creates a
requirements for federal contractors are rapidly
ton of challenges for that host country, because
changing...and you have to track that evolution to be
they are beholden to U.S. government
eligible for federal contracts.” This is another area, they
regulations on their now-procured asset.
stated, where interagency dynamics come into play:
“Those cyber standards are not even necessarily held by
Taken in whole, companies’ insights on foreign and
NASA or the DOD...maintaining your status [as a federal
cyber threats illustrate a complex challenge that
contractor] requires you to keep up with evolving policy
regulators will continue to face. Ensuring a prosperous
in many different agencies.”
U.S. space economy requires that U.S. companies are
competitive on the international stage, but that
| 10

competition is at times hindered by national security A startup also expressed concern over orbital debris, but
concerns. Similarly, there is a need to bolster cyber preferred the use of a space sustainability rating over
defenses for space activities in both the private and any concrete treaty provision:
public sector. Policymakers will need to continue
We support a space sustainability rating that will
innovating ways to do so without needlessly burdening
provide a new, innovative way of addressing the
companies— particularly smaller companies that do not
orbital challenge by encouraging responsible
yet have the bandwidth to comply with rigorous cyber
behavior in space through increasing the
requirements.
transparency of organizations’ debris mitigation
7) Orbital Debris, Proliferated LEO, and Space efforts in lieu of an international treaty or the
Sustainability establishment of an international body that
Several companies expressed their concerns regarding would set standards for space traffic
the crowding of low Earth orbit (LEO) and the management.
proliferation of orbital debris. One representative said
This rating, they added, should be used to make space
they wanted to see the U.S. take leadership on both
insurance more affordable for responsible space actors.
domestic and international fronts in space environment
management: crafting the policy that supports space
A representative of an on-orbit servicing startup had an
sustainability, investing in necessary R&D in debris
additional recommendation relating to space
removal technologies, creating and exploring economic
sustainability. They highlighted the need for the U.S.
models to incentivize sustainable behavior, and
government to “sweat their assets” by investing in
resolving international liability questions relating to on-
existing space assets rather than solely rolling out new
orbit servicing. They envisioned this framework evolving
technology:
via mini-lateral coalitions of like-minded nations
agreeing on certain responsibilities and principles.
The U.S. government has an awful lot of
Similar to the Artemis Accords, they added, it could later
satellites in space that are providing valuable
be opened to additional member states.
services today that would benefit from servicing.
However, the government is largely only
A launch company also mentioned challenges they
thinking about servicing for the future, but at
faced with increased orbital congestion and debris.
this moment in time, we have this stuff in orbit.
“During a certain launch, we were given a very low
We can use it, we can make it last longer, and it
number of opportunities for a launch because of all the
is very valuable. But the way the government is
debris that is up there. It worked out, but say there had
structured...they are not looking at preserving
been weather problems— we would have lost that
the stuff that we have. Because, of course, it is
launch, and every scrub costs a lot of money.” They
more sexy, more fun, to build new stuff. But I
mentioned the increasing presence of satellite
think the taxpayers—as a taxpayer myself—
constellations as a possibly problematic trend and said
would like to see the government sweat those
that “The whole of government— the FAA, FCC, NASA,
assets, make them last longer. Use them as
probably the DOD too, needs to tackle the proliferated
much as you can.
LEO issue and needs to engage internationally as well.”
While many topics discussed during the interviews
generated lively discussion, the issue of space
| 11

sustainability and orbital debris generated more specific Technology Outpaces Regulation
policy prescriptions than in other areas. It is unclear if
this is because the topic is generally popular in the field, The most prevalent theme throughout the interviews
so interviewees had ideas fresh in their memory, or if it was the difficulty of operating in a business
is an issue of particular concern to companies. environment that is regulated by dated laws and
policies. Technology’s speed and regulation’s slowness
8) Strategic Propellant Reserve causes friction that industry leaders experience
One startup representative presented a policy firsthand regardless of their company’s service
suggestion that emerged from recent events. Reflecting offerings. Launch companies find that export control
on Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the interviewee laws and federal acquisition regulations have not kept
discussed the “tremendous shortfall of supply of critical pace with the realities of the industry. For example,
propellant for the space industry”: some technologies that are available commercially are
still caught under export regulation’s most stringent
Xenon is a propellant that is used for electric
control category. Similarly other countries, notably
propulsion...the vast majority of both xenon and
Russia and China, are willing and able to sell launch
krypton is produced in Russia and the Ukraine,
services to states that the U.S. prohibits business with.
so the market price for xenon has gone up
On-orbit servicing companies are even more susceptible
tenfold in the last couple of months. What used
to this friction. Their technologies often have no clear
to cost us $2.5 million to fill a satellite might
regulatory home, and are often dual-use in nature,
now be costing us $25 million or more.
placing them in the crosshairs of a civil vs. military space
goals conflict. Interagency dynamics deepen this
Just as it does for oil and gas, the representative argued
challenge. Businesses specializing in emerging
that the U.S. government should have a strategic
technologies discussed challenges they faced in
reserve of these propellants to insulate both the
navigating the interagency process. They noted that a
government and private industry from shortfalls
streamlined licensing process characterized by
resulting from conflicts, natural disasters, or other
transparency would enable them to best perceive and
unforeseen production interruptions.
respond to regulators’ concerns. Several companies
suggested that the traditional system of licensing in the
Conclusion
U.S. does not align with currently available commercial
capabilities. Space technologies increasingly dip into
These conversations generated some key insights. It is
several—or no—regulatory buckets, resulting in a
important to note that the companies interviewed for
piecemeal licensing schema.
this study are not perfectly representative of the entire
sector, and the sample size is not large enough to draw
U.S. Foreign Threats and Private Industry
statistically reliable conclusions. All the same, the
themes that emerged from this inquiry elucidate some
An unexpected theme of the interviews was the role of
of the current goals and challenges of U.S. space
foreign threats in U.S. commercial space operations.
companies.
Strategic competition with China appears to be an area
of great concern—or at the very least, awareness—for
some policy and regulatory officials in the private space
sector. As previously mentioned, interviewees were not
| 12

prompted to comment on China or any U.S. adversaries. to know the rules of the road so that they could best
Nonetheless, competition with China and the threat of align their business strategies with government
Chinese cyber infiltration loomed large in some guidance, thereby crafting sustainable business plans.
interviewees’ minds. Chinese attempts to obtain
There are a couple of possible explanations for this
valuable IP by purchasing up startups via VC funding
outcome. The first is that this is not a representative
was one such threat. Interviewees also discussed how
sample of new space companies, and that we would
weak IT systems are prime targets for Chinese
discover that more new space do want deregulation if
infiltration, resulting in a de facto U.S. subsidization of
we were to have a more representative sample. The
Chinese R&D. Additionally, Russia’s ability to sell launch
second is that this is, in fact, a representative sample,
services to countries that the U.S. does not do business
and that new space companies do view policy
with was cited as another foreign threat that
development as a means to achieve the stability that
undermines U.S. non-proliferation goals. Interviewees
will help their companies thrive.
also discussed how a shift towards protectionism and
“buy American” policies could harm their supply chain
Another third explanation relates to the nature of the
stability, negatively impacting business operations.
U.S. space industry. It is the norm for career
Several companies also had a forward-looking view on
professionals in policy and regulatory roles at space
the need for better cyber protections in the industry. For
companies to have had prior experience in the public
some companies, this would take the form of more
sector, and vice versa. This was certainly the case for
oversight and more regulation. Others advocated for a
this sample of interviewees: many of the representatives
different type of regulation that imposes less of a
referenced prior governmental experience during the
burden on companies, such as threat-based prevention.
discussions. While respondents were asked to consider
all questions from the vantage point of their commercial
Old Space vs. New Space
roles, their public sector experience may have bled into
Another interesting finding was the relative harmony of their assessment, presenting answers that are overly
views between older and newer space companies. One sympathetic to the challenges of governance.
old space company expressed a perception that new
Taken in whole, the companies’ input reflects the
space companies were laser-focused on deregulation
growing pains of a rapidly developing industry. Space
and limited government oversight of their activities.
has always been a military domain, but the expansion of
While one new space company did identify several areas
commercial opportunities is making waves that
for less regulation, all the remaining new space
policymakers find difficult to ride. This challenge will
companies had far more to say on the topic of additional
only become more evident as global profits from space
regulation and policy guidance that they would like to
activities continue to rise. The Space Foundation reports
see. These companies viewed policy as a means to
that the global space industry stood at $424 billion in
enhance their standing with would-be customers and
2020.8 Estimates on the future value of the industry vary,
investors. Given that these startups often focused on
emerging areas of space activity, they expressed a desire
8 Via Michael Sheetz, “The space industry is on its way to reach $1 citi.html#:~:text=America%20and%20others.-
trillion in revenue by 2040, Citi says,” CNBC, May 21, 2022, ,The%20global%20space%20economy's%20value%20reached%20
 %24424%20billion%20in%202020,satellite%20sector%2C%E2%80%
1-trillion-in-revenue-by-2040- 9D%20Citi%20said.
| 13

but generally project that it will stand at $0.9–$1.5
trillion by 2040.9
Proactive U.S. space policy and law will help the country
obtain a larger portion of that growing income.
Exploring industry perspectives helps to understand the
realities of regulation and policy, and highlights key
pressure points. By attuning their efforts to these areas
of focus, policymakers can empower the commercial
industry to thrive, protecting innovation by minimizing
risk.
9 Ryan Brukardt, Jesse Klempner, Daniel Pacthod, and Brooke e%20and%20defense/our%20insights/the%20role%20of%20space
Stokes, “The role of space in driving sustainability, security, and %20in%20driving%20sustainability%20security%20and%20develop
development on Earth,” McKinsey & Company, May 19, 2022, ment%20on%20earth/the-role-of-space-in-driving-sustainability-
 security-and-development-on-earth-vf.pdf?shouldIndex=false, 9.
| 14

Appendix: Questions Asked During Interviews
Guiding research questions that were presented to all interviewees in advance of and during interviews:
● Which laws and policies most strongly affect your day-to-day workload?
● Are there areas where you want to see more regulation or policy guidance?
● Are there areas where you want to see less regulation or policy guidance?
● Has your business been affected by political elections at the federal, state, or local level?
Additional questions raised with some or all interviewees, depending on flow of discussion, the company’s characteristics,
and the interviewee’s role:
● Does your company have or pursue federal contracts? If yes, can you describe how you navigate the regulations
surrounding federal contracts?
● Can you tell me about your experience, if any, with ITAR and EAR? Do they affect your company’s ability to achieve its
business goals?
● Have you witnessed any interagency dynamics (IE, DOD v. NASA, Commerce v. DOS)? Have these affected your ability to
achieve your company’s business goals?
● How often do U.S. space laws hinder your company’s ability to conduct R&D?
a. Never
b. Sometimes
c. Frequently
d. Consistently
● How often does U.S. space law hinder your company's ability to achieve foreign partnerships?
a. Never
b. Sometimes
c. Frequently
d. Consistently
● How often does U.S. space law hinder your ability to sell a product to a foreign company?
a. Never
b. Sometimes
c. Frequently
d. Consistently
● Which U.S. agency/regulatory body do you work with most frequently? Please distinguish between agencies you work
with via contract vs. for regulatory purposes (licensing, consultation, etc).
a. Department of Transportation - Federal Aviation Authority
b. Congress - Federal Communications Commision
c. National Aeronautics and Space Administration
d. Executive Office of the President - OMB, Office of Science and Technology, or National Space Council
e. Department of Commerce - National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), including National
Environmental Satellite, Data and Information Service (NESDIS), the Office of Space Commerce (OSC), the Office
of Foreign Assets Control
f. U.S. Department of State - Office of Emerging Security Challenges, Bureau of Arms Control, Verification, and
Compliance (AVC); Office of Space Affairs, Bureau of Oceans and International Environment and Scientific Affairs
g. Department of Defense - Space Force; U.S. Space Command (USSPACECOM); Office of the Secretary of Defense
(OSD); other DOD components
h. Department of Energy - Lawrence Livermore, Los Alamos, and Sandia National Laboratories
i. The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States
| 15

About CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research organization dedicated to
advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding former U.S. Senator Sam Nunn (D-GA).
Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of values—nonpartisanship,
independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity and professionalism, and talent development.
CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research, analysis, and recommendations. We
organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media appearances that aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and
salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policymakers and the thinking of key influencers.
We work toward a vision of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS is ranked the number one think tank in the United States as well as the defense and national security center of excellence for
2016-2018 by the University of Pennsylvania’s annual think tank report.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be understood to be solely those of
the author(s).
| 16