This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
IAEA Safety Standards
for protecting people and the environment
Regulations for the
Safe Transport of
Radioactive Material
2018 Edition
Specific Safety Requirements
No. SSR-6 (Rev. 1)

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS AND RELATED PUBLICATIONS
IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
Under the terms of Article III of its Statute, the IAEA is authorized to establish or adopt
standards of safety for protection of health and minimization of danger to life and property, and
to provide for the application of these standards.
The publications by means of which the IAEA establishes standards are issued in the
IAEA Safety Standards Series. This series covers nuclear safety, radiation safety, transport
safety and waste safety. The publication categories in the series are Safety Fundamentals,
Safety Requirements and Safety Guides.
Information on the IAEA’s safety standards programme is available on the IAEA Internet
site

The site provides the texts in English of published and draft safety standards. The texts
of safety standards issued in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish, the IAEA Safety
Glossary and a status report for safety standards under development are also available. For
further information, please contact the IAEA at: Vienna International Centre, PO Box 100,
1400 Vienna, Austria.
All users of IAEA safety standards are invited to inform the IAEA of experience in their
use (e.g. as a basis for national regulations, for safety reviews and for training courses) for the
purpose of ensuring that they continue to meet users’ needs. Information may be provided via
the IAEA Internet site or by post, as above, or by email to Official.Mail@iaea.org.
RELATED PUBLICATIONS
The IAEA provides for the application of the standards and, under the terms of Articles III
and VIII.C of its Statute, makes available and fosters the exchange of information relating
to peaceful nuclear activities and serves as an intermediary among its Member States for this
purpose.
Reports on safety in nuclear activities are issued as Safety Reports, which provide
practical examples and detailed methods that can be used in support of the safety standards.
Other safety related IAEA publications are issued as Emergency Preparedness and
Response publications, Radiological Assessment Reports, the International Nuclear Safety
Group’s INSAG Reports, Technical Reports and TECDOCs. The IAEA also issues reports
on radiological accidents, training manuals and practical manuals, and other special safety
related publications.
Security related publications are issued in the IAEA Nuclear Security Series.
The IAEA Nuclear Energy Series comprises informational publications to encourage
and assist research on, and the development and practical application of, nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. It includes reports and guides on the status of and advances in technology,
and on experience, good practices and practical examples in the areas of nuclear power, the
nuclear fuel cycle, radioactive waste management and decommissioning.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REGULATIONS FOR THE
SAFE TRANSPORT OF
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
2018 Edition

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
The following States are Members of the International Atomic Energy Agency:
AFGHANISTAN GHANA PANAMA
ALBANIA GREECE PAPUA NEW GUINEA
ALGERIA GRENADA PARAGUAY
ANGOLA GUATEMALA PERU
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA GUYANA PHILIPPINES
ARGENTINA HAITI POLAND
ARMENIA HOLY SEE PORTUGAL
AUSTRALIA HONDURAS QATAR
AUSTRIA HUNGARY REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA
AZERBAIJAN ICELAND
ROMANIA
BAHAMAS INDIA
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
BAHRAIN INDONESIA
RWANDA
BANGLADESH IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
BARBADOS IRAQ SAINT VINCENT AND
BELARUS IRELAND THE GRENADINES
BELGIUM ISRAEL SAN MARINO
BELIZE ITALY SAUDI ARABIA
BENIN JAMAICA SENEGAL
BOLIVIA, PLURINATIONAL JAPAN SERBIA
STATE OF JORDAN SEYCHELLES
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA KAZAKHSTAN SIERRA LEONE
BOTSWANA KENYA SINGAPORE
BRAZIL KOREA, REPUBLIC OF SLOVAKIA
BRUNEI DARUSSALAM KUWAIT SLOVENIA
BULGARIA KYRGYZSTAN SOUTH AFRICA
BURKINA FASO LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC SPAIN
BURUNDI REPUBLIC SRI LANKA
CAMBODIA LATVIA SUDAN
CAMEROON LEBANON
SWAZILAND
CANADA LESOTHO
SWEDEN
CENTRAL AFRICAN LIBERIA
SWITZERLAND
REPUBLIC LIBYA
SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC
CHAD LIECHTENSTEIN
CHILE LITHUANIA TAJIKISTAN
CHINA LUXEMBOURG THAILAND
COLOMBIA MADAGASCAR THE FORMER YUGOSLAV
CONGO MALAWI REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
COSTA RICA MALAYSIA TOGO
CÔTE D’IVOIRE MALI TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
CROATIA MALTA TUNISIA
CUBA MARSHALL ISLANDS TURKEY
CYPRUS MAURITANIA TURKMENISTAN
CZECH REPUBLIC MAURITIUS UGANDA
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC MEXICO UKRAINE
OF THE CONGO MONACO UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
DENMARK MONGOLIA UNITED KINGDOM OF
DJIBOUTI MONTENEGRO GREAT BRITAIN AND
DOMINICA MOROCCO NORTHERN IRELAND
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC MOZAMBIQUE
UNITED REPUBLIC
ECUADOR MYANMAR
OF TANZANIA
EGYPT NAMIBIA
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
EL SALVADOR NEPAL
URUGUAY
ERITREA NETHERLANDS
ESTONIA NEW ZEALAND UZBEKISTAN
ETHIOPIA NICARAGUA VANUATU
FIJI NIGER VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN
FINLAND NIGERIA REPUBLIC OF
FRANCE NORWAY VIET NAM
GABON OMAN YEMEN
GEORGIA PAKISTAN ZAMBIA
GERMANY PALAU ZIMBABWE
The Agency’s Statute was approved on 23 by the Conference on the Statute of the
IAEA held at United Nations Headquarters, New York; it entered into force on 29 .
The Headquarters of the Agency are situated in Vienna. Its principal objective is “to accelerate and enlarge
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world’’.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS SERIES No. SSR-6 (Rev. 1)
REGULATIONS FOR THE
SAFE TRANSPORT OF
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
2018 EDITION
SPECIFIC SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
This Safety Requirements publication includes
a CD-ROM containing the IAEA Safety Glossary:
2007 Edition (2007) and the Fundamental Safety Principles (2006),
each in Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish versions.
The CD-ROM is also available for purchase separately.
See: 
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
VIENNA, 2018

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
COPYRIGHT NOTICE
All IAEA scientific and technical publications are protected by the terms of
the Universal Copyright Convention as adopted in 1952 (Berne) and as revised
in 1972 (Paris). The copyright has since been extended by the World Intellectual
Property Organization (Geneva) to include electronic and virtual intellectual
property. Permission to use whole or parts of texts contained in IAEA publications
in printed or electronic form must be obtained and is usually subject to royalty
agreements. Proposals for non-commercial reproductions and translations are
welcomed and considered on a case-by-case basis. Enquiries should be addressed
to the IAEA Publishing Section at:
Marketing and Sales Unit, Publishing Section
International Atomic Energy Agency
Vienna International Centre
PO Box 100
1400 Vienna, Austria
fax: +43 1 26007 22529
tel.: +43 1 2600 22417
email: sales.publications@iaea.org

© IAEA, 2018
Printed by the IAEA in Austria 
STI/PUB/1798

IAEA Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Names: International Atomic Energy Agency.
Title: Regulations for the safe transport of radioactive material, 2018 edition /
International Atomic Energy Agency.
Description: Vienna : International Atomic Energy Agency, 2018. | Series: IAEA
safety standards series, ISSN 1020–525X ; no. SSR-6 (Rev. 1) | Includes
bibliographical references.
Identifiers: IAEAL 18-01161 | ISBN 978–92–0–107917–6 (paperback : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Radioactive substances — Safety regulations. | Radioactive
substances — Transportation. | Radioactive substances — Law and legislation.
Classification: UDC 656.073 | STI/PUB/1798

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
FOREWORD
by Yukiya Amano
Director General
The IAEA’s Statute authorizes the Agency to “establish or adopt…
standards of safety for protection of health and minimization of danger to life and
property” — standards that the IAEA must use in its own operations, and which
States can apply by means of their regulatory provisions for nuclear and radiation
safety. The IAEA does this in consultation with the competent organs of the
United Nations and with the specialized agencies concerned. A comprehensive
set of high quality standards under regular review is a key element of a stable and
sustainable global safety regime, as is the IAEA’s assistance in their application.
The IAEA commenced its safety standards programme in 1958. The
emphasis placed on quality, fitness for purpose and continuous improvement
has led to the widespread use of the IAEA standards throughout the world. The
Safety Standards Series now includes unified Fundamental Safety Principles,
which represent an international consensus on what must constitute a high level
of protection and safety. With the strong support of the Commission on Safety
Standards, the IAEA is working to promote the global acceptance and use of its
standards.
Standards are only effective if they are properly applied in practice.
The IAEA’s safety services encompass design, siting and engineering safety,
operational safety, radiation safety, safe transport of radioactive material and
safe management of radioactive waste, as well as governmental organization,
regulatory matters and safety culture in organizations. These safety services assist
Member States in the application of the standards and enable valuable experience
and insights to be shared.
Regulating safety is a national responsibility, and many States have
decided to adopt the IAEA’s standards for use in their national regulations. For
parties to the various international safety conventions, IAEA standards provide
a consistent, reliable means of ensuring the effective fulfilment of obligations
under the conventions. The standards are also applied by regulatory bodies and
operators around the world to enhance safety in nuclear power generation and in
nuclear applications in medicine, industry, agriculture and research.
Safety is not an end in itself but a prerequisite for the purpose of the
protection of people in all States and of the environment — now and in the
future. The risks associated with ionizing radiation must be assessed and
controlled without unduly limiting the contribution of nuclear energy to equitable
and sustainable development. Governments, regulatory bodies and operators
everywhere must ensure that nuclear material and radiation sources are used
beneficially, safely and ethically. The IAEA safety standards are designed to
facilitate this, and I encourage all Member States to make use of them.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
PREFACE
This publication is a revision of IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6,
Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material, 2012 Edition.
The revision was undertaken by amending, adding and/or deleting specific
paragraphs. The paragraph numbering system used for the revision is as follows:
(1) Amended paragraphs retain their original paragraph number. A list of
amended paragraphs is given in the table below. As part of the revision
process, some minor modifications of an editorial nature may have also
been made. Editorial changes are not considered to be amendments to this
publication and are not included in the table.
(2) New paragraphs are indicated by using the number of the preceding
paragraph with the addition of an uppercase letter. This numbering system
is used only to indicate the location of new paragraphs within the text; it
is not intended to imply a link between the paragraphs. A list of all new
paragraphs in this publication is given in the table below.
(3) Where a paragraph has been deleted, the paragraph number is retained
together with an explanatory comment. A list of all deleted paragraphs in
this publication is given in the table below.
Summary of changed paragraphs in this publication
Amended paragraphs 101, 102, 104, 244, 304, 305, 309, 409, 411, 413, 414,
423, 424, 427, 503, 509, 510, 513, 514, 515, 516, 517,
520, 522, 523, 524, 527, 528, 529, 540, 543, 546, 566,
571, 572, 573, 575, 579, 605, 617, 622, 624, 626, 627,
628, 629, 630, 648, 659, 671, 680, 701, 716, 809, 817,
819, 820, 823, 825, 832, 833, 838
New paragraphs 220A, 524A, 536A, 613A, 821A, 827A
Deleted paragraphs 233, 601
In addition, the proper shipping name of UN number 2913 has been
modified to include the new group of surface contaminated objects SCO-III; this
is indicated in Table 1 of this publication. Furthermore, Table 2 of this publication
has been extended to include basic radionuclide values for the radionuclides
Ba-135m, Ge-69, Ir-193m, Ni-57, Sr-83, Tb-149 and Tb-161.
A table of all the changes made is available upon request to the IAEA
(Safety.Standards@iaea.org).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
THE IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
BACKGROUND
Radioactivity is a natural phenomenon and natural sources of radiation are
features of the environment. Radiation and radioactive substances have many
beneficial applications, ranging from power generation to uses in medicine,
industry and agriculture. The radiation risks to workers and the public and to the
environment that may arise from these applications have to be assessed and, if
necessary, controlled.
Activities such as the medical uses of radiation, the operation of nuclear
installations, the production, transport and use of radioactive material, and the
management of radioactive waste must therefore be subject to standards of safety.
Regulating safety is a national responsibility. However, radiation risks may
transcend national borders, and international cooperation serves to promote and
enhance safety globally by exchanging experience and by improving capabilities
to control hazards, to prevent accidents, to respond to emergencies and to mitigate
any harmful consequences.
States have an obligation of diligence and duty of care, and are expected to
fulfil their national and international undertakings and obligations.
International safety standards provide support for States in meeting their
obligations under general principles of international law, such as those relating to
environmental protection. International safety standards also promote and assure
confidence in safety and facilitate international commerce and trade.
A global nuclear safety regime is in place and is being continuously
improved. IAEA safety standards, which support the implementation of binding
international instruments and national safety infrastructures, are a cornerstone
of this global regime. The IAEA safety standards constitute a useful tool
for contracting parties to assess their performance under these international
conventions.
THE IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
The status of the IAEA safety standards derives from the IAEA’s Statute,
which authorizes the IAEA to establish or adopt, in consultation and, where
appropriate, in collaboration with the competent organs of the United Nations
and with the specialized agencies concerned, standards of safety for protection of
health and minimization of danger to life and property, and to provide for their
application.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
With a view to ensuring the protection of people and the environment
from harmful effects of ionizing radiation, the IAEA safety standards establish
fundamental safety principles, requirements and measures to control the radiation
exposure of people and the release of radioactive material to the environment, to
restrict the likelihood of events that might lead to a loss of control over a nuclear
reactor core, nuclear chain reaction, radioactive source or any other source of
radiation, and to mitigate the consequences of such events if they were to occur.
The standards apply to facilities and activities that give rise to radiation risks,
including nuclear installations, the use of radiation and radioactive sources, the
transport of radioactive material and the management of radioactive waste.
Safety measures and security measures1 have in common the aim of
protecting human life and health and the environment. Safety measures and
security measures must be designed and implemented in an integrated manner
so that security measures do not compromise safety and safety measures do not
compromise security.
The IAEA safety standards reflect an international consensus on what
constitutes a high level of safety for protecting people and the environment
from harmful effects of ionizing radiation. They are issued in the IAEA Safety
Standards Series, which has three categories (see Fig. 1).
Safety Fundamentals
Safety Fundamentals present the fundamental safety objective and principles
of protection and safety, and provide the basis for the safety requirements.
Safety Requirements
An integrated and consistent set of Safety Requirements establishes
the requirements that must be met to ensure the protection of people and the
environment, both now and in the future. The requirements are governed by the
objective and principles of the Safety Fundamentals. If the requirements are not
met, measures must be taken to reach or restore the required level of safety. The
format and style of the requirements facilitate their use for the establishment, in a
harmonized manner, of a national regulatory framework. Requirements, including
numbered ‘overarching’ requirements, are expressed as ‘shall’ statements. Many
requirements are not addressed to a specific party, the implication being that the
appropriate parties are responsible for fulfilling them.
1 See also publications issued in the IAEA Nuclear Security Series.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Safety Fundamentals
Fundamental Safety Principles
General Safety Requirements Specific Safety Requirements
Part 1. Governmental, Legal and 1. Site Evaluation for
Regulatory Framework for Safety Nuclear Installations
Part 2. Leadership and Management
2. Safety of Nuclear Power Plants
for Safety
2/1 Design
Part 3. Radiation Protection and 2/2 Commissioning and Operation
Safety of Radiation Sources
Part 4. Safety Assessment for 3. Safety of Research Reactors
Facilities and Activities
Part 5. Predisposal Management 4. Safety of Nuclear Fuel
of Radioactive Waste Cycle Facilities
Part 6. Decommissioning and 5. Safety of Radioactive Waste
Termination of Activities Disposal Facilities
Part 7. Emergency Preparedness 6. Safe Transport of
and Response Radioactive Material
Collection of Safety Guides
FIG. 1. The long term structure of the IAEA Safety Standards Series.
Safety Guides
Safety Guides provide recommendations and guidance on how to comply
with the safety requirements, indicating an international consensus that it
is necessary to take the measures recommended (or equivalent alternative
measures). The Safety Guides present international good practices, and
increasingly they reflect best practices, to help users striving to achieve high
levels of safety. The recommendations provided in Safety Guides are expressed
as ‘should’ statements.
APPLICATION OF THE IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
The principal users of safety standards in IAEA Member States are
regulatory bodies and other relevant national authorities. The IAEA safety
standards are also used by co-sponsoring organizations and by many organizations
that design, construct and operate nuclear facilities, as well as organizations
involved in the use of radiation and radioactive sources.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
The IAEA safety standards are applicable, as relevant, throughout the entire
lifetime of all facilities and activities — existing and new — utilized for peaceful
purposes and to protective actions to reduce existing radiation risks. They can be
used by States as a reference for their national regulations in respect of facilities
and activities.
The IAEA’s Statute makes the safety standards binding on the IAEA in
relation to its own operations and also on States in relation to IAEA assisted
operations.
The IAEA safety standards also form the basis for the IAEA’s safety review
services, and they are used by the IAEA in support of competence building,
including the development of educational curricula and training courses.
International conventions contain requirements similar to those in
the IAEA safety standards and make them binding on contracting parties.
The IAEA safety standards, supplemented by international conventions, industry
standards and detailed national requirements, establish a consistent basis for
protecting people and the environment. There will also be some special aspects
of safety that need to be assessed at the national level. For example, many of
the IAEA safety standards, in particular those addressing aspects of safety in
planning or design, are intended to apply primarily to new facilities and activities.
The requirements established in the IAEA safety standards might not be fully
met at some existing facilities that were built to earlier standards. The way in
which IAEA safety standards are to be applied to such facilities is a decision for
individual States.
The scientific considerations underlying the IAEA safety standards provide
an objective basis for decisions concerning safety; however, decision makers
must also make informed judgements and must determine how best to balance
the benefits of an action or an activity against the associated radiation risks and
any other detrimental impacts to which it gives rise.
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS FOR THE IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
The preparation and review of the safety standards involves the IAEA
Secretariat and five safety standards committees, for emergency preparedness
and response (EPReSC) (as of 2016), nuclear safety (NUSSC), radiation
safety (RASSC), the safety of radioactive waste (WASSC) and the safe
transport of radioactive material (TRANSSC), and a Commission on Safety
Standards (CSS) which oversees the IAEA safety standards programme
(see Fig. 2).
All IAEA Member States may nominate experts for the safety standards
committees and may provide comments on draft standards. The membership of

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Outline and work plan
prepared by the Secretariat;
review by the safety standards
committees and the CSS
Secretariat and
consultants:
drafting of new or revision
of existing safety standard
Draft
Review by Draft
safety standards Member States
committee(s)
Comments
Final draft
Endorsement
by the CSS
FIG. 2. The process for developing a new safety standard or revising an existing standard.
the Commission on Safety Standards is appointed by the Director General and
includes senior governmental officials having responsibility for establishing
national standards.
A management system has been established for the processes of planning,
developing, reviewing, revising and establishing the IAEA safety standards.
It articulates the mandate of the IAEA, the vision for the future application of
the safety standards, policies and strategies, and corresponding functions and
responsibilities.
INTERACTION WITH OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
The findings of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR) and the recommendations of international

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
expert bodies, notably the International Commission on Radiological Protection
(ICRP), are taken into account in developing the IAEA safety standards. Some
safety standards are developed in cooperation with other bodies in the United
Nations system or other specialized agencies, including the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Environment Programme,
the International Labour Organization, the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency, the
Pan American Health Organization and the World Health Organization.
INTERPRETATION OF THE TEXT
Safety related terms are to be understood as defined in the IAEA Safety
Glossary (see Otherwise,
words are used with the spellings and meanings assigned to them in the latest
edition of The Concise Oxford Dictionary. For Safety Guides, the English version
of the text is the authoritative version.
The background and context of each standard in the IAEA Safety
Standards Series and its objective, scope and structure are explained in Section 1,
Introduction, of each publication.
Material for which there is no appropriate place in the body text
(e.g. material that is subsidiary to or separate from the body text, is included
in support of statements in the body text, or describes methods of calculation,
procedures or limits and conditions) may be presented in appendices or annexes.
An appendix, if included, is considered to form an integral part of the
safety standard. Material in an appendix has the same status as the body text,
and the IAEA assumes authorship of it. Annexes and footnotes to the main text,
if included, are used to provide practical examples or additional information or
explanation. Annexes and footnotes are not integral parts of the main text. Annex
material published by the IAEA is not necessarily issued under its authorship;
material under other authorship may be presented in annexes to the safety
standards. Extraneous material presented in annexes is excerpted and adapted as
necessary to be generally useful.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
CONTENTS
SECTION I. INTRODUCTION .............................. 1
Background (101–103) ......................................... 1
Objective (104–105) ........................................... 2
Scope (106–110) .............................................. 3
Structure (111) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
SECTION II. DEFINITIONS (201–249) ........................ 5
SECTION III. GENERAL PROVISIONS ....................... 15
Radiation protection (301–303) .................................. 15
Emergency response (304–305) .................................. 15
Management system (306) ...................................... 16
Compliance assurance (307–308) ................................. 16
Non-compliance (309) ......................................... 16
Special arrangement (310) ...................................... 17
Training (311–315) ............................................ 17
SECTION IV. ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION ....... 21
General provisions (401) ....................................... 21
Basic radionuclide values (402) .................................. 21
Determination of basic radionuclide values (403–407) ................ 21
Classification of material (408–420) .............................. 46
Classification of packages (421–433) .............................. 50
Special arrangement (434) ...................................... 54
SECTION V. REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS
FOR TRANSPORT ............................. 55
Requirements before the first shipment (501) ....................... 55
Requirements before each shipment (502–503) ...................... 55
Transport of other goods (504–506) ............................... 56
Other dangerous properties of contents (507) ........................ 57
Requirements and controls for contamination and for
leaking packages (508–514) ................................... 57
Requirements and controls for transport of excepted packages (515–516).. 58

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Requirements and controls for transport of LSA material and SCO in
industrial packages or unpackaged (517–522)...................... 59
Determination of transport index (523–524A) ....................... 60
Determination of criticality safety index for consignments, freight
containers and overpacks (525) ................................. 63
Limits on transport index, criticality safety index and dose rates for
packages and overpacks (526–528) .............................. 63
Categories (529) .............................................. 63
Marking, labelling and placarding (530–544)........................ 64
Consignor’s responsibilities (545–561)............................. 72
Transport and storage in transit (562–581) .......................... 78
Customs operations (582) ....................................... 85
Undeliverable consignments (583) ................................ 85
Retention and availability of transport documents by carriers (584–588) .. 85
SECTION VI. REQUIREMENTS FOR RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
AND FOR PACKAGINGS AND PACKAGES ....... 87
Requirements for radioactive material (601–605) .................... 87
Requirements for material excepted from fissile classification (606)...... 88
General requirements for all packagings and packages (607–618)........ 88
Additional requirements for packages transported by air (619–621) ...... 90
Requirements for excepted packages (622).......................... 90
Requirements for industrial packages (623–630) ..................... 90
Requirements for packages containing uranium hexafluoride (631–634) .. 93
Requirements for Type A packages (635–651) ....................... 94
Requirements for Type B(U) packages (652–666) .................... 96
Requirements for Type B(M) packages (667–668) .................... 99
Requirements for Type C packages (669–672) ....................... 99
Requirements for packages containing fissile material (673–686) ........ 100
SECTION VII. TEST PROCEDURES ........................... 107
Demonstration of compliance (701–702) ........................... 107
Leaching test for low dispersible radioactive material (703) ............ 107
Tests for special form radioactive material (704–711) ................. 108
Tests for low dispersible radioactive material (712) ................... 110
Tests for packages (713–737) .................................... 110

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VIII. APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE
REQUIREMENTS ............................. 119
General (801–802) ............................................ 119
Approval of special form radioactive material and low dispersible
radioactive material (803–804) ................................. 120
Approval of material excepted from fissile classification (805–806) ...... 120
Approval of package designs (807–816)............................ 121
Approval of alternative activity limits for an exempt consignment of
instruments or articles (817–818) ............................... 124
Transitional arrangements (819–823) .............................. 125
Notification and registration of serial numbers (824) .................. 127
Approval of shipments (825–828) ................................ 128
Approval of shipments under special arrangement (829–831) ........... 129
Competent authority certificates of approval (832–833) ............... 130
Contents of certificates of approval (834–839) ...................... 132
Validation of certificates (840) ................................... 139
REFERENCES ............................................... 141
ANNEX I: SUMMARY OF APPROVAL AND PRIOR
NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.................. 145
ANNEX II: CONVERSION FACTORS AND PREFIXES........... 151
ANNEX III: SUMMARY OF CONSIGNMENTS REQUIRING
EXCLUSIVE USE ................................ 153
CONTRIBUTORS TO DRAFTING AND REVIEW (2018) ............ 155
INDEX ..................................................... 159

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1. Excerpts from the list of UN numbers, proper shipping
names and descriptions ............................ 22
Table 2. Basic radionuclide values ........................... 25
Table 3. Basic radionuclide values for unknown radionuclides or
mixtures ........................................ 46
Table 4. Activity limits for excepted packages ................. 51
Table 5. Industrial package requirements for LSA material, SCO-I
and SCO-II ...................................... 61
Table 6. Conveyance activity limits for LSA material and SCO in
industrial packages or unpackaged . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Table 7. Multiplication factors for tanks, freight containers and
unpackaged LSA-I, SCO-I and SCO-III ............... 62
Table 8. Categories of packages, overpacks and freight containers .. 64
Table 9. UN marking for packages and overpacks .............. 65
Table 10. Transport index limits for freight containers and
conveyances not under exclusive use .................. 80
Table 11. CSI limits for freight containers and conveyances
containing fissile material .......................... 81
Table 12. Insolation data ................................... 97
Table 13. Values of Z for calculation of CSI in accordance with
para. 674 ........................................ 101
Table 14. Free drop distance for testing packages to normal
conditions of transport ............................. 113

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Section I
INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND
101. These Regulations establish standards of safety which provide an acceptable
level of control of the radiation, criticality and thermal hazards to people, property
and the environment that are associated with the transport of radioactive material.
These Regulations are based on: the Fundamental Safety Principles, IAEA Safety
Standards Series No. SF-1 [1], jointly sponsored by the European Atomic Energy
Community (EAEC), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO), the IAEA, the International Labour Organization (ILO), the
International Maritime Organization (IMO), the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency
(NEA), the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Health Organization (WHO);
Radiation Protection and Safety of Radiation Sources: International Basic Safety
Standards, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 3 [2], jointly sponsored
by the European Commission (EC), FAO, IAEA, ILO, OECD/NEA, PAHO,
UNEP and WHO; Governmental, Legal and Regulatory Framework for Safety,
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 1 (Rev. 1) [3]; and Leadership and
Management for Safety, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 2 [4].
Thus, compliance with these Regulations is deemed to satisfy the principles of
GSR Part 3 [2] in respect of transport. In accordance with SF-1 [1], the prime
responsibility for safety must rest with the person or organization responsible for
facilities and activities that give rise to radiation risks.
102. This Safety Standard is supplemented by a hierarchy of Safety
Guides, including: Advisory Material for the IAEA Regulations for the Safe
Transport of Radioactive Material (2012 Edition), IAEA Safety Standards
Series No. SSG-26 [5] (the 2018 edition that will coincide with this edition
of the Regulations is under development); Planning and Preparing for
Emergency Response to Transport Accidents Involving Radioactive Material,
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. TS-G-1.2 (ST-3) [6]; Compliance Assurance
for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material, IAEA Safety Standards Series
No. TS-G-1.5 [7]; The Management System for the Safe Transport of Radioactive
Material, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. TS-G-1.4 [8]; Radiation Protection
Programmes for the Transport of Radioactive Material, IAEA Safety Standards
Series No. TS-G-1.3 [9]; and Schedules of Provisions of the IAEA Regulations
for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material (2012 Edition), IAEA Safety

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION I
Standards Series No. SSG-33 [10] (the 2018 edition that will coincide with this
edition of the Regulations is under development).
103. In certain parts of these Regulations, a particular action is prescribed,
but the responsibility for carrying out the action is not specifically assigned to
any particular person. Such responsibility may vary according to the laws and
customs of different countries and the international conventions into which these
countries have entered. For the purpose of these Regulations, it is not necessary
to make this assignment, but only to identify the action itself. It remains the
prerogative of each government to assign this responsibility.
OBJECTIVE
104. The objective of these Regulations is to establish requirements that must
be satisfied to ensure safety and to protect people, property, and the environment
from harmful effects of ionizing radiation during the transport of radioactive
material. This protection is achieved by requiring:
(a) Containment of the radioactive contents;
(b) Control of external dose rate;
(c) Prevention of criticality;
(d) Prevention of damage caused by heat.
These requirements are satisfied firstly by applying a graded approach to contents
limits for packages and conveyances and to performance standards applied
to package designs, depending upon the hazard of the radioactive contents.
Secondly, they are satisfied by imposing conditions on the design and operation
of packages and on the maintenance of packagings, including consideration of
the nature of the radioactive contents. Thirdly, they are satisfied by requiring
administrative controls, including, where appropriate, approval by competent
authorities. Finally, further protection is provided by making arrangements for
planning and preparing emergency response to protect people, property and the
environment.
105. In the transport of radioactive material, the safety of people and the
protection of property and the environment are assured when these Regulations
are complied with. Confidence in this regard is achieved through management
system and compliance assurance programmes.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
INTRODUCTION
SCOPE
106. These Regulations apply to the transport of radioactive material by all
modes on land, water, or in the air, including transport that is incidental to the use
of the radioactive material. Transport comprises all operations and conditions
associated with, and involved in, the movement of radioactive material; these
include the design, manufacture, maintenance and repair of packaging, and
the preparation, consigning, loading, carriage including in-transit storage,
shipment after storage, unloading and receipt at the final destination of loads of
radioactive material and packages. A graded approach is applied in specifying
the performance standards in these Regulations, which are characterized in terms
of three general severity levels:
(a) Routine conditions of transport (incident free);
(b) Normal conditions of transport (minor mishaps);
(c) Accident conditions of transport.
107. These Regulations do not apply to any of the following:
(a) Radioactive material that is an integral part of the means of transport.
(b) Radioactive material moved within an establishment that is subject to
appropriate safety regulations in force in the establishment and where the
movement does not involve public roads or railways.
(c) Radioactive material implanted or incorporated into a person or live animal
for diagnosis or treatment.
(d) Radioactive material in or on a person who is to be transported for medical
treatment because the person has been subject to accidental or deliberate
intake of radioactive material or to contamination.
(e) Radioactive material in consumer products that have received regulatory
approval, following their sale to the end user.
(f) Natural material and ores containing naturally occurring radionuclides,
which may have been processed, provided the activity concentration of
the material does not exceed 10 times the values specified in Table 2, or
calculated in accordance with paras 403(a) and 404–407. For natural
materials and ores containing naturally occurring radionuclides that are not
in secular equilibrium the calculation of the activity concentration shall be
performed in accordance with para. 405.
(g) Non-radioactive solid objects with radioactive substances present on any
surface in quantities not in excess of the levels defined in para. 214.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION I
108. These Regulations do not specify controls such as routeing or physical
protection that may be instituted for reasons other than radiological safety. Any
such controls shall take into account radiological and non-radiological hazards,
and shall not detract from the standards of safety that these Regulations are
intended to provide.
109. Measures should be taken to ensure that radioactive material is kept secure
in transport so as to prevent theft or damage and to ensure that control of the
material is not relinquished inappropriately (see Annex I).
110. For radioactive material having subsidiary hazards, and for transport
of radioactive material with other dangerous goods, the relevant transport
regulations for dangerous goods shall apply in addition to these Regulations.
STRUCTURE
111. This publication is structured so that Section II defines the terms that are
required for the purposes of these Regulations; Section III provides general
provisions; Section IV provides activity limits and material restrictions used
throughout these Regulations; Section V provides requirements and controls
for transport; Section VI provides requirements for radioactive material and for
packagings and packages; Section VII provides requirements for test procedures;
and Section VIII provides requirements for approvals and administration.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Section II
DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply for the purposes of these Regulations:
A and A
1 2
201. A shall mean the activity value of special form radioactive material that

is listed in Table 2 or derived in Section IV and is used to determine the activity
limits for the requirements of these Regulations. A shall mean the activity value

of radioactive material, other than special form radioactive material, that is
listed in Table 2 or derived in Section IV and is used to determine the activity
limits for the requirements of these Regulations.
Aircraft
202. Cargo aircraft shall mean any aircraft, other than a passenger aircraft, that
carries goods or property.
203. Passenger aircraft shall mean an aircraft that carries any person other
than a crew member, a carrier’s employee in an official capacity, an authorized
representative of an appropriate national authority, or a person accompanying a
consignment or other cargo.
Approval
204. Multilateral approval shall mean approval by the relevant competent
authority of the country of origin of the design or shipment, as applicable,
and also, where the consignment is to be transported through or into any other
country, approval by the competent authority of that country.
205. Unilateral approval shall mean an approval of a design that is required to
be given by the competent authority of the country of origin of the design only.
Carrier
206. Carrier shall mean any person, organization or government undertaking the
carriage of radioactive material by any means of transport. The term includes
both carriers for hire or reward (known as common or contract carriers in some

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION II
countries) and carriers on own account (known as private carriers in some
countries).
Competent authority
207. Competent authority shall mean any body or authority designated
or otherwise recognized as such for any purpose in connection with these
Regulations.
Compliance assurance
208. Compliance assurance shall mean a systematic programme of measures
applied by a competent authority that is aimed at ensuring that the provisions of
these Regulations are met in practice.
Confinement system
209. Confinement system shall mean the assembly of fissile material and
packaging components specified by the designer and agreed to by the competent
authority as intended to preserve criticality safety.
Consignee
210. Consignee shall mean any person, organization or government that is
entitled to take delivery of a consignment.
Consignment
211. Consignment shall mean any package or packages, or load of radioactive
material, presented by a consignor for transport.
Consignor
212. Consignor shall mean any person, organization or government that prepares
a consignment for transport.
Containment system
213. Containment system shall mean the assembly of components of the
packaging specified by the designer as intended to retain the radioactive material
during transport.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
DEFINITIONS
Contamination
214. Contamination shall mean the presence of a radioactive substance on a
surface in quantities in excess of 0.4 Bq/cm2 for beta and gamma emitters and
low toxicity alpha emitters, or 0.04 Bq/cm2 for all other alpha emitters.
215. Non-fixed contamination shall mean contamination that can be removed
from a surface during routine conditions of transport.
216. Fixed contamination shall mean contamination other than non-fixed
contamination.
Conveyance
217. Conveyance shall mean:
(a) For transport by road or rail: any vehicle;
(b) For transport by water: any vessel, or any hold, compartment, or defined
deck area of a vessel;
(c) For transport by air: any aircraft.
Criticality safety index
218. Criticality safety index (CSI) assigned to a package, overpack or freight
container containing fissile material shall mean a number that is used to provide
control over the accumulation of packages, overpacks or freight containers
containing fissile material.
Defined deck area
219. Defined deck area shall mean the area of the weather deck of a vessel, or of
a vehicle deck of a roll-on/roll-off ship or ferry, that is allocated for the stowage
of radioactive material.
Design
220. Design shall mean the description of fissile material excepted under
para. 417(f), special form radioactive material, low dispersible radioactive
material, package or packaging that enables such an item to be fully identified.
The description may include specifications, engineering drawings, reports

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION II
demonstrating compliance with regulatory requirements, and other relevant
documentation.
Dose rate
220A. Dose rate shall mean the ambient dose equivalent or the directional dose
equivalent, as appropriate, per unit time, measured at the point of interest.
Exclusive use
221. Exclusive use shall mean the sole use, by a single consignor, of a conveyance
or of a large freight container, in respect of which all initial, intermediate and
final loading and unloading and shipment are carried out in accordance with the
directions of the consignor or consignee, where so required by these Regulations.
Fissile nuclides and fissile material
222. Fissile nuclides shall mean uranium-233, uranium-235, plutonium-239
and plutonium-241. Fissile material shall mean a material containing any of the
fissile nuclides. Excluded from the definition of fissile material are the following:
(a) Natural uranium or depleted uranium that is unirradiated;
(b) Natural uranium or depleted uranium that has been irradiated in thermal
reactors only;
(c) Material with fissile nuclides less than a total of 0.25 g;
(d) Any combination of (a), (b) and/or (c).
These exclusions are only valid if there is no other material with fissile nuclides
in the package or in the consignment if shipped unpackaged.
Freight container — small, large
223. Freight container shall mean an article of transport equipment that is of
a permanent character and is strong enough to be suitable for repeated use;
specially designed to facilitate the transport of goods by one or other modes of
transport without intermediate reloading, designed to be secured and/or readily
handled, and having fittings for these purposes. The term freight container does
not include the vehicle.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
DEFINITIONS
A small freight container shall mean a freight container that has an internal
volume of not more than 3 m3. A large freight container shall mean a freight
container that has an internal volume of more than 3 m3.
Intermediate bulk container
224. Intermediate bulk container (IBC) shall mean a portable packaging that:
(a) Has a capacity of not more than 3 m3;
(b) Is designed for mechanical handling;
(c) Is resistant to the stresses produced during handling and transport, as
determined by tests.
Low dispersible radioactive material
225. Low dispersible radioactive material shall mean either a solid radioactive
material or a solid radioactive material in a sealed capsule that has limited
dispersibility and is not in powder form.
Low specific activity material
226. Low specific activity (LSA) material shall mean radioactive material that
by its nature has a limited specific activity, or radioactive material for which
limits of estimated average specific activity apply. External shielding materials
surrounding the LSA material shall not be considered in determining the
estimated average specific activity.
Low toxicity alpha emitters
227. Low toxicity alpha emitters are: natural uranium, depleted uranium, natural
thorium, uranium-235, uranium-238, thorium-232, thorium-228 and thorium-230
when contained in ores, or in physical and chemical concentrates; or alpha
emitters with a half-life of less than 10 days.
Management system
228. Management system shall mean a set of interrelated or interacting elements
for establishing policies and objectives and enabling the objectives to be achieved
in an efficient and effective manner.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION II
Maximum normal operating pressure
229. Maximum normal operating pressure shall mean the maximum pressure
above atmospheric pressure at mean sea level that would develop in the
containment system in a period of one year under the conditions of temperature
and solar radiation corresponding to the environmental conditions in the absence
of venting, external cooling by an ancillary system, or operational controls during
transport.
Overpack
230. Overpack shall mean an enclosure used by a single consignor to contain
one or more packages, and to form one unit for convenience of handling and
stowage during transport.
Package
231. Package shall mean the complete product of the packing operation,
consisting of the packaging and its contents prepared for transport. The types of
package covered by these Regulations that are subject to the activity limits and
material restrictions of Section IV and meet the corresponding requirements are:
(a) Excepted package;
(b) Industrial package Type 1 (Type IP-1);
(c) Industrial package Type 2 (Type IP-2);
(d) Industrial package Type 3 (Type IP-3);
(e) Type A package;
(f) Type B(U) package;
(g) Type B(M) package;
(h) Type C package.
Packages containing fissile material or uranium hexafluoride are subject to
additional requirements.
Packaging
232. Packaging shall mean one or more receptacles and any other components or
materials necessary for the receptacles to perform containment and other safety
functions.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
DEFINITIONS
Radiation level
233. This paragraph was deleted and its content has been transferred to the new
para. 220A.
Radiation protection programme
234. Radiation protection programme shall mean systematic arrangements that
are aimed at providing adequate consideration of radiation protection measures.
Radioactive contents
235. Radioactive contents shall mean the radioactive material together with any
contaminated or activated solids, liquids and gases within the packaging.
Radioactive material
236. Radioactive material shall mean any material containing radionuclides
where both the activity concentration and the total activity in the consignment
exceed the values specified in paras 402–407.
Shipment
237. Shipment shall mean the specific movement of a consignment from origin
to destination.
Special arrangement
238. Special arrangement shall mean those provisions, approved by the
competent authority, under which consignments that do not satisfy all the
applicable requirements of these Regulations may be transported.
Special form radioactive material
239. Special form radioactive material shall mean either an indispersible solid
radioactive material or a sealed capsule containing radioactive material.
Specific activity
240. Specific activity of a radionuclide shall mean the activity per unit mass
of that nuclide. The specific activity of a material shall mean the activity per

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION II
unit mass of the material in which the radionuclides are essentially uniformly
distributed.
Surface contaminated object
241. Surface contaminated object (SCO) shall mean a solid object that is not
itself radioactive but which has radioactive material distributed on its surface.
Tank
242. Tank shall mean a portable tank (including a tank container), a road tank
vehicle, a rail tank wagon or a receptacle that contains solids, liquids, or gases,
having a capacity of not less than 450 L when used for the transport of gases.
Through or into
243. Through or into shall mean through or into the countries in which a
consignment is transported but specifically excludes countries over which a
consignment is carried by air, provided that there are no scheduled stops in those
countries.
Transport index
244. Transport index (TI) assigned to a package, overpack or freight container,
or to unpackaged LSA-I, SCO-I or SCO-III, shall mean a number that is used to
provide control over radiation exposure.
Unirradiated thorium
245. Unirradiated thorium shall mean thorium containing not more than 10−7 g
of uranium-233 per gram of thorium-232.
Unirradiated uranium
246. Unirradiated uranium shall mean uranium containing not more than
2×103 Bq of plutonium per gram of uranium-235, not more than 9×106 Bq
of fission products per gram of uranium-235 and not more than 5×10−3 g of
uranium-236 per gram of uranium-235.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
DEFINITIONS
Uranium — natural, depleted, enriched
247. Natural uranium shall mean uranium (which may be chemically
separated) containing the naturally occurring distribution of uranium isotopes
(approximately 99.28% uranium-238 and 0.72% uranium-235, by mass).
Depleted uranium shall mean uranium containing a lesser mass percentage of
uranium-235 than natural uranium.
Enriched uranium shall mean uranium containing a greater mass percentage
of uranium-235 than 0.72%. In all cases, a very small mass percentage of
uranium-234 is present.
Vehicle
248. Vehicle shall mean a road vehicle (including an articulated vehicle, i.e. a
tractor and semi-trailer combination), railroad car or railway wagon. Each trailer
shall be considered as a separate vehicle.
Vessel
249. Vessel shall mean any sea-going vessel or inland waterway craft used for
carrying cargo.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Section III
GENERAL PROVISIONS
RADIATION PROTECTION
301. Doses to persons shall be below the relevant dose limits. Protection and
safety shall be optimized in order that the magnitude of individual doses, the
number of persons exposed and the likelihood of incurring exposure shall be
kept as low as reasonably achievable, economic and social factors being taken
into account, within the restriction that the doses to individuals are subject to
dose constraints. A structured and systematic approach shall be adopted and shall
include consideration of the interfaces between transport and other activities.
302. A radiation protection programme shall be established for the transport
of radioactive material. The nature and extent of the measures to be employed
in the programme shall be related to the magnitude and likelihood of radiation
exposure. The programme shall incorporate the requirements of paras 301,
303–305, 311 and 562. Programme documents shall be available, on request, for
inspection by the relevant competent authority.
303. For occupational exposures arising from transport activities, where it is
assessed that the effective dose either:
(a) Is likely to be between 1 and 6 mSv in a year, a dose assessment programme
via workplace monitoring or individual monitoring shall be conducted; or
(b) Is likely to exceed 6 mSv in a year, individual monitoring shall be
conducted.
When workplace monitoring or individual monitoring is conducted, appropriate
records shall be kept.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
304. In the event of a nuclear or radiological emergency during the transport
of radioactive material, provisions as established by relevant national and/or
international organizations shall be observed to protect people, property and the
environment. Consignors and carriers shall establish, in advance, arrangements
for preparedness and response in accordance with the national and/or international

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION III
requirements and in a consistent and coordinated manner with the national and/or
international emergency arrangements and emergency management system.
305. The arrangements for preparedness and response shall be based on the
graded approach and shall take into consideration the identified hazards and their
potential consequences, including the formation of other dangerous substances
that may result from the reaction between the contents of a consignment and the
environment in the event of a nuclear or radiological emergency. Guidance for
the establishment of such arrangements is contained in Refs [6, 11–14].
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
306. A management system based on international, national or other standards
acceptable to the competent authority shall be established and implemented for
all activities within the scope of the Regulations, as identified in para. 106, to
ensure compliance with the relevant provisions of these Regulations. Certification
that the design specification has been fully implemented shall be available to the
competent authority. The manufacturer, consignor or user shall be prepared:
(a) To provide facilities for inspection during manufacture and use;
(b) To demonstrate compliance with these Regulations to the competent
authority.
Where competent authority approval is required, such approval shall take into
account, and be contingent upon, the adequacy of the management system.
COMPLIANCE ASSURANCE
307. The competent authority shall assure compliance with these Regulations.
308. The relevant competent authority shall arrange for periodic assessments of
the radiation doses to persons due to the transport of radioactive material, to
ensure that the system of protection and safety complies with GSR Part 3 [2].
NON-COMPLIANCE
309. In the event of non-compliance with any limit in these Regulations
applicable to dose rate or contamination:

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
GENERAL PROVISIONS
(a) The consignor, consignee, carrier and any organization involved during
transport who may be affected, as appropriate, shall be informed of the
non-compliance by:
(i) The carrier if the non-compliance is identified during transport; or
(ii) The consignee if the non-compliance is identified at receipt.
(b) The consignor, carrier or consignee, as appropriate, shall:
(i) Take immediate steps to mitigate the consequences of the
non-compliance;
(ii) Investigate the non-compliance and its causes, circumstances and
consequences;
(iii) Take appropriate action to remedy the causes and circumstances that
led to the non-compliance and to prevent a recurrence of the causes
and circumstances similar to those that led to the non-compliance;
(iv) Communicate to the relevant competent authority the causes of the
non-compliance and the corrective or preventive actions taken or to be
taken.
(c) T he communication of the non-compliance to the consignor and the relevant
competent authority, respectively, shall be made as soon as practicable
and shall be immediate whenever an emergency exposure situation has
developed or is developing.
SPECIAL ARRANGEMENT
310. Consignments for which conformity with the other provisions of these
Regulations is impracticable shall not be transported except under special
arrangement. Provided the competent authority is satisfied that conformity with
the other provisions of these Regulations is impracticable and that the requisite
standards of safety established by these Regulations have been demonstrated
through means alternative to the other provisions of these Regulations, the
competent authority may approve special arrangement transport operations for
a single consignment or a planned series of multiple consignments. The overall
level of safety in transport shall be at least equivalent to that which would be
provided if all the applicable requirements in these Regulations had been met.
For consignments of this type, multilateral approval shall be required.
TRAINING
311. Workers shall receive appropriate training concerning radiation protection,
including the precautions to be observed in order to restrict their occupational

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION III
exposure and the exposure of other persons who might be affected by their
actions.
312. Persons engaged in the transport of radioactive material shall receive
training on the contents of these Regulations commensurate with their
responsibilities.
313. Persons such as those who classify radioactive material; pack radioactive
material; mark and label radioactive material; prepare transport documents for
radioactive material; offer or accept radioactive material for transport; carry or
handle radioactive material during transport; mark or placard or load or unload
packages of radioactive material into or from transport vehicles, bulk packagings
or freight containers; or are otherwise directly involved in the transport of
radioactive material as determined by the competent authority; shall receive the
following training:
(a) General awareness/familiarization training:
(i) Each person shall receive training designed to provide familiarity with
the general provisions of these Regulations.
(ii) The general awareness/familiarization training shall include a
description of the categories of radioactive material; labelling,
marking, placarding and packaging and segregation requirements; the
purpose and content of the radioactive material transport document;
and the available emergency response documents.
(b) Function specific training: Each person shall receive detailed training
concerning specific radioactive material transport requirements that are
applicable to the function that person performs.
(c) Safety training: Commensurate with the risk of exposure in the event of
a release, and with the functions performed, each person shall receive
training on:
(i) Methods and procedures for avoidance of accident conditions during
transport, such as proper use of package handling equipment and
appropriate methods of stowage of radioactive material.
(ii) Available emergency response information and how to use it.
(iii) General hazards presented by the various categories of radioactive
material and how to prevent exposure to those hazards, including, if
appropriate, the use of personal protective clothing and equipment.
(iv) Procedures to be immediately followed in the event of an unintentional
release of radioactive material, including any emergency response
procedures for which the person is responsible and personal protection
procedures to be followed.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
GENERAL PROVISIONS
314. Records of all safety training undertaken shall be kept by the employer and
made available to the employee if requested.
315. The training required in para. 313 shall be provided or verified upon
employment in a position involving radioactive material transport and shall
be periodically supplemented with retraining as deemed appropriate by the
competent authority.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Section IV
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
GENERAL PROVISIONS
401. Radioactive material shall be assigned one of the United Nations (UN)
numbers specified in Table 1 in accordance with paras 408–434.
BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES
402. The following basic values for individual radionuclides are given in
Table 2:
(a) A and A in TBq;
1 2
(b) Activity concentration limits for exempt material in Bq/g;
(c) Activity limits for exempt consignments in Bq.
DETERMINATION OF BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES
403. For individual radionuclides:
(a) That are not listed in Table 2, the determination of the basic radionuclide
values referred to in para. 402 shall require multilateral approval. For these
radionuclides, activity concentrations for exempt material and activity
limits for exempt consignments shall be calculated in accordance with the
principles established in GSR Part 3 [2]. It is permissible to use an A value

calculated using a dose coefficient for the appropriate lung absorption
type, as recommended by the International Commission on Radiological
Protection, if the chemical forms of each radionuclide under both
normal and accident conditions of transport are taken into consideration.
Alternatively, the radionuclide values in Table 3 may be used without
obtaining competent authority approval.
(b) In instruments or articles in which the radioactive material is enclosed in
or is included as a component part of the instrument or other manufactured
article and which meets para. 423(c), alternative basic radionuclide values
to those in Table 2 for the activity limit for an exempt consignment are
permitted and shall require multilateral approval. Such alternative activity

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
TABLE 1. EXCERPTS FROM THE LIST OF UN NUMBERS, PROPER
SHIPPING NAMES AND DESCRIPTIONS
Assignment of PROPER SHIPPING NAME
UN numbers and descriptiona
Excepted package
UN 2908 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, EXCEPTED PACKAGE —
EMPTY PACKAGING
UN 2909 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, EXCEPTED PACKAGE —
ARTICLES MANUFACTURED FROM NATURAL URANIUM or
DEPLETED URANIUM or NATURAL THORIUM
UN 2910 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, EXCEPTED PACKAGE —
LIMITED QUANTITY OF MATERIAL
UN 2911 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, EXCEPTED PACKAGE —
INSTRUMENTS or ARTICLES
UN 3507 URANIUM HEXAFLUORIDE, RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL,
EXCEPTED PACKAGE, less than 0.1 kg per package, non-fissile or
fissile-exceptedb
Low specific activity material
UN 2912 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, LOW SPECIFIC ACTIVITY
(LSA-I), non-fissile or fissile-exceptedb
UN 3321 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, LOW SPECIFIC ACTIVITY
(LSA-II), non-fissile or fissile-exceptedb
UN 3322 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, LOW SPECIFIC ACTIVITY
(LSA-III), non-fissile or fissile-exceptedb
UN 3324 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, LOW SPECIFIC ACTIVITY
(LSA-II), FISSILE
UN 3325 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, LOW SPECIFIC ACTIVITY
(LSA-III), FISSILE
Surface contaminated objects
UN 2913 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, SURFACE CONTAMINATED
OBJECTS (SCO-I, SCO-II or SCO-III), non-fissile or fissile-exceptedb
UN 3326 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, SURFACE CONTAMINATED
OBJECTS (SCO-I or SCO-II), FISSILE
Type A package
UN 2915 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, TYPE A PACKAGE, non-special form,
non-fissile or fissile-exceptedb
UN 3327 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, TYPE A PACKAGE, FISSILE,
non-special form

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
TABLE 1. EXCERPTS FROM THE LIST OF UN NUMBERS, PROPER
SHIPPING NAMES AND DESCRIPTIONS (cont.)
Assignment of PROPER SHIPPING NAME
UN numbers and descriptiona
UN 3332 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, TYPE A PACKAGE, SPECIAL
FORM, non-fissile or fissile-exceptedb
UN 3333 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, TYPE A PACKAGE, SPECIAL
FORM, FISSILE
Type B(U) package
UN 2916 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, TYPE B(U) PACKAGE, non-fissile or
fissile-exceptedb
UN 3328 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, TYPE B(U) PACKAGE, FISSILE
Type B(M) package
UN 2917 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, TYPE B(M) PACKAGE, non-fissile or
fissile-exceptedb
UN 3329 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, TYPE B(M) PACKAGE, FISSILE
Type C package
UN 3323 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, TYPE C PACKAGE, non-fissile or
fissile-exceptedb
UN 3330 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, TYPE C PACKAGE, FISSILE
Special arrangement
UN 2919 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, TRANSPORTED UNDER SPECIAL
ARRANGEMENT, non-fissile or fissile-exceptedb
UN 3331 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, TRANSPORTED UNDER SPECIAL
ARRANGEMENT, FISSILE
Uranium hexafluoride
UN 2977 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, URANIUM HEXAFLUORIDE,
FISSILE
UN 2978 RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, URANIUM HEXAFLUORIDE,
non-fissile or fissile-exceptedb
a The “PROPER SHIPPING NAME” is found in the column “PROPER SHIPPING NAME
and description” and is restricted to that part shown in CAPITAL LETTERS. In the cases of
UN 2909, UN 2911, UN 2913 and UN 3326, where alternative proper shipping names are
separated by the word “or”, only the relevant proper shipping name shall be used.
b The term ‘fissile-excepted’ refers only to material excepted under para. 417.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
limits for an exempt consignment shall be calculated in accordance with the
principles set out in GSR Part 3 [2].
404. In the calculations of A and A for a radionuclide not listed in Table 2,
1 2
a single radioactive decay chain in which the radionuclides are present in their
naturally occurring proportions, and in which no progeny nuclide has a half-life
either longer than 10 days or longer than that of the parent nuclide, shall be
considered as a single radionuclide; and the activity to be taken into account and
the A or A value to be applied shall be that corresponding to the parent nuclide
1 2
of that chain. In the case of radioactive decay chains in which any progeny
nuclide has a half-life either longer than 10 days or longer than that of the parent
nuclide, the parent and such progeny nuclides shall be considered as mixtures of
different nuclides.
405. For mixtures of radionuclides, the basic radionuclide values referred to in
para. 402 may be determined as follows:

X =
m f(i)
∑
X(i)
i
where
f(i) is the fraction of activity or activity concentration of radionuclide i in the
mixture.
X(i) is the appropriate value of A or A , or the activity concentration limit
1 2
for exempt material or the activity limit for an exempt consignment as
appropriate for radionuclide i.
X is the derived value of A or A , or the activity concentration limit for
m 1 2
exempt material or the activity limit for an exempt consignment in the case
of a mixture.
Text continued on p.45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES
Activity Activity limit
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit for an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Actinium (89)
Ac-225 (a) 8 × 10−1 6 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 104
Ac-227 (a) 9 × 10−1 9 × 10−5 1 × 10−1 1 × 103
Ac-228 6 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Silver (47)
Ag-105 2 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Ag-108m (a) 7 × 10−1 7 × 10−1 1 × 101 (b) 1 × 106 (b)
Ag-110m (a) 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Ag-111 2 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Aluminium (13)
Al-26 1 × 10−1 1 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Americium (95)
Am-241 1 × 101 1 × 10−3 1 × 100 1 × 104
Am-242m (a) 1 × 101 1 × 10−3 1 × 100 (b) 1 × 104 (b)
Am-243 (a) 5 × 100 1 × 10−3 1 × 100 (b) 1 × 103 (b)
Argon (18)
Ar-37 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 106 1 × 108
Ar-39 4 × 101 2 × 101 1 × 107 1 × 104
Ar-41 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 109
Arsenic (33)
As-72 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
As-73 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 107
As-74 1 × 100 9 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
As-76 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 105
As-77 2 × 101 7 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Astatine (85)
At-211 (a) 2 × 101 5 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 107
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Gold (79)
Au-193 7 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 107
Au-194 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Au-195 1 × 101 6 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 107
Au-198 1 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Au-199 1 × 101 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Barium (56)
Ba-131 (a) 2 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Ba-133 3 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Ba-133m 2 × 101 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Ba-135m 2 × 101 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Ba-140 (a) 5 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 101 (b) 1 × 105 (b)
Beryllium (4)
Be-7 2 × 101 2 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 107
Be-10 4 × 101 6 × 10−1 1 × 104 1 × 106
Bismuth (83)
Bi-205 7 × 10−1 7 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Bi-206 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Bi-207 7 × 10−1 7 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Bi-210 1 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Bi-210m (a) 6 × 10−1 2 × 10−2 1 × 101 1 × 105
Bi-212 (a) 7 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 (b) 1 × 105 (b)
Berkelium (97)
Bk-247 8 × 100 8 × 10−4 1 × 100 1 × 104
Bk-249 (a) 4 × 101 3 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Bromine (35)
Br-76 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Br-77 3 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Br-82 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Carbon (6)
C-11 1 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
C-14 4 × 101 3 × 100 1 × 104 1 × 107
Calcium (20)
Ca-41 Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 105 1 × 107
Ca-45 4 × 101 1 × 100 1 × 104 1 × 107
Ca-47 (a) 3 × 100 3 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Cadmium (48)
Cd-109 3 × 101 2 × 100 1 × 104 1 × 106
Cd-113m 4 × 101 5 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Cd-115 (a) 3 × 100 4 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Cd-115m 5 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Cerium (58)
Ce-139 7 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Ce-141 2 × 101 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 107
Ce-143 9 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Ce-144 (a) 2 × 10−1 2 × 10−1 1 × 102 (b) 1 × 105 (b)
Californium (98)
Cf-248 4 × 101 6 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 104
Cf-249 3 × 100 8 × 10−4 1 × 100 1 × 103
Cf-250 2 × 101 2 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 104
Cf-251 7 × 100 7 × 10−4 1 × 100 1 × 103
Cf-252 1 × 10−1 3 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 104
Cf-253 (a) 4 × 101 4 × 10−2 1 × 102 1 × 105
Cf-254 1 × 10−3 1 × 10−3 1 × 100 1 × 103
Chlorine (17)
Cl-36 1 × 101 6 × 10−1 1 × 104 1 × 106
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Cl-38 2 × 10−1 2 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Curium (96)
Cm-240 4 × 101 2 × 10−2 1 × 102 1 × 105
Cm-241 2 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Cm-242 4 × 101 1 × 10−2 1 × 102 1 × 105
Cm-243 9 × 100 1 × 10−3 1 × 100 1 × 104
Cm-244 2 × 101 2 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 104
Cm-245 9 × 100 9 × 10−4 1 × 100 1 × 103
Cm-246 9 × 100 9 × 10−4 1 × 100 1 × 103
Cm-247 (a) 3 × 100 1 × 10−3 1 × 100 1 × 104
Cm-248 2 × 10−2 3 × 10−4 1 × 100 1 × 103
Cobalt (27)
Co-55 5 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Co-56 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Co-57 1 × 101 1 × 101 1 × 102 1 × 106
Co-58 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Co-58m 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 104 1 × 107
Co-60 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Chromium (24)
Cr-51 3 × 101 3 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 107
Caesium (55)
Cs-129 4 × 100 4 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 105
Cs-131 3 × 101 3 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 106
Cs-132 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 105
Cs-134 7 × 10−1 7 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 104
Cs-134m 4 × 101 6 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 105
Cs-135 4 × 101 1 × 100 1 × 104 1 × 107
Cs-136 5 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Cs-137 (a) 2 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 (b) 1 × 104 (b)
Copper (29)
Cu-64 6 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Cu-67 1 × 101 7 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Dysprosium (66)
Dy-159 2 × 101 2 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 107
Dy-165 9 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Dy-166 (a) 9 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Erbium (68)
Er-169 4 × 101 1 × 100 1 × 104 1 × 107
Er-171 8 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Europium (63)
Eu-147 2 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Eu-148 5 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Eu-149 2 × 101 2 × 101 1 × 102 1 × 107
Eu-150 (short lived) 2 × 100 7 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Eu-150 (long lived) 7 × 10−1 7 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Eu-152 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Eu-152m 8 × 10−1 8 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Eu-154 9 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Eu-155 2 × 101 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 107
Eu-156 7 × 10−1 7 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Fluorine (9)
F-18 1 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Iron (26)
Fe-52 (a) 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Fe-55 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 104 1 × 106
Fe-59 9 × 10−1 9 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Fe-60 (a) 4 × 101 2 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 105
Gallium (31)
Ga-67 7 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Ga-68 5 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Ga-72 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Gadolinium (64)
Gd-146 (a) 5 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Gd-148 2 × 101 2 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 104
Gd-153 1 × 101 9 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 107
Gd-159 3 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Germanium (32)
Ge-68 (a) 5 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Ge-69 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Ge-71 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 104 1 × 108
Ge-77 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Hafnium (72)
Hf-172 (a) 6 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Hf-175 3 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Hf-181 2 × 100 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Hf-182 Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 102 1 × 106
Mercury (80)
Hg-194 (a) 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Hg-195m (a) 3 × 100 7 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Hg-197 2 × 101 1 × 101 1 × 102 1 × 107
Hg-197m 1 × 101 4 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Hg-203 5 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 105
Holmium (67)
Ho-166 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 105
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Ho-166m 6 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Iodine (53)
I-123 6 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 107
I-124 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
I-125 2 × 101 3 × 100 1 × 103 1 × 106
I-126 2 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
I-129 Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 102 1 × 105
I-131 3 × 100 7 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
I-132 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
I-133 7 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
I-134 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
I-135 (a) 6 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Indium (49)
In-111 3 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
In-113m 4 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
In-114m (a) 1 × 101 5 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
In-115m 7 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Iridium (77)
Ir-189 (a) 1 × 101 1 × 101 1 × 102 1 × 107
Ir-190 7 × 10−1 7 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Ir-192 1 × 100 (c) 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 104
Ir-193m 4 × 101 4 × 100 1 × 104 1 × 107
Ir-194 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 105
Potassium (19)
K-40 9 × 10−1 9 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
K-42 2 × 10−1 2 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
K-43 7 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Krypton (36)
Kr-79 4 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 103 1 × 105
Kr-81 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 104 1 × 107
Kr-85 1 × 101 1 × 101 1 × 105 1 × 104
Kr-85m 8 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 103 1 × 1010
Kr-87 2 × 10−1 2 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 109
Lanthanum (57)
La-137 3 × 101 6 × 100 1 × 103 1 × 107
La-140 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Lutetium (71)
Lu-172 6 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Lu-173 8 × 100 8 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 107
Lu-174 9 × 100 9 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 107
Lu-174m 2 × 101 1 × 101 1 × 102 1 × 107
Lu-177 3 × 101 7 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 107
Magnesium (12)
Mg-28 (a) 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Manganese (25)
Mn-52 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Mn-53 Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 104 1 × 109
Mn-54 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Mn-56 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Molybdenum (42)
Mo-93 4 × 101 2 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 108
Mo-99 (a) 1 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Nitrogen (7)
N-13 9 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 109
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Sodium (11)
Na-22 5 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Na-24 2 × 10−1 2 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Niobium (41)
Nb-93m 4 × 101 3 × 101 1 × 104 1 × 107
Nb-94 7 × 10−1 7 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Nb-95 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Nb-97 9 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Neodymium (60)
Nd-147 6 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Nd-149 6 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Nickel (28)
Ni-57 6 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Ni-59 Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 104 1 × 108
Ni-63 4 × 101 3 × 101 1 × 105 1 × 108
Ni-65 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Neptunium (93)
Np-235 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 107
Np-236 (short lived) 2 × 101 2 × 100 1 × 103 1 × 107
Np-236 (long lived) 9 × 100 2 × 10−2 1 × 102 1 × 105
Np-237 2 × 101 2 × 10−3 1 × 100 (b) 1 × 103 (b)
Np-239 7 × 100 4 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 107
Osmium (76)
Os-185 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Os-191 1 × 101 2 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 107
Os-191m 4 × 101 3 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 107
Os-193 2 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Os-194 (a) 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 105
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Phosphorus (15)
P-32 5 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 105
P-33 4 × 101 1 × 100 1 × 105 1 × 108
Protactinium (91)
Pa-230 (a) 2 × 100 7 × 10−2 1 × 101 1 × 106
Pa-231 4 × 100 4 × 10−4 1 × 100 1 × 103
Pa-233 5 × 100 7 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 107
Lead (82)
Pb-201 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Pb-202 4 × 101 2 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 106
Pb-203 4 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Pb-205 Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 104 1 × 107
Pb-210 (a) 1 × 100 5 × 10−2 1 × 101 (b) 1 × 104 (b)
Pb-212 (a) 7 × 10−1 2 × 10−1 1 × 101 (b) 1 × 105 (b)
Palladium (46)
Pd-103 (a) 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 108
Pd-107 Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 105 1 × 108
Pd-109 2 × 100 5 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Promethium (61)
Pm-143 3 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Pm-144 7 × 10−1 7 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Pm-145 3 × 101 1 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 107
Pm-147 4 × 101 2 × 100 1 × 104 1 × 107
Pm-148m (a) 8 × 10−1 7 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Pm-149 2 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Pm-151 2 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Polonium (84)
Po-210 4 × 101 2 × 10−2 1 × 101 1 × 104
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Praseodymium (59)
Pr-142 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 105
Pr-143 3 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 104 1 × 106
Platinum (78)
Pt-188 (a) 1 × 100 8 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Pt-191 4 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Pt-193 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 104 1 × 107
Pt-193m 4 × 101 5 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 107
Pt-195m 1 × 101 5 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Pt-197 2 × 101 6 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Pt-197m 1 × 101 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Plutonium (94)
Pu-236 3 × 101 3 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 104
Pu-237 2 × 101 2 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 107
Pu-238 1 × 101 1 × 10−3 1 × 100 1 × 104
Pu-239 1 × 101 1 × 10−3 1 × 100 1 × 104
Pu-240 1 × 101 1 × 10−3 1 × 100 1 × 103
Pu-241 (a) 4 × 101 6 × 10−2 1 × 102 1 × 105
Pu-242 1 × 101 1 × 10−3 1 × 100 1 × 104
Pu-244 (a) 4 × 10−1 1 × 10−3 1 × 100 1 × 104
Radium (88)
Ra-223 (a) 4 × 10−1 7 × 10−3 1 × 102 (b) 1 × 105 (b)
Ra-224 (a) 4 × 10−1 2 × 10−2 1 × 101 (b) 1 × 105 (b)
Ra-225 (a) 2 × 10−1 4 × 10−3 1 × 102 1 × 105
Ra-226 (a) 2 × 10−1 3 × 10−3 1 × 10 1 (b) 1 × 104 (b)
Ra-228 (a) 6 × 10−1 2 × 10−2 1 × 10 1 (b) 1 × 105 (b)
Rubidium (37)
Rb-81 2 × 100 8 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Rb-83 (a) 2 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Rb-84 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Rb-86 5 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 105
Rb-87 Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 104 1 × 107
Rb (natural) Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 104 1 × 107
Rhenium (75)
Re-184 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Re-184m 3 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Re-186 2 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Re-187 Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 106 1 × 109
Re-188 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 105
Re-189 (a) 3 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Re (natural) Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 106 1 × 109
Rhodium (45)
Rh-99 2 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Rh-101 4 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 107
Rh-102 5 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Rh-102m 2 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Rh-103m 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 104 1 × 108
Rh-105 1 × 101 8 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 107
Radon (86)
Rn-222 (a) 3 × 10−1 4 × 10−3 1 × 101 (b) 1 × 108 (b)
Ruthenium (44)
Ru-97 5 × 100 5 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 107
Ru-103 (a) 2 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Ru-105 1 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Ru-106 (a) 2 × 10−1 2 × 10−1 1 × 102 (b) 1 × 105 (b)
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Sulphur (16)
S-35 4 × 101 3 × 100 1 × 105 1 × 108
Antimony (51)
Sb-122 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 104
Sb-124 6 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Sb-125 2 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Sb-126 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Scandium (21)
Sc-44 5 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Sc-46 5 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Sc-47 1 × 101 7 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Sc-48 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Selenium (34)
Se-75 3 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Se-79 4 × 101 2 × 100 1 × 104 1 × 107
Silicon (14)
Si-31 6 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Si-32 4 × 101 5 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Samarium (62)
Sm-145 1 × 101 1 × 101 1 × 102 1 × 107
Sm-147 Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 101 1 × 104
Sm-151 4 × 101 1 × 101 1 × 104 1 × 108
Sm-153 9 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Tin (50)
Sn-113 (a) 4 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 103 1 × 107
Sn-117m 7 × 100 4 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Sn-119m 4 × 101 3 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 107
Sn-121m (a) 4 × 101 9 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 107
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Sn-123 8 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Sn-125 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 105
Sn-126 (a) 6 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Strontium (38)
Sr-82 (a) 2 × 10−1 2 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Sr-83 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Sr-85 2 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Sr-85m 5 × 100 5 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 107
Sr-87m 3 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Sr-89 6 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Sr-90 (a) 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 102 (b) 1 × 104 (b)
Sr-91 (a) 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
Sr-92 (a) 1 × 100 3 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Tritium (1)
T(H-3) 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 106 1 × 109
Tantalum (73)
Ta-178 (long lived) 1 × 100 8 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Ta-179 3 × 101 3 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 107
Ta-182 9 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 104
Terbium (65)
Tb-149 8 × 10−1 8 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Tb-157 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 104 1 × 107
Tb-158 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Tb-160 1 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Tb-161 3 × 101 7 × 10-1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Technetium (43)
Tc-95m (a) 2 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Tc-96 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Tc-96m (a) 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 107
Tc-97 Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 103 1 × 108
Tc-97m 4 × 101 1 × 100 1 × 103 1 × 107
Tc-98 8 × 10−1 7 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Tc-99 4 × 101 9 × 10−1 1 × 104 1 × 107
Tc-99m 1 × 101 4 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 107
Tellurium (52)
Te-121 2 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Te-121m 5 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Te-123m 8 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 107
Te-125m 2 × 101 9 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 107
Te-127 2 × 101 7 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Te-127m (a) 2 × 101 5 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 107
Te-129 7 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Te-129m (a) 8 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Te-131m (a) 7 × 10−1 5 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Te-132 (a) 5 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 107
Thorium (90)
Th-227 1 × 101 5 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 104
Th-228 (a) 5 × 10−1 1 × 10−3 1 × 100 (b) 1 × 104 (b)
Th-229 5 × 100 5 × 10−4 1 × 100 (b) 1 × 103 (b)
Th-230 1 × 101 1 × 10−3 1 × 100 1 × 104
Th-231 4 × 101 2 × 10−2 1 × 103 1 × 107
Th-232 Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 101 1 × 104
Th-234 (a) 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 103 (b) 1 × 105 (b)
Th (natural) Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 100 (b) 1 × 103 (b)
Titanium (22)
Ti-44 (a) 5 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Thallium (81)
Tl-200 9 × 10−1 9 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Tl-201 1 × 101 4 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Tl-202 2 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Tl-204 1 × 101 7 × 10−1 1 × 104 1 × 104
Thulium (69)
Tm-167 7 × 100 8 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Tm-170 3 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Tm-171 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 104 1 × 108
Uranium (92)
U-230 (fast lung 4 × 101 1 × 10−1 1 × 101 (b) 1 × 105 (b)
absorption) (a)(d)
U-230 (medium lung 4 × 101 4 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 104
absorption) (a)(e)
U-230 (slow lung 3 × 101 3 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 104
absorption) (a)(f)
U-232 (fast lung 4 × 101 1 × 10−2 1 × 100 (b) 1 × 103 (b)
absorption) (d)
U-232 (medium lung 4 × 101 7 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 104
absorption) (e)
U-232 (slow lung 1 × 101 1 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 104
absorption) (f)
U-233 (fast lung 4 × 101 9 × 10−2 1 × 101 1 × 104
absorption) (d)
U-233 (medium lung 4 × 101 2 × 10−2 1 × 102 1 × 105
absorption) (e)
U-233 (slow lung 4 × 101 6 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 105
absorption) (f)
U-234 (fast lung 4 × 101 9 × 10−2 1 × 101 1 × 104
absorption) (d)
U-234 (medium lung 4 × 101 2 × 10−2 1 × 102 1 × 105
absorption) (e)
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
U-234 (slow lung 4 × 101 6 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 105
absorption) (f)
U-235 (all lung Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 101 (b) 1 × 104 (b)
absorption types)
(a)(d)(e)(f)
U-236 (fast lung Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 101 1 × 104
absorption) (d)
U-236 (medium lung 4 × 101 2 × 10−2 1 × 102 1 × 105
absorption) (e)
U-236 (slow lung 4 × 101 6 × 10−3 1 × 101 1 × 104
absorption) (f)
U-238 (all lung Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 101 (b) 1 × 104 (b)
absorption types)
(d)(e) (f)
U (natural) Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 100 (b) 1 × 103 (b)
U (enriched to 20% Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 100 1 × 103
or less) (g)
U (depleted) Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 100 1 × 103
Vanadium (23)
V-48 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 105
V-49 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 104 1 × 107
Tungsten (74)
W-178 (a) 9 × 100 5 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
W-181 3 × 101 3 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 107
W-185 4 × 101 8 × 10−1 1 × 104 1 × 107
W-187 2 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
W-188 (a) 4 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 105
Xenon (54)
Xe-122 (a) 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 109
Xe-123 2 × 100 7 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 109
Xe-127 4 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 103 1 × 105
For footnotes see pp. 42–45

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
TABLE 2. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES (cont.)
Activity Activity limit for
Radionuclide
A A concentration limit an exempt
(atomic number) 1 2
for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Xe-131m 4 × 101 4 × 101 1 × 104 1 × 104
Xe-133 2 × 101 1 × 101 1 × 103 1 × 104
Xe-135 3 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 103 1 × 1010
Yttrium (39)
Y-87 (a) 1 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Y-88 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Y-90 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 105
Y-91 6 × 10−1 6 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 106
Y-91m 2 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Y-92 2 × 10−1 2 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 105
Y-93 3 × 10−1 3 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 105
Ytterbium (70)
Yb-169 4 × 100 1 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 107
Yb-175 3 × 101 9 × 10−1 1 × 103 1 × 107
Zinc (30)
Zn-65 2 × 100 2 × 100 1 × 101 1 × 106
Zn-69 3 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 104 1 × 106
Zn-69m (a) 3 × 100 6 × 10−1 1 × 102 1 × 106
Zirconium (40)
Zr-88 3 × 100 3 × 100 1 × 102 1 × 106
Zr-93 Unlimited Unlimited 1 × 103 (b) 1 × 107 (b)
Zr-95 (a) 2 × 100 8 × 10−1 1 × 101 1 × 106
Zr-97 (a) 4 × 10−1 4 × 10−1 1 × 101 (b) 1 × 105 (b)
(a) A

and/or A

values for these parent radionuclides include contributions from their
progeny with half-lives less than 10 days, as listed in the following:
Mg-28 Al-28
Ca-47 Sc-47
Ti-44 Sc-44

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
Table 2, footnote (a) (cont.)
Fe-52 Mn-52m
Fe-60 Co-60m
Zn-69m Zn-69
Ge-68 Ga-68
Rb-83 Kr-83m
Sr-82 Rb-82
Sr-90 Y-90
Sr-91 Y-91m
Sr-92 Y-92
Y-87 Sr-87m
Zr-95 Nb-95m
Zr-97 Nb-97m, Nb-97
Mo-99 Tc-99m
Tc-95m Tc-95
Tc-96m Tc-96
Ru-103 Rh-103m
Ru-106 Rh-106
Pd-103 Rh-103m
Ag-108m Ag-108
Ag-110m Ag-110
Cd-115 In-115m
In-114m In-114
Sn-113 In-113m
Sn-121m Sn-121
Sn-126 Sb-126m
Te-127m Te-127
Te-129m Te-129
Te-131m Te-131
Te-132 I-132
I-135 Xe-135m
Xe-122 I-122
Cs-137 Ba-137m
Ba-131 Cs-131
Ba-140 La-140
Ce-144 Pr-144m, Pr-144
Pm-148m Pm-148
Gd-146 Eu-146
Dy-166 Ho-166
Hf-172 Lu-172
W-178 Ta-178
W-188 Re-188
Re-189 Os-189m
Os-194 Ir-194
Ir-189 Os-189m
Pt-188 Ir-188

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
Table 2, footnote (a) (cont.)
Hg-194 Au-194
Hg-195m Hg-195
Pb-210 Bi-210
Pb-212 Bi-212, Tl-208, Po-212
Bi-210m Tl-206
Bi-212 Tl-208, Po-212
At-211 Po-211
Rn-222 Po-218, Pb-214, At-218, Bi-214, Po-214
Ra-223 Rn-219, Po-215, Pb-211, Bi-211, Po-211, Tl-207
Ra-224 Rn-220, Po-216, Pb-212, Bi-212, Tl-208, Po-212
Ra-225 Ac-225, Fr-221, At-217, Bi-213, Tl-209, Po-213, Pb-209
Ra-226 Rn-222, Po-218, Pb-214, At-218, Bi-214, Po-214
Ra-228 Ac-228
Ac-225 Fr-221, At-217, Bi-213, Tl-209, Po-213, Pb-209
Ac-227 Fr-223
Th-228 Ra-224, Rn-220, Po-216, Pb-212, Bi-212, Tl-208, Po-212
Th-234 Pa-234m, Pa-234
Pa-230 Ac-226, Th-226, Fr-222, Ra-222, Rn-218, Po-214
U-230 Th-226, Ra-222, Rn-218, Po-214
U-235 Th-231
Pu-241 U-237
Pu-244 U-240, Np-240m
Am-242m Am-242, Np-238
Am-243 Np-239
Cm-247 Pu-243
Bk-249 Am-245
Cf-253 Cm-249
(b) Parent nuclides and their progeny included in secular equilibrium are listed in the
following (the activity to be taken into account is that of the parent nuclide only):
Sr-90 Y-90
Zr-93 Nb-93m
Zr-97 Nb-97
Ru-106 Rh-106
Ag-108m Ag-108
Cs-137 Ba-137m
Ce-144 Pr-144
Ba-140 La-140
Bi-212 Tl-208 (0.36), Po-212 (0.64)
Pb-210 Bi-210, Po-210
Pb-212 Bi-212, Tl-208 (0.36), Po-212 (0.64)
Rn-222 Po-218, Pb-214, Bi-214, Po-214
Ra-223 Rn-219, Po-215, Pb-211, Bi-211, Tl-207
Ra-224 Rn-220, Po-216, Pb-212, Bi-212, Tl-208 (0.36), Po-212 (0.64)

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
Table 2, footnote (b) (cont.)
Ra-226 Rn-222, Po-218, Pb-214, Bi-214, Po-214, Pb-210, Bi-210, Po-210
Ra-228 Ac-228
Th-228 Ra-224, Rn-220, Po-216, Pb-212, Bi-212, Tl-208 (0.36), Po-212 (0.64)
Th-229 Ra-225, Ac-225, Fr-221, At-217, Bi-213, Po-213, Pb-209
Th-natural* Ra-228, Ac-228, Th-228, Ra-224, Rn-220, Po-216, Pb-212, Bi-212,
Tl-208 (0.36), Po-212 (0.64)
Th-234 Pa-234m
U-230 Th-226, Ra-222, Rn-218, Po-214
U-232 Th-228, Ra-224, Rn-220, Po-216, Pb-212, Bi-212, Tl-208 (0.36),
Po-212 (0.64)
U-235 Th-231
U-238 Th-234, Pa-234m
U-natural* Th-234, Pa-234m, U-234, Th-230, Ra-226, Rn-222, Po-218, Pb-214,
Bi-214, Po-214, Pb-210, Bi-210, Po-210
Np-237 Pa-233
Am-242m Am-242
Am-243 Np-239
* In the case of Th-natural, the parent nuclide is Th-232; in the case of U-natural the
parent nuclide is U-238.
(c) The quantity may be determined from a measurement of the rate of decay or a
measurement of the dose rate at a prescribed distance from the source.
(d) These values apply only to compounds of uranium that take the chemical form of UF,

UOF and UO(NO) in both normal and accident conditions of transport.
2 2 2 32
(e) These values apply only to compounds of uranium that take the chemical form of
UO, UF, UCl and hexavalent compounds in both normal and accident conditions of
3 4 4
transport.
(f) These values apply to all compounds of uranium other than those specified in (d) and
(e) above.
(g) These values apply to unirradiated uranium only.
406. When the identity of each radionuclide is known but the individual
activities of some of the radionuclides are not known, the radionuclides may be
grouped and the lowest radionuclide value, as appropriate for the radionuclides in
each group, may be used in applying the formulas in paras 405 and 430. Groups
may be based on the total alpha activity and the total beta/gamma activity, when
these are known, using the lowest radionuclide values for the alpha emitters or
beta/gamma emitters, respectively.
407. For individual radionuclides or for mixtures of radionuclides for which
relevant data are not available, the values shown in Table 3 shall be used.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
TABLE 3. BASIC RADIONUCLIDE VALUES FOR UNKNOWN
RADIONUCLIDES OR MIXTURES
Activity Activity limit
A A concentration limit for an exempt
1 2
Radioactive content for exempt material consignment
(TBq) (TBq) (Bq/g) (Bq)
Only beta or gamma emitting 0.1 0.02 1 × 101 1 × 104
nuclides are known to be present
Alpha emitting nuclides, 0.2 9 × 10−5 1 × 10−1 1 × 103
but no neutron emitters are
known to be present
Neutron emitting nuclides are 0.001 9 × 10−5 1 × 10−1 1 × 103
known to be present or no
relevant data are available
CLASSIFICATION OF MATERIAL
Low specific activity material
408. Radioactive material may only be classified as LSA material if the
conditions of paras 226, 409–411 and 517–522 are met.
409. LSA material shall be in one of three groups:
(a) LSA-I:
(i) Uranium and thorium ores and concentrates of such ores, and other
ores containing naturally occurring radionuclides.
(ii) Natural uranium, depleted uranium, natural thorium or their
compounds or mixtures, that are unirradiated and in solid or liquid
form.
(iii) Radioactive material for which the A value is unlimited. Fissile

material may be included only if excepted under para. 417.
(iv) Other radioactive material in which the activity is distributed
throughout and the estimated average specific activity does not exceed
30 times the values for the activity concentration specified in paras
402–407. Fissile material may be included only if excepted under
para. 417.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
(b) LSA-II:
(i) Water with a tritium concentration of up to 0.8 TBq/L;
(ii) Other material in which the activity is distributed throughout and the
estimated average specific activity does not exceed 10−4A /g for solids

and gases, and 10−5A /g for liquids.

(c) LSA-III:
Solids (e.g. consolidated wastes, activated materials), excluding powders,
in which:
(i) The radioactive material is distributed throughout a solid or a
collection of solid objects, or is essentially uniformly distributed in a
solid compact binding agent (such as concrete, bitumen and ceramic).
(ii) The estimated average specific activity of the solid, excluding any
shielding material, does not exceed 2 × 10−3A /g.

410. A single package of non-combustible solid LSA-II or LSA-III material, if
carried by air, shall not contain an activity greater than 3000A .

411. The radioactive contents in a single package of LSA material shall be so
restricted that the dose rate specified in para. 517 shall not be exceeded, and the
activity in a single package shall also be so restricted that the activity limits for a
conveyance specified in para. 522 shall not be exceeded.
Surface contaminated object
412. Radioactive material may be classified as SCO if the conditions in
paras 241, 413, 414 and 517–522 are met.
413. SCO shall be in one of three groups:
(a) SCO-I: A solid object on which:
(i) The non-fixed contamination on the accessible surface averaged over
300 cm2 (or the area of the surface if less than 300 cm2) does not
exceed 4 Bq/cm2 for beta and gamma emitters and low toxicity alpha
emitters, or 0.4 Bq/cm2 for all other alpha emitters;
(ii) The fixed contamination on the accessible surface averaged over
300 cm2 (or the area of the surface if less than 300 cm2) does not
exceed 4 × 104 Bq/cm2 for beta and gamma emitters and low toxicity
alpha emitters, or 4000 Bq/cm2 for all other alpha emitters;

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
(iii) The non-fixed contamination plus the fixed contamination on the
inaccessible surface averaged over 300 cm2 (or the area of the surface
if less than 300 cm2) does not exceed 4 × 104 Bq/cm2 for beta and
gamma emitters and low toxicity alpha emitters, or 4000 Bq/cm2 for
all other alpha emitters.
(b) S CO-II: A solid object on which either the fixed or non-fixed contamination
on the surface exceeds the applicable limits specified for SCO-I in (a) above
and on which:
(i) The non-fixed contamination on the accessible surface averaged
over 300 cm2 (or the area of the surface if less than 300 cm2) does
not exceed 400 Bq/cm2 for beta and gamma emitters and low toxicity
alpha emitters, or 40 Bq/cm2 for all other alpha emitters;
(ii) The fixed contamination on the accessible surface averaged over
300 cm2 (or the area of the surface if less than 300 cm2) does not
exceed 8 × 105 Bq/cm2 for beta and gamma emitters and low toxicity
alpha emitters, or 8 × 104 Bq/cm2 for all other alpha emitters;
(iii) The non-fixed contamination plus the fixed contamination on the
inaccessible surface averaged over 300 cm2 (or the area of the surface
if less than 300 cm2) does not exceed 8 × 105 Bq/cm2 for beta and
gamma emitters and low toxicity alpha emitters, or 8 × 104 Bq/cm2 for
all other alpha emitters.
(c) S CO-III: A large solid object which, because of its size, cannot be
transported in a type of package described in these Regulations and for
which:
(i) All openings are sealed to prevent release of radioactive material
during conditions defined in para. 520(e);
(ii) The inside of the object is as dry as practicable;
(iii) The non-fixed contamination on the external surfaces does not exceed
the limits specified in para. 508;
(iv) The non-fixed contamination plus the fixed contamination on
the inaccessible surface averaged over 300 cm2 does not exceed
8 × 105 Bq/cm2 for beta and gamma emitters and low toxicity alpha
emitters, or 8 × 104 Bq/cm2 for all other alpha emitters.
414. The radioactive contents in a single package of SCO shall be so restricted
that the dose rate specified in para. 517 shall not be exceeded, and the activity in a
single package shall also be so restricted that the activity limits for a conveyance
specified in para. 522 shall not be exceeded.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
Special form radioactive material
415. Radioactive material may be classified as special form radioactive material
only if it meets the requirements of paras 602–604 and 802.
Low dispersible radioactive material
416. Radioactive material may be classified as low dispersible radioactive
material only if it meets the requirements of para. 605, taking into account the
requirements of paras 665 and 802.
Fissile material
417. Fissile material and packages containing fissile material shall be classified
under the relevant entry as “FISSILE” in accordance with Table 1 unless
excepted by one of the provisions of subparagraphs (a)–(f) of this paragraph and
transported subject to the requirements of para. 570. All provisions apply only to
material in packages that meet the requirements of para. 636, unless unpackaged
material is specifically allowed in the provision:
(a) Uranium enriched in uranium-235 to a maximum of 1% by mass, and with
a total plutonium and uranium-233 content not exceeding 1% of the mass
of uranium-235, provided that the fissile nuclides are distributed essentially
homogeneously throughout the material. In addition, if uranium-235
is present in metallic, oxide or carbide forms, it shall not form a lattice
arrangement.
(b) Liquid solutions of uranyl nitrate enriched in uranium-235 to a maximum of
2% by mass, with a total plutonium and uranium-233 content not exceeding
0.002% of the mass of uranium, and with a minimum nitrogen to uranium
atomic ratio (N/U) of 2.
(c) Uranium with a maximum uranium enrichment of 5% by mass of
uranium-235 provided:
(i) There is no more than 3.5 g of uranium-235 per package.
(ii) The total plutonium and uranium-233 content does not exceed 1% of
the mass of uranium-235 per package.
(iii) Transport of the package is subject to the consignment limit provided
in para. 570(c).
(d) Fissile nuclides with a total mass not greater than 2.0 g per package,
provided the package is transported subject to the consignment limit
provided in para. 570(d).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
(e) Fissile nuclides with a total mass not greater than 45 g, either packaged or
unpackaged, subject to the requirements of para. 570(e).
(f) A fissile material that meets the requirements of paras 570(b), 606 and 802.
418. The contents of packages containing fissile material shall be as specified
for the package design, either directly in these Regulations or in the certificate of
approval.
Uranium hexafluoride
419. Uranium hexafluoride shall be assigned to one of the following UN
numbers only:
(a) UN 2977, RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, URANIUM HEXAFLUORIDE,
FISSILE;
(b) UN 2978, RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, URANIUM HEXAFLUORIDE,
non-fissile or fissile-excepted;
(c) UN 3507, URANIUM HEXAFLUORIDE, RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL,
EXCEPTED PACKAGE, less than 0.1 kg per package, non-fissile or
fissile-excepted.
420. The contents of a package containing uranium hexafluoride shall comply
with the following requirements:
(a) The mass of uranium hexafluoride shall not be different from that allowed
for by the package design.
(b) The mass of uranium hexafluoride shall not be greater than a value that
would lead to an ullage of less than 5% at the maximum temperature of the
package, as specified for in the plant systems where the package might be
used.
(c) The uranium hexafluoride shall be in solid form and the internal pressure
shall not be above atmospheric pressure when presented for transport.
CLASSIFICATION OF PACKAGES
421. The quantity of radioactive material in a package shall not exceed the
relevant limits for the package type as specified below.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
Classification as excepted package
422. A package may be classified as an excepted package if it meets one of the
following conditions:
(a) It is an empty package having contained radioactive material;
(b) It contains instruments or articles not exceeding the activity limits specified
in Table 4;
(c) It contains articles manufactured of natural uranium, depleted uranium or
natural thorium;
(d) It contains radioactive material not exceeding the activity limits specified
in Table 4;
(e) It contains less than 0.1 kg of uranium hexafluoride not exceeding the
activity limits specified in column 4 of Table 4.
423. Radioactive material that is enclosed in or is included as a component part
of an instrument or other manufactured article, may be classified under UN 2911,
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, EXCEPTED PACKAGE — INSTRUMENTS or
ARTICLES, provided that:
(a) The dose rate at 10 cm from any point on the external surface of any
unpackaged instrument or article is not greater than 0.1 mSv/h.
TABLE 4. ACTIVITY LIMITS FOR EXCEPTED PACKAGES
Instrument or article Materials
Physical state of
contents
Item limitsa Package limitsa Package limitsa
Solids
Special form 10−2A A 10−3A
1 1 1
Other forms 10−2A A 10−3A
2 2 2
Liquids 10−3A 10−1A 10−4A
2 2 2
Gases
Tritium 2 × 10−2A 2 × 10−1A 2 × 10−2A
2 2 2
Special form 10−3A 10−2A 10−3A
1 1 1
Other forms 10−3A 10−2A 10−3A
2 2 2
a For mixtures of radionuclides, see paras 405–407.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
(b) Each instrument or article bears the mark “RADIOACTIVE” on its external
surface except for the following:
(i) Radioluminescent timepieces or devices do not require marks.
(ii) Consumer products that have either received regulatory approval in
accordance with para. 107(e) or do not individually exceed the activity
limit for an exempt consignment in Table 2 (column 5) do not require
marks, provided that such products are transported in a package that
bears the mark “RADIOACTIVE” on its internal surface in such
a manner that a warning of the presence of radioactive material is
visible on opening the package.
(iii) Other instruments or articles too small to bear the mark
“RADIOACTIVE” do not require marks, provided that they are
transported in a package that bears the mark “RADIOACTIVE” on
its internal surface in such a manner that a warning of the presence of
radioactive material is visible on opening the package.
(c) The active material is completely enclosed by non-active components (a
device performing the sole function of containing radioactive material
shall not be considered to be an instrument or manufactured article).
(d) The limits specified in columns 2 and 3 of Table 4 are met for each
individual item and each package, respectively.
(e) For transport by post, the total activity in each excepted package shall not
exceed one tenth of the relevant limits specified in column 3 of Table 4.
(f) If the package contains fissile material, one of the provisions of
subparagraphs (a)–(f) of para. 417 shall apply.
424. Radioactive material in forms other than as specified in para. 423 and
with an activity not exceeding the limits specified in column 4 of Table 4 may
be classified under UN 2910, RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, EXCEPTED
PACKAGE — LIMITED QUANTITY OF MATERIAL, provided that:
(a) The package retains its radioactive contents under routine conditions of
transport.
(b) The package bears the mark “RADIOACTIVE” on either:
(i) An internal surface in such a manner that a warning of the presence of
radioactive material is visible on opening the package; or
(ii) The outside of the package, where it is impractical to mark an internal
surface.
(c) For transport by post, the total activity in each excepted package shall not
exceed one tenth of the relevant limits specified in column 4 of Table 4.
(d) If the package contains fissile material, one of the provisions of
subparagraphs (a)–(f) of para. 417 shall apply.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ACTIVITY LIMITS AND CLASSIFICATION
425. Uranium hexafluoride not exceeding the limits specified in column 4 of
Table 4 may be classified under UN 3507 URANIUM HEXAFLUORIDE,
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, EXCEPTED PACKAGE, less than 0.1 kg per
package, non-fissile or fissile-excepted, provided that:
(a) The mass of uranium hexafluoride in the package is less than 0.1 kg.
(b) The conditions of paras 420, 424(a) and 424(b) are met.
426. Articles manufactured of natural uranium, depleted uranium or natural
thorium and articles in which the sole radioactive material is unirradiated
natural uranium, unirradiated depleted uranium or unirradiated natural thorium
may be classified under UN 2909, RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, EXCEPTED
PACKAGE — ARTICLES MANUFACTURED FROM NATURAL URANIUM
or DEPLETED URANIUM or NATURAL THORIUM, provided that the outer
surface of the uranium or thorium is enclosed in an inactive sheath made of metal
or some other substantial material.
Additional requirements and controls for transport of empty packagings
427. An empty packaging that had previously contained radioactive material
may be classified under UN 2908, RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL, EXCEPTED
PACKAGE — EMPTY PACKAGING, provided that:
(a) It is in a well-maintained condition and securely closed.
(b) The outer surface of any uranium or thorium in its structure is covered with
an inactive sheath made of metal or some other substantial material.
(c) The level of internal non-fixed contamination does not exceed 100 times
the levels specified in para. 508.
(d) Any labels that may have been displayed on it in conformity with para. 538
are no longer visible.
(e) If the packaging has contained fissile material, one of the provisions of
subparagraphs (a)–(f) of para. 417 or one of the provisions for exclusion in
para. 222 shall apply.
Classification as Type A package
428. Packages containing radioactive material may be classified as Type A
packages provided that the conditions of paras 429 and 430 are met.
429. Type A packages shall not contain activities greater than either of the
following:

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION IV
(a) For special form radioactive material — A ;

(b) For all other radioactive material — A .

430. For mixtures of radionuclides whose identities and respective activities
are known, the following condition shall apply to the radioactive contents of a
Type A package:
B(i) C(j)
∑ +∑ ≤1
A (i) A (j)
i 1 j 2
where
B(i) is the activity of radionuclide i as special form radioactive material;
A (i) is the A value for radionuclide i;
1 1
C(j) is the activity of radionuclide j as other than special form radioactive
material;
A (j) is the A value for radionuclide j.
2 2
Classification as Type B(U), Type B(M) or Type C package
431. Type B(U), Type B(M) and Type C packages shall be classified in accordance
with the competent authority certificate of approval for the package design issued
by the country of origin of design.
432. The contents of a Type B(U), Type B(M) or Type C package shall be as
specified in the certificate of approval.
433. Type B(U) and Type B(M) packages, if transported by air, shall meet
the requirements of para. 432 and shall not contain activities greater than the
following:
(a) For low dispersible radioactive material — as authorized for the package
design as specified in the certificate of approval;
(b) For special form radioactive material — 3000A or 105A , whichever is the
1 2
lower;
(c) For all other radioactive material — 3000A .

SPECIAL ARRANGEMENT
434. Radioactive material shall be classified as transported under special
arrangement when it is intended to be carried in accordance with para. 310.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Section V
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT
REQUIREMENTS BEFORE THE FIRST SHIPMENT
501. Before a packaging is first used to transport radioactive material, it
shall be confirmed that it has been manufactured in conformity with the
design specifications to ensure compliance with the relevant provisions of
these Regulations and any applicable certificate of approval. The following
requirements shall also be fulfilled, if applicable:
(a) If the design pressure of the containment system exceeds 35 kPa (gauge), it
shall be ensured that the containment system of each packaging conforms
to the approved design requirements relating to the capability of that system
to maintain its integrity under that pressure.
(b) For each packaging intended for use as a Type B(U), Type B(M) or Type C
package and for each packaging intended to contain fissile material, it shall
be ensured that the effectiveness of its shielding and containment and,
where necessary, the heat transfer characteristics and the effectiveness of
the confinement system, are within the limits applicable to or specified for
the approved design.
(c) For each packaging intended to contain fissile material, it shall be ensured
that the effectiveness of the criticality safety features is within the limits
applicable to or specified for the design, and in particular where, in
order to comply with the requirements of para. 673, neutron poisons are
specifically included, checks shall be performed to confirm the presence
and distribution of those neutron poisons.
REQUIREMENTS BEFORE EACH SHIPMENT
502. Before each shipment of any package, it shall be ensured that the package
contains neither:
(a) Radionuclides different from those specified for the package design; nor
(b) Contents in a form, or physical or chemical state, different from those
specified for the package design.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
503. Before each shipment of any package, it shall be ensured that all the
requirements specified in the relevant provisions of these Regulations and
in the applicable certificates of approval have been fulfilled. The following
requirements shall also be fulfilled, if applicable:
(a) It shall be ensured that lifting attachments that do not meet the requirements
of para. 608 have been removed or otherwise rendered incapable of being
used for lifting the package, in accordance with para. 609.
(b) Each Type B(U), Type B(M) and Type C package shall be held until
equilibrium conditions have been approached closely enough to demonstrate
compliance with the requirements for temperature and pressure, unless an
exemption from these requirements has received unilateral approval.
(c) For each Type B(U), Type B(M) and Type C package, it shall be ensured
by inspection and/or appropriate tests that all closures, valves and other
openings of the containment system through which the radioactive contents
might escape are properly closed and, where appropriate, sealed in the
manner for which the demonstrations of compliance with the requirements
of paras 659 and 671 were made.
(d) For packages containing fissile material, the measurement specified
in para. 677(b) and the tests to demonstrate closure of each package as
specified in para. 680 shall be performed.
(e) For packages intended to be used for shipment after storage, it shall be
ensured that all packaging components and radioactive contents have
been maintained during storage in a manner such that all the requirements
specified in the relevant provisions of these Regulations and in the
applicable certificates of approval have been fulfilled.
TRANSPORT OF OTHER GOODS
504. A package shall not contain any items other than those that are necessary
for the use of the radioactive material. The interaction between these items and
the package, under the conditions of transport applicable to the design, shall not
reduce the safety of the package.
505. Freight containers, IBCs, tanks, as well as other packagings and overpacks,
used for the transport of radioactive material shall not be used for the storage or
transport of other goods unless decontaminated below the level of 0.4 Bq/cm2 for
beta and gamma emitters and low toxicity alpha emitters and 0.04 Bq/cm2 for all
other alpha emitters.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT
506. Consignments shall be segregated from other dangerous goods during
transport in compliance with the relevant transport regulations for dangerous
goods of each of the countries through or into which the materials will be
transported, and, where applicable, with the regulations of the cognizant transport
organizations, as well as these Regulations.
OTHER DANGEROUS PROPERTIES OF CONTENTS
507. In addition to the radioactive and fissile properties, any other dangerous
properties of the contents of the package, such as explosiveness, flammability,
pyrophoricity, chemical toxicity and corrosiveness, shall be taken into account
in the packing, labelling, marking, placarding, storage and transport in order to
be in compliance with the relevant transport regulations for dangerous goods of
each of the countries through or into which the materials will be transported, and,
where applicable, with the regulations of the cognizant transport organizations,
as well as these Regulations.
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR CONTAMINATION AND
FOR LEAKING PACKAGES
508. The non-fixed contamination on the external surfaces of any package shall
be kept as low as practicable and, under routine conditions of transport, shall not
exceed the following limits:
(a) 4 Bq/cm2 for beta and gamma emitters and low toxicity alpha emitters;
(b) 0.4 Bq/cm2 for all other alpha emitters.
These limits are applicable when averaged over any area of 300 cm2 of any part
of the surface.
509. Except as provided in para. 514, the level of non-fixed contamination on the
external and internal surfaces of overpacks, freight containers and conveyances
shall not exceed the limits specified in para. 508. This requirement does not
apply to the internal surfaces of freight containers being used as packagings,
either loaded or empty.
510. If it is evident that a package is damaged or leaking, or if it is suspected
that the package may have leaked or been damaged, access to the package shall
be restricted and a qualified person shall, as soon as possible, assess the extent

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
of contamination and the resultant dose rate of the package. The scope of the
assessment shall include the package, the conveyance, the adjacent loading and
unloading areas and, if necessary, all other material that has been carried in
the conveyance. When necessary, additional steps for the protection of people,
property and the environment, in accordance with provisions established by
the relevant competent authority, shall be taken to overcome and minimize the
consequences of such leakage or damage.
511. Packages that are damaged or leaking radioactive contents in excess
of allowable limits for normal conditions of transport may be removed to an
acceptable interim location under supervision, but shall not be forwarded until
repaired or reconditioned and decontaminated.
512. A conveyance and equipment used regularly for the transport of radioactive
material shall be periodically checked to determine the level of contamination.
The frequency of such checks shall be related to the likelihood of contamination
and the extent to which radioactive material is transported.
513. Except as provided in para. 514, any conveyance, or equipment or part
thereof that has become contaminated above the limits specified in para. 508 in
the course of the transport of radioactive material, or that shows a dose rate in
excess of 5 μSv/h at the surface, shall be decontaminated as soon as possible by
a qualified person and shall not be reused unless the following conditions are
fulfilled:
(a) The non-fixed contamination shall not exceed the limits specified in
para. 508.
(b) The dose rate resulting from the fixed contamination shall not exceed
5 μSv/h at the surface.
514. A freight container or conveyance dedicated to the transport of unpackaged
radioactive material under exclusive use shall be excepted from the requirements
of paras 509 and 513 solely with regard to its internal surfaces and only for as
long as it remains under that specific exclusive use.
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT OF
EXCEPTED PACKAGES
515. Excepted packages shall be subject only to the following provisions in
Sections V and VI:

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT
(a) The requirements specified in paras 503–505; 507–513; 516; 530–533;
545; 546 introductory sentence; 546(a); 546(j),(i) and (ii); 546(k); 546(m);
550–553; 555; 556; 561; 564; 570; 582 and 583;
(b) The requirements for excepted packages specified in para. 622;
(c) The requirements specified in paras 580 and 581, if transported by post.
All relevant provisions of the other sections shall apply to excepted packages.
516. The dose rate at any point on the external surface of an excepted package
shall not exceed 5 μSv/h.
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT OF
LSA MATERIAL AND SCO IN INDUSTRIAL PACKAGES OR
UNPACKAGED
517. The quantity of LSA material or SCO in a single Type IP-1, Type IP-2,
Type IP-3 package, or object or collection of objects, whichever is appropriate,
shall be so restricted that the external dose rate at 3 m from the unshielded
material or object or collection of objects does not exceed 10 mSv/h.
518. For LSA material and SCO that are or contain fissile material that is not
excepted under para. 417, the applicable requirements of paras 568 and 569 shall
be met.
519. For LSA material and SCO that are, or contain, fissile material, the
applicable requirements of para. 673 shall be met.
520. LSA material and SCO in groups LSA-I, SCO-I and SCO-III may be
transported, unpackaged, under the following conditions:
(a) All unpackaged material other than ores containing only naturally occurring
radionuclides shall be transported in such a manner that under routine
conditions of transport there will be no escape of the radioactive contents
from the conveyance nor will there be any loss of shielding.
(b) Each conveyance shall be under exclusive use, except when only
transporting SCO-I on which the contamination on the accessible and
the inaccessible surfaces is not greater than 10 times the applicable level
specified in para. 214.
(c) For SCO-I where it is suspected that non-fixed contamination exists on
inaccessible surfaces in excess of the values specified in para. 413(a)(i),

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
measures shall be taken to ensure that the radioactive material is not released
into the conveyance.
(d) Unpackaged fissile material shall meet the requirement of para. 417(e).
(e) For SCO-III;
(i) Transport shall be under exclusive use by road, rail, inland waterway
or sea.
(ii) Stacking shall not be permitted.
(iii) All activities associated with the shipment, including radiation
protection, emergency response and any special precautions or special
administrative or operational controls that are to be employed during
transport shall be described in a transport plan. The transport plan
shall demonstrate that the overall level of safety in transport is at least
equivalent to that which would be provided if the requirements of
para. 648 (only for the test specified in para. 724, preceded by the tests
specified in paras 720 and 721) had been met.
(iv) The requirements of para. 624 for a Type IP-2 package shall be
satisfied, except that the maximum damage referred to in para. 722
may be determined based on provisions in the transport plan, and the
requirements of para. 723 are not applicable.
(v) The object and any shielding are secured to the conveyance in
accordance with para. 607.
(vi) The shipment shall be subject to multilateral approval.
521. LSA material and SCO, except as otherwise specified in para. 520, shall be
packaged in accordance with Table 5.
522. The total activity in a single hold or compartment of an inland waterway
craft, or in another conveyance, for carriage of LSA material or SCO in a
Type IP-1, Type IP-2, Type IP-3 package or unpackaged, shall not exceed the
limits shown in Table 6. For SCO-III, the limits in Table 6 may be exceeded
provided that the transport plan contains precautions which are to be employed
during transport to obtain an overall level of safety at least equivalent to that
which would be provided if the limits had been applied.
DETERMINATION OF TRANSPORT INDEX
523. The TI for a package, overpack or freight container, or for unpackaged
LSA-I, SCO-I or SCO-III, shall be the number derived in accordance with the
following procedure:

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT
TABLE 5. INDUSTRIAL PACKAGE REQUIREMENTS FOR
LSA MATERIAL, SCO-I AND SCO-II
Industrial package type
Radioactive contents
Exclusive use Not under exclusive use
LSA-I
Solid a Type IP-1 Type IP-1
Liquid Type IP-1 Type IP-2
LSA-II
Solid Type IP-2 Type IP-2
Liquid and gas Type IP-2 Type IP-3
LSA-III Type IP-2 Type IP-3
SCO-I a Type IP-1 Type IP-1
SCO-II Type IP-2 Type IP-2
a Under the conditions specified in para. 520, LSA-I material and SCO-I may be transported
unpackaged.
TABLE 6. CONVEYANCE ACTIVITY LIMITS FOR LSA MATERIAL
AND SCO IN INDUSTRIAL PACKAGES OR UNPACKAGED
Activity limit for conveyances Activity limit for a hold or
Nature of material other than inland waterway compartment of an inland
craft waterway craft
LSA-I No limit No limit
LSA-II and LSA-III No limit 100A

non-combustible solids
LSA-II and LSA-III 100A 10A
2 2
combustible solids and all
liquids and gases
SCO a 100A 10A
2 2
a For SCO-III see para. 522.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
(a) Determine the maximum dose rate in units of millisieverts per hour
(mSv/h) at a distance of 1 m from the external surfaces of the package,
overpack, freight container or unpackaged LSA-I, SCO-I and SCO-III. The
value determined shall be multiplied by 100. For uranium and thorium ores
and their concentrates, the maximum dose rate at any point 1 m from the
external surface of the load may be taken as:
(i) 0.4 mSv/h for ores and physical concentrates of uranium and thorium;
(ii) 0.3 mSv/h for chemical concentrates of thorium;
(iii) 0.02 mSv/h for chemical concentrates of uranium, other than uranium
hexafluoride.
(b) For tanks, freight containers and unpackaged LSA-I, SCO-I and SCO-III,
the value determined in step (a) shall be multiplied by the appropriate factor
from Table 7.
(c) The value obtained in steps (a) and (b) shall be rounded up to the first
decimal place (for example, 1.13 becomes 1.2), except that a value of 0.05
or less may be considered as zero and the resulting number is the TI value.
524. The TI for each rigid overpack, freight container or conveyance shall be
determined as the sum of the TIs of all the packages contained therein. For a
shipment from a single consignor, the consignor may determine the TI by direct
measurement of dose rate.
524A. The TI for a non-rigid overpack shall be determined only as the sum of
the TIs of all the packages within the overpack.
TABLE 7. MULTIPLICATION FACTORS FOR TANKS,
FREIGHT CONTAINERS AND UNPACKAGED LSA-I,
SCO-I AND SCO-III
Size of load a Multiplication factor
size of load ≤ 1 m2 1
1 m2 < size of load ≤ 5 m2 2
5 m2 < size of load ≤ 20 m2 3
20 m2 < size of load 10
a Largest cross-sectional area of the load being measured.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT
DETERMINATION OF CRITICALITY SAFETY INDEX FOR
CONSIGNMENTS, FREIGHT CONTAINERS AND OVERPACKS
525. The CSI for each overpack or freight container shall be determined as
the sum of the CSIs of all the packages contained. The same procedure shall be
followed for determining the total sum of the CSIs in a consignment or aboard a
conveyance.
LIMITS ON TRANSPORT INDEX, CRITICALITY SAFETY INDEX
AND DOSE RATES FOR PACKAGES AND OVERPACKS
526. Except for consignments under exclusive use, the TI of any package or
overpack shall not exceed 10, nor shall the CSI of any package or overpack
exceed 50.
527. Except for packages or overpacks transported under exclusive use by rail
or by road under the conditions specified in para. 573(a), or under exclusive use
and special arrangement by vessel or by air under the conditions specified in
para. 575 or para. 579, respectively, the maximum dose rate at any point on the
external surface of a package or overpack shall not exceed 2 mSv/h.
528. The maximum dose rate at any point on the external surface of a package
or overpack under exclusive use shall not exceed 10 mSv/h.
CATEGORIES
529. Packages, overpacks and freight containers shall be assigned to either
category I-WHITE, II-YELLOW or III-YELLOW in accordance with the
conditions specified in Table 8 and with the following requirements:
(a) For a package, overpack or freight container, the TI and the surface dose
rate conditions shall be taken into account in determining which category
is appropriate. Where the TI satisfies the condition for one category but
the surface dose rate satisfies the condition for a different category, the
package, overpack or freight container shall be assigned to the higher
category. For this purpose, category I-WHITE shall be regarded as the
lowest category.
(b) The TI shall be determined following the procedures specified in paras 523,
524 and 524A.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
TABLE 8. CATEGORIES OF PACKAGES, OVERPACKS AND FREIGHT
CONTAINERS
Conditions
Category
Maximum dose rate at any point
TI
on external surface
0a Not more than 0.005 mSv/h I-WHITE
More than 0 but not more than 1a More than 0.005 mSv/h but II-YELLOW
not more than 0.5 mSv/h
More than 1 but not more than 10 More than 0.5 mSv/h but III-YELLOW
not more than 2 mSv/h
More than 10 More than 2 mSv/h but III-YELLOWb
not more than 10 mSv/h
a If the measured TI is not greater than 0.05, the value quoted may be zero in accordance with
para. 523(c).
b Shall also be transported under exclusive use except for freight containers (see Table 10).
(c) If the surface dose rate is greater than 2 mSv/h, the package or overpack
shall be transported under exclusive use and under the provisions of
paras 573(a), 575 or 579, as appropriate.
(d) A package transported under a special arrangement shall be assigned to
category III-YELLOW except under the provisions of para. 530.
(e) An overpack or freight container that contains packages transported under
special arrangement shall be assigned to category III-YELLOW except
under the provisions of para. 530.
MARKING, LABELLING AND PLACARDING
530. For each package or overpack, the UN number and proper shipping
name shall be determined (see Table 1). In all cases of international transport
of packages requiring competent authority approval of design or shipment, for
which different approval types apply in the different countries concerned by the
shipment, the UN number, proper shipping name, categorization, labelling and
marking shall be in accordance with the certificate of the country of origin of
design.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT
Marking
531. Each package shall be legibly and durably marked on the outside of the
packaging with an identification of either the consignor or consignee, or both.
Each overpack shall be legibly and durably marked on the outside of the overpack
with an identification of either the consignor or consignee, or both, unless these
marks of all the packages within the overpack are clearly visible.
532. Each package shall be legibly and durably marked on the outside with the
UN marks as specified in Table 9. Additionally, each overpack shall be legibly
and durably marked with the word “OVERPACK” and the UN marks as specified
in Table 9, unless all the marks of the packages within the overpack are clearly
visible.
533. Each package of gross mass exceeding 50 kg shall have its permissible
gross mass legibly and durably marked on the outside of the packaging.
TABLE 9. UN MARKING FOR PACKAGES AND OVERPACKS
Item UN marksa
Package UN number, preceded by the letters “UN”,
(other than an excepted package) and the proper shipping name
Excepted package UN number, preceded by the letters “UN”
(other than those in consignments accepted
for international movement by post)
Overpack UN number, preceded by the letters “UN”
(other than an overpack containing only for each applicable UN number in the
excepted packages) overpack, followed by the proper shipping
name in the case of a non-excepted package
Overpack containing only excepted packages UN number, preceded by the letters “UN”
(other than consignments accepted for for each applicable UN number in the
international movement by post) overpack
Consignment accepted for international The requirement of para. 581
movement by post
a See Table 1 for listing of UN numbers and proper shipping names.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
534. Each package that conforms to:
(a) An IP-1, IP-2 or IP-3 design shall be legibly and durably marked on the
outside of the packaging with “TYPE IP-1”, “TYPE IP-2” or “TYPE IP-3”,
as appropriate.
(b) A Type A package design shall be legibly and durably marked on the outside
of the packaging with “TYPE A”.
(c) An IP-2, IP-3 or a Type A package design shall be legibly and durably
marked on the outside of the packaging with the international vehicle
registration code (VRI code) of the country of origin of design and either
the name of the manufacturer or other identification of the packaging
specified by the competent authority of the country of origin of design.
535. Each package that conforms to a design approved under one or more of
paras 807–816 and 820 shall be legibly and durably marked on the outside of the
packaging with the following information:
(a) The identification mark allocated to that design by the competent authority;
(b) A serial number to uniquely identify each packaging that conforms to that
design;
(c) “TYPE B(U)”, “TYPE B(M)” or “TYPE C”, in the case of a Type B(U),
Type B(M) or Type C package design.
536. Each package that conforms to a Type B(U), Type B(M) or Type C package
design shall have the outside of the outermost receptacle, that is resistant to the
effects of fire and water, plainly marked by embossing, stamping or other means
resistant to the effects of fire and water with the trefoil symbol shown in Fig. 1.
536A. Any mark on the package made in accordance with the requirements of
paras 534(a) and (b) and 535(c) relating to the package type that does not relate
to the UN number and proper shipping name assigned to the consignment shall
be removed or covered.
537. Where LSA-I or SCO-I material is contained in receptacles or wrapping
materials and is transported under exclusive use, as permitted by para. 520, the
outer surface of these receptacles or wrapping materials may bear the mark
“RADIOACTIVE LSA-I” or “RADIOACTIVE SCO-I”, as appropriate.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT
60°
60°
X/2
X
5 X
FIG. 1. Basic trefoil symbol with proportions based on a central circle of radius X.
The minimum allowable size of X shall be 4 mm.
Labelling
538. Each package, overpack and freight container shall bear the labels
conforming to the applicable models in Figs 2–4, except as allowed under
the alternative provisions of para. 543 for large freight containers and tanks,
according to the appropriate category. In addition, each package, overpack and
freight container containing fissile material, other than fissile material excepted
under the provisions of para. 417, shall bear labels conforming to the model in
Fig. 5. Any labels that do not relate to the contents shall be removed or covered.
For radioactive material having other dangerous properties, see para. 507.
539. The labels conforming to the applicable models in Figs 2–4 shall be affixed
to two opposite sides of the outside of a package or overpack or on the outside of
all four sides of a freight container or tank. The labels conforming to the model
in Fig. 5, where applicable, shall be affixed adjacent to the labels conforming to
the applicable models in Figs 2–4. The labels shall not cover the marks specified
in paras 531–536.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
FIG. 2. Category I-WHITE label. The minimum width of the line inside the edge forming the
diamond shall be 2 mm. The background colour of the label shall be white, the colour of the
trefoil and the printing shall be black, and the colour of the category bar shall be red.
Labelling for radioactive contents
540. Each label conforming to the applicable models in Figs 2–4 shall be
completed with the following information:
(a) Contents:
(i) Except for LSA-I material, the name(s) of the radionuclide(s) as taken
from Table 2, using the symbols prescribed therein. For mixtures of
radionuclides, the most restrictive nuclides must be listed to the extent
the space on the line permits. The group of LSA or SCO shall be

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT

m
m
4 mm
RADIOACTIVE
CONTENTS
M ACTIVITY N
IN
IM
N
SI
O
U E
M M
1 0 0 m D m IM E N TRA IN N D S E P X ORT M U M 1 D 0 I 0 m m
S IO
N 7 MI
NI
FIG. 3. Category II-YELLOW label. The minimum width of the line inside the edge forming
the diamond shall be 2 mm. The background colour of the upper half of the label shall be
yellow and the lower half white, the colour of the trefoil and the printing shall be black, and
the colour of the category bars shall be red.
shown following the name(s) of the radionuclide(s). The terms LSA-II,
LSA-III, SCO-I and SCO-II shall be used for this purpose.
(ii) For LSA-I material, the term LSA-I is all that is necessary; the name of
the radionuclide is not necessary.
(b) Activity: The maximum activity of the radioactive contents during transport
expressed in units of becquerels (Bq) with the appropriate SI prefix symbol
(see Annex II). For fissile material, the total mass of fissile nuclides in units
of grams (g), or multiples thereof, may be used in place of activity.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
FIG. 4. Category III-YELLOW label. The minimum width of the line inside the edge forming
the diamond shall be 2 mm. The background colour of the upper half of the label shall be
yellow and the lower half white, the colour of the trefoil and the printing shall be black, and
the colour of the category bars shall be red.
(c) For overpacks and freight containers, the “contents” and “activity” entries
on the label shall bear the information required in para. 540(a) and 540(b),
respectively, totalled together for the entire contents of the overpack or
freight container except that on labels for overpacks or freight containers
containing mixed loads of packages containing different radionuclides,
such entries may read “See Transport Documents”.
(d) TI: The number determined in accordance with paras 523, 524 and 524A
(except for category I-WHITE).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT

m
m
FISSILE
M CRITICALITY N
IN
IM SAFETY INDEX
N
SI
O
U E
M M
1 0 0
m
D
m
IM
E N M U
M

D

I

m m
S IO
N 7 MI
NI
FIG. 5. CSI label. The minimum width of the line inside the edge forming the diamond shall
be 2 mm. The background colour of the label shall be white, the colour of the printing shall
be black.
Labelling for criticality safety
541. Each label conforming to the model in Fig. 5 shall be completed with the
CSI as stated in the certificate of approval applicable in the countries through or
into which the consignment is transported and issued by the competent authority
or as specified in para. 674 or para. 675.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
542. For overpacks and freight containers, the label conforming to the model in
Fig. 5 shall bear the sum of the CSIs of all the packages contained therein.
Placarding
543. Large freight containers carrying unpackaged LSA-I material or SCO-I or
packages other than excepted packages, and tanks shall bear four placards that
conform to the model given in Fig. 6. The placards shall be affixed in a vertical
orientation to each side wall and to each end wall of the large freight container or
tank. Any placards that do not relate to the contents shall be removed. Instead of
using both labels and placards, it is permitted, as an alternative, to use enlarged
labels only, where appropriate, as shown in Figs 2–4, except having the minimum
size shown in Fig. 6.
544. Where the consignment in the freight container or tank is unpackaged
LSA-I or SCO-I or where a consignment in a freight container is required to be
shipped under exclusive use and is packaged radioactive material with a single
UN number, the appropriate UN number for the consignment (see Table 1) shall
also be displayed, in black digits not less than 65 mm high, either:
(a) In the lower half of the placard shown in Fig. 6 and against the white
background; or
(b) On the placard shown in Fig. 7.
When the alternative given in (b) is used, the subsidiary placard shall be affixed
immediately adjacent to the main placard shown in Fig. 6, on all four sides of the
freight container or tank.
CONSIGNOR’S RESPONSIBILITIES
545. Except as otherwise provided in these Regulations, no person may offer
radioactive material for transport unless it is properly marked, labelled,
placarded, described and certified on a transport document, and otherwise in a
condition for transport as required by these Regulations.
Particulars of consignment
546. The consignor shall include in the transport documents with each
consignment the identification of the consignor and consignee, including their

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT
FIG. 6. Placard. Except as permitted by para. 571, minimum dimensions shall be as shown;
when different dimensions are used, the relative proportions must be maintained. The
number “7”shall not be less than 25 mm high. The background colour of the upper half of the
placard shall be yellow and of the lower half white, the colour of the trefoil and the printing
shall be black. The use of the word “RADIOACTIVE” in the bottom half is optional, to allow
the alternative use of this placard to display the appropriate UN number for the consignment.
names and addresses, and the following information, as applicable, in the order
given:
(a) The UN number assigned to the material as specified in accordance with
the provisions of paras 401 and 530, preceded by the letters “UN”.
(b) The proper shipping name, as specified in accordance with the provisions
of paras 401 and 530.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
FIG. 7. Placard for separate display of UN number. The background colour of the placard
shall be orange and the border and UN number shall be black. The symbol “****” denotes the
space in which the appropriate UN number for radioactive material, as specified in Table 1,
shall be displayed.
(c) The UN dangerous goods class number “7”.
(d) The subsidiary hazard class or division number(s) corresponding to the
subsidiary hazard label(s) required to be applied, when assigned, shall be
entered following the primary hazard class or division and shall be enclosed
in parentheses.
(e) The name or symbol of each radionuclide or, for mixtures of radionuclides,
an appropriate general description or a list of the most restrictive nuclides.
(f) A description of the physical and chemical form of the material, or a notation
that the material is special form radioactive material or low dispersible
radioactive material. A generic chemical description is acceptable for
chemical form.
(g) The maximum activity of the radioactive contents during transport
expressed in units of becquerels (Bq) with the appropriate SI prefix symbol
(see Annex II). For fissile material, the mass of fissile material (or mass of
each fissile nuclide for mixtures, when appropriate) in units of grams (g), or
appropriate multiples thereof, may be used in place of activity.
(h) The category of the package, overpack or freight container, as assigned per
para. 529, i.e. I-WHITE, II-YELLOW, III-YELLOW.
(i) The TI as determined per paras 523, 524 and 524A (except for category
I-WHITE).
(j) For fissile material:
(i) Shipped under one exception of subparagraphs 417(a)–(f), reference to
that paragraph;

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT
(ii) Shipped under para. 417(c)–(e), the total mass of fissile nuclides;
(iii) Contained in a package for which one of para. 674(a)–(c) or 675 is
applied, reference to that paragraph;
(iv) The CSI, where applicable.
(k) The identification mark for each competent authority certificate of approval
(special form radioactive material, low dispersible radioactive material,
fissile material excepted under para. 417(f), special arrangement, package
design or shipment) applicable to the consignment.
(l) For consignments of more than one package, the information contained
in para. 546(a)–(k) shall be given for each package. For packages in
an overpack, freight container or conveyance, a detailed statement of
the contents of each package within the overpack, freight container or
conveyance and, where appropriate, of each overpack, freight container
or conveyance shall be included. If packages are to be removed from
the overpack, freight container or conveyance at a point of intermediate
unloading, appropriate transport documents shall be made available.
(m) Where a consignment is required to be shipped under exclusive use, the
statement “EXCLUSIVE USE SHIPMENT”.
(n) For LSA-II, LSA-III, SCO-I, SCO-II and SCO-III, the total activity of the
consignment as a multiple of A . For radioactive material for which the A
2 2
value is unlimited, the multiple of A shall be zero.

Consignor’s certification or declaration
547. The consignor shall include in the transport documents a certification or
declaration in the following terms:
“I hereby declare that the contents of this consignment are fully and
accurately described above by the proper shipping name and are classified,
packaged, marked and labelled/placarded, and are in all respects in proper
condition for transport according to applicable international and national
governmental regulations.”
548. If the intent of the declaration is already a condition of transport within a
particular international convention, the consignor need not provide a declaration
for that part of the transport covered by the convention.
549. The declaration shall be signed and dated by the consignor. Facsimile
signatures are acceptable where applicable laws and regulations recognize the
legal validity of facsimile signatures.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
550. If the dangerous goods documentation is presented to the carrier by
means of electronic data processing or electronic data interchange transmission
techniques, the signature(s) may be replaced by the name(s) (in capitals) of the
person authorized to sign.
551. When radioactive material, other than when carried in tanks, is packed or
loaded into any freight container or vehicle that will be transported by sea, those
responsible for packing the container or vehicle shall provide a container/vehicle
packing certificate specifying the container/vehicle identification number(s) and
certifying that the operation has been carried out in accordance with the applicable
conditions of the International Maritime Dangerous Goods (IMDG) Code [15].
552. The information required in the transport documents and the
container/vehicle packing certificate may be incorporated into a single document,
if not, the documents shall be attached. If the information is incorporated into a
single document, the document shall include a signed declaration such as:
“It is declared that the packing of the goods into the container/vehicle has
been carried out in accordance with the applicable provisions”.
This declaration shall be dated and the person signing it shall be identified on
the document. Facsimile signatures are acceptable where applicable laws and
regulations recognize the legal validity of facsimile signatures.
553. The declaration shall be made on the same transport document that contains
the particulars of consignment listed in para. 546.
Information for carriers
554. The consignor shall provide in the transport documents a statement
regarding actions, if any, that are required to be taken by the carrier. The
statement shall be in the languages deemed necessary by the carrier or the
authorities concerned and shall include at least the following points:
(a) Supplementary requirements for loading, stowage, carriage, handling and
unloading of the package, overpack or freight container, including any
special stowage provisions for the safe dissipation of heat (see para. 565),
or a statement that no such requirements are necessary;
(b) Restrictions on the mode of transport or conveyance and any necessary
routeing instructions;
(c) Emergency arrangements appropriate to the consignment.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT
555. The consignor shall retain a copy of each of the transport documents
containing the information specified in paras 546, 547, 551, 552 and 554, as
applicable, for a minimum period of three months.
When the documents are kept electronically, the consignor shall be able to
reproduce them in a printed form.
556. The applicable competent authority certificates need not necessarily
accompany the consignment. The consignor shall make the applicable certificates
available to the carrier(s) before loading and unloading.
Notification of competent authorities
557. Before the first shipment of any package requiring competent authority
approval, the consignor shall ensure that copies of each applicable competent
authority certificate applying to that package design have been submitted
to the competent authority of the country of origin of the shipment and to the
competent authority of each country through or into which the consignment is to
be transported. The consignor is not required to await an acknowledgement from
the competent authority, nor is the competent authority required to make such
acknowledgement of receipt of the certificate.
558. For each shipment listed in (a), (b), (c) or (d) below, the consignor shall
notify the competent authority of the country of origin of the shipment and the
competent authority of each country through or into which the consignment is
to be transported. This notification shall be in the possession of each competent
authority prior to the commencement of the shipment, preferably at least 7 days
in advance of the shipment. The shipments that require consignor notification
include:
(a) Type C packages containing radioactive material with an activity greater
than 3000A or 3000A , as appropriate, or 1000 TBq, whichever is the
1 2
lower;
(b) Type B(U) packages containing radioactive material with an activity
greater than 3000A or 3000A , as appropriate, or 1000 TBq, whichever is
1 2
the lower;
(c) Type B(M) packages;
(d) Shipments under special arrangement.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
559. The consignment notification shall include:
(a) Sufficient information to enable the identification of the package or
packages, including all applicable certificate numbers and identification
marks.
(b) Information on the date of shipment, the expected date of arrival and the
proposed routeing.
(c) The name(s) of the radioactive material(s) or nuclide(s).
(d) Descriptions of the physical and chemical forms of the radioactive material,
or whether it is special form radioactive material or low dispersible
radioactive material.
(e) The maximum activity of the radioactive contents during transport
expressed in units of becquerels (Bq) with the appropriate SI prefix symbol
(see Annex II). For fissile material, the mass of fissile material (or the
mass of each fissile nuclide for a mixture, when appropriate) in units of
grams (g), or multiples thereof, may be used in place of activity.
560. The consignor is not required to send a separate notification if the required
information has been included in the application for approval of shipment (see
para. 827).
Possession of certificates and instructions
561. The consignor shall have in his/her possession a copy of each certificate
required under Section VIII of these Regulations and a copy of the instructions
with regard to the proper closing of the package and other preparations for
shipment before making any shipment under the terms of the certificates.
TRANSPORT AND STORAGE IN TRANSIT
Segregation during transport and storage in transit
562. Packages, overpacks and freight containers containing radioactive material
and unpackaged radioactive material shall be segregated during transport and
during storage in transit:
(a) From workers in regularly occupied working areas by distances calculated
using a dose criterion of 5 mSv in a year and conservative model parameters;

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT
(b) From members of the public in areas where the public has regular access
by distances calculated using a dose criterion of 1 mSv in a year and
conservative model parameters;
(c) From undeveloped photographic film by distances calculated using a
radiation exposure criterion for undeveloped photographic film due to the
transport of radioactive material of 0.1 mSv per consignment of such film;
(d) From other dangerous goods in accordance with para. 506.
563. Category II-YELLOW or III-YELLOW packages or overpacks shall not
be carried in compartments occupied by passengers, except those exclusively
reserved for couriers specially authorized to accompany such packages or
overpacks.
Stowage during transport and storage in transit
564. Consignments shall be securely stowed.
565. Provided that its average surface heat flux does not exceed 15 W/m2
and that the immediate surrounding cargo is not in sacks or bags, a package
or overpack may be carried or stored among packaged general cargo without
any special stowage provisions except as may be specifically required by the
competent authority in an applicable certificate of approval.
566. Loading of freight containers and accumulation of packages, overpacks
and freight containers shall be controlled as follows:
(a) Except under the condition of exclusive use, and for consignments of LSA-I
material, the total number of packages, overpacks and freight containers
aboard a single conveyance shall be limited so that the sum of the TIs
aboard the conveyance does not exceed the values shown in Table 10.
(b) The dose rate under routine conditions of transport shall not exceed
2 mSv/h at any point on the external surface of the vehicle or freight
container, and 0.1 mSv/h at 2 m from the external surface of the vehicle or
freight container, except for consignments transported under exclusive use
by road or rail for which the radiation limits around the vehicle are set forth
in para. 573(b) and 573(c).
(c) The sum of the CSIs in a freight container and aboard a conveyance shall
not exceed the values shown in Table 11.
567. Any package or overpack having a TI greater than 10, or any consignment
having a CSI greater than 50, shall be transported only under exclusive use.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
TABLE 10. TRANSPORT INDEX LIMITS FOR FREIGHT CONTAINERS
AND CONVEYANCES NOT UNDER EXCLUSIVE USE
Limit on sum of TIs in a freight
Type of freight container or conveyance
container or aboard a conveyance
Freight container:
Small freight container 50
Large freight container 50
Vehicle 50
Aircraft:
Passenger 50
Cargo 200
Inland waterway craft 50
Sea-going vessela:
(i) Hold, compartment or defined deck area:
Packages, overpacks, small freight containers 50
Large freight containers 200
(ii) Total vessel:
Packages, overpacks, small freight containers 200
Large freight containers No limit
a Packages or overpacks carried in or on a vehicle that are in accordance with the provisions of
para. 573 may be transported by vessels provided that they are not removed from the vehicle
at any time while on board the vessel.
Additional requirements relating to transport and storage in transit of
fissile material
568. Any group of packages, overpacks and freight containers containing fissile
material stored in transit in any one storage area shall be so limited that the sum
of the CSIs in the group does not exceed 50. Each group shall be stored so as to
maintain a spacing of at least 6 m from other such groups.
569. Where the sum of the CSIs on board a conveyance or in a freight container
exceeds 50, as permitted in Table 11, storage shall be such as to maintain
a spacing of at least 6 m from other groups of packages, overpacks or freight
containers containing fissile material or other conveyances carrying radioactive
material.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT
TABLE 11. CSI LIMITS FOR FREIGHT CONTAINERS AND
CONVEYANCES CONTAINING FISSILE MATERIAL
Limit on sum of CSIs in a freight container or
aboard a conveyance
Type of freight container or conveyance
Not under exclusive use Under exclusive use
Freight container:
Small freight container 50 Not applicable
Large freight container 50 100
Vehicle 50 100
Aircraft:
Passenger 50 Not applicable
Cargo 50 100
Inland waterway craft 50 100
Sea-going vessel a:
(i) Hold, compartment or defined deck area:
Packages, overpacks, 50 100
small freight containers
Large freight containers 50 100
(ii) Total vessel:
Packages, overpacks, 200b 200c
small freight containers
Large freight containers No limitb No limitc
a
Packages or overpacks carried in or on a vehicle that are in accordance with the provisions of
para. 573 may be transported by vessels provided that they are not removed from the vehicle
at any time while on board the vessel. In this case, the entries under the heading “under
exclusive use” apply.
b
The consignment shall be so handled and stowed that the sum of CSIs in any group does not
exceed 50 and that each group is handled and stowed so as to maintain a spacing of at least
6 m from other groups.
c
The consignment shall be so handled and stowed that the sum of CSIs in any group does not
exceed 100 and that each group is handled and stowed so as to maintain a spacing of at least
6 m from other groups. The intervening space between groups may be occupied by other
cargo in accordance with para. 506.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
570. Fissile material meeting one of the provisions (a)–(f) of para. 417 shall
meet the following requirements:
(a) Only one of the provisions (a)–(f) of para. 417 is allowed per consignment.
(b) Only one approved fissile material in packages classified in accordance
with para. 417(f) is allowed per consignment unless multiple materials are
authorized in the certificate of approval.
(c) Fissile material in packages classified in accordance with para. 417(c) shall
be transported in a consignment with no more than 45 g of fissile nuclides.
(d) Fissile material in packages classified in accordance with para. 417(d) shall
be transported in a consignment with no more than 15 g of fissile nuclides.
(e) Unpackaged or packaged fissile material classified in accordance with
para. 417(e) shall be transported under exclusive use on a conveyance with
no more than 45 g of fissile nuclides.
Additional requirements relating to transport by rail and by road
571. Vehicles carrying packages, overpacks or freight containers labelled with
any of the labels shown in Figs 2–5, or carrying unpackaged LSA-I material,
SCO-I or SCO-III, shall display the placard shown in Fig. 6 on each of:
(a) The two external lateral walls in the case of a rail vehicle;
(b) The two external lateral walls and the external rear wall in the case of a
road vehicle.
In the case of a vehicle without sides, the placards may be affixed directly on
the cargo carrying unit provided that they are readily visible. In the case of large
tanks or freight containers, the placards on the tanks or freight containers shall
suffice. In the case of vehicles that have insufficient area to allow the fixing of
larger placards, the dimensions of the placard described in Fig. 6 may be reduced
to 100 mm. Any placards that do not relate to the contents shall be removed.
572. Where the consignment in or on the vehicle is unpackaged LSA-I material,
SCO-I or SCO-III, or where a consignment is required to be shipped under
exclusive use and is packaged radioactive material with a single UN number, the
appropriate UN number (see Table 1) shall also be displayed, in black digits not
less than 65 mm high, either:
(a) In the lower half of the placard shown in Fig. 6, against the white
background; or
(b) On the placard shown in Fig. 7.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT
When the alternative given in (b) is used, the subsidiary placard shall be affixed
immediately adjacent to the main placard, either on the two external lateral walls
in the case of a rail vehicle or on the two external lateral walls and the external
rear wall in the case of a road vehicle.
573. For consignments under exclusive use, the dose rate shall not exceed:
(a) 10 mSv/h at any point on the external surface of any package or overpack,
and may only exceed 2 mSv/h provided that:
(i) The vehicle is equipped with an enclosure that, during routine
conditions of transport, prevents the access of unauthorized persons to
the interior of the enclosure.
(ii) Provisions are made to secure the package or overpack so that its
position within the vehicle enclosure remains fixed during routine
conditions of transport.
(iii) There is no loading or unloading during the shipment.
(b) 2 mSv/h at any point on the outer surfaces of the vehicle, including the
upper and lower surfaces, or, in the case of an open vehicle, at any point
on the vertical planes projected from the outer edges of the vehicle, on the
upper surface of the load, and on the lower external surface of the vehicle.
(c) 0.1 mSv/h at any point 2 m from the vertical planes represented by the
outer lateral surfaces of the vehicle, or, if the load is transported in an open
vehicle, at any point 2 m from the vertical planes projected from the outer
edges of the vehicle.
574. In the case of road vehicles, no persons other than the driver and assistants
shall be permitted in vehicles carrying packages, overpacks or freight containers
bearing category II-YELLOW or III-YELLOW labels.
Additional requirements relating to transport by vessels
575. Packages or overpacks having a surface dose rate greater than 2 mSv/h,
unless being carried in or on a vehicle under exclusive use in accordance with
Table 10, footnote (a), shall not be transported by vessel except under special
arrangement.
576. The transport of consignments by means of a special use vessel that, by
virtue of its design, or by reason of its being chartered, is dedicated to the purpose

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
of carrying radioactive material, shall be excepted from the requirements
specified in para. 566 provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) A radiation protection programme for the shipment shall be approved by
the competent authority of the flag state of the vessel and, when requested,
by the competent authority at each port of call.
(b) Stowage arrangements shall be predetermined for the whole voyage,
including any consignments to be loaded at ports of call en route.
(c) The loading, carriage and unloading of the consignments shall be supervised
by persons qualified in the transport of radioactive material.
Additional requirements relating to transport by air
577. Type B(M) packages and consignments under exclusive use shall not be
transported on passenger aircraft.
578. Vented Type B(M) packages, packages that require external cooling by
an ancillary cooling system, packages subject to operational controls during
transport and packages containing liquid pyrophoric materials shall not be
transported by air.
579. Packages or overpacks having a surface dose rate greater than 2 mSv/h
shall not be transported by air except by special arrangement.
Additional requirements relating to transport by post
580. A consignment that conforms to the requirements of para. 515, in which
the activity of the radioactive contents does not exceed one tenth of the limits
prescribed in Table 4, and that does not contain uranium hexafluoride, may be
accepted for domestic movement by national postal authorities, subject to such
additional requirements as those authorities may prescribe.
581. A consignment that conforms to the requirements of para. 515, in which
the activity of the radioactive contents does not exceed one tenth of the limits
prescribed in Table 4, and that does not contain uranium hexafluoride, may be
accepted for international movement by post, subject in particular to the following
additional requirements as prescribed by the Acts of the Universal Postal Union:
(a) The consignment shall be deposited with the postal service only by
consignors authorized by the national authority.
(b) The consignment shall be dispatched by the quickest route, normally by air.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROLS FOR TRANSPORT
(c) The consignment shall be plainly and durably marked on the outside with
the words “RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL — QUANTITIES PERMITTED
FOR MOVEMENT BY POST”. These words shall be crossed out if the
packaging is returned empty.
(d) The consignment shall carry on the outside the name and address of the
consignor with the request that the consignment be returned in the case of
non-delivery.
(e) The name and address of the consignor and the contents of the consignment
shall be indicated on the internal packaging.
CUSTOMS OPERATIONS
582. Customs operations involving the inspection of the radioactive contents of a
package shall be carried out only in a place where adequate means of controlling
radiation exposure are provided and in the presence of qualified persons. Any
package opened on customs instructions shall, before being forwarded to the
consignee, be restored to its original condition.
UNDELIVERABLE CONSIGNMENTS
583. Where a consignment is undeliverable, it shall be placed in a safe location
and the appropriate competent authority shall be informed as soon as possible
and a request made for instructions on further action.
RETENTION AND AVAILABILITY OF TRANSPORT DOCUMENTS
BY CARRIERS
584. A carrier shall not accept a consignment for transport unless:
(a) A copy of the transport document and other documents or information as
required by these Regulations are provided; or
(b) The information applicable to the consignment is provided in electronic
form.
585. The information applicable to the consignment shall accompany the
consignment to its final destination. This information may be on the transport
document or may be on another document. This information shall be given to the
consignee when the consignment is delivered.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION V
586. When the information applicable to the consignment is given to the carrier
in electronic form, the information shall be available to the carrier at all times
during transport to the consignment’s final destination. The information shall be
able to be produced without delay in a printed form.
587. The carrier shall retain a copy of the transport document and additional
information and documentation, as specified in these Regulations, for a minimum
period of three months.
588. When the documents are kept electronically or in a computer system, the
carrier shall be capable of reproducing them in a printed form.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Section VI
REQUIREMENTS FOR RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
AND FOR PACKAGINGS AND PACKAGES
REQUIREMENTS FOR RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
Requirements for LSA-III material
601. This paragraph was deleted.
Requirements for special form radioactive material
602. Special form radioactive material shall have at least one dimension of not
less than 5 mm.
603. Special form radioactive material shall be of such a nature or shall be so
designed that if it is subjected to the tests specified in paras 704–711, it shall
meet the following requirements:
(a) It would not break or shatter under the impact, percussion and bending tests
in paras 705–707 and 709(a), as applicable.
(b) It would not melt or disperse in the heat test in para. 708 or para. 709(b), as
applicable.
(c) The activity in the water from the leaching tests specified in paras 710 and
711 would not exceed 2 kBq; or alternatively, for sealed sources, the leakage
rate for the volumetric leakage assessment test specified in the International
Organization for Standardization document: Radiation Protection — Sealed
Radioactive Sources — Leakage Test Methods (ISO 9978) [16], would not
exceed the applicable acceptance threshold acceptable to the competent
authority.
604. When a sealed capsule constitutes part of the special form radioactive
material, the capsule shall be so manufactured that it can be opened only by
destroying it.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VI
Requirements for low dispersible radioactive material
605. Low dispersible radioactive material shall be such that the total amount of
this radioactive material in a package shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The dose rate at 3 m from the unshielded radioactive material does not
exceed 10 mSv/h.
(b) If subjected to the tests specified in paras 736 and 737, the airborne release
in gaseous and particulate forms of up to 100 μm aerodynamic equivalent
diameter would not exceed 100A . A separate specimen may be used for

each test.
(c) If subjected to the test specified in para. 703, the activity in the water would
not exceed 100A . In the application of this test, the damaging effects of the

tests specified in (b) shall be taken into account.
REQUIREMENTS FOR MATERIAL EXCEPTED FROM FISSILE
CLASSIFICATION
606. Fissile material excepted from classification as “FISSILE” under
para. 417(f) shall be subcritical without the need for accumulation control under
the following conditions:
(a) The conditions of para. 673(a);
(b) The conditions consistent with the assessment provisions stated in
paras 684(b) and 685(b) for packages;
(c) The conditions specified in para. 683(a), if transported by air.
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL PACKAGINGS AND PACKAGES
607. The package shall be so designed in relation to its mass, volume and shape
that it can be easily and safely transported. In addition, the package shall be so
designed that it can be properly secured in or on the conveyance during transport.
608. The design shall be such that any lifting attachments on the package will
not fail when used in the intended manner and that if failure of the attachments
should occur, the ability of the package to meet other requirements of these
Regulations would not be impaired. The design shall take account of appropriate
safety factors to cover snatch lifting.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS FOR PACKAGES
609. Attachments and any other features on the outer surface of the package that
could be used to lift it shall be designed either to support its mass in accordance
with the requirements of para. 608 or shall be removable or otherwise rendered
incapable of being used during transport.
610. As far as practicable, the packaging shall be so designed that the external
surfaces are free from protruding features and can be easily decontaminated.
611. As far as practicable, the outer layer of the package shall be so designed as
to prevent the collection and the retention of water.
612. Any features added to the package at the time of transport that are not part
of the package shall not reduce its safety.
613. The package shall be capable of withstanding the effects of any acceleration,
vibration or vibration resonance that may arise under routine conditions of
transport without any deterioration in the effectiveness of the closing devices on
the various receptacles or in the integrity of the package as a whole. In particular,
nuts, bolts and other securing devices shall be so designed as to prevent them
from becoming loose or being released unintentionally, even after repeated use.
613A. The design of the package shall take into account ageing mechanisms.
614. The materials of the packaging and any components or structures shall be
physically and chemically compatible with each other and with the radioactive
contents. Account shall be taken of their behaviour under irradiation.
615. All valves through which the radioactive contents could escape shall be
protected against unauthorized operation.
616. The design of the package shall take into account ambient temperatures and
pressures that are likely to be encountered in routine conditions of transport.
617. A package shall be so designed that it provides sufficient shielding to ensure
that, under routine conditions of transport and with the maximum radioactive
contents that the package is designed to contain, the dose rate at any point on
the external surface of the package would not exceed the values specified in
paras 516, 527 and 528, as applicable, with account taken of paras 566(b) and 573.
618. For radioactive material having other dangerous properties, the package
design shall take into account those properties (see paras 110 and 507).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VI
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PACKAGES TRANSPORTED
BY AIR
619. For packages to be transported by air, the temperature of the accessible
surfaces shall not exceed 50°C at an ambient temperature of 38°C with no
account taken for insolation.
620. Packages to be transported by air shall be so designed that if they were
exposed to ambient temperatures ranging from −40°C to +55°C, the integrity of
containment would not be impaired.
621. Packages containing radioactive material to be transported by air shall be
capable of withstanding, without loss or dispersal of radioactive contents from
the containment system, an internal pressure that produces a pressure differential
of not less than maximum normal operating pressure plus 95 kPa.
REQUIREMENTS FOR EXCEPTED PACKAGES
622. An excepted package shall be designed to meet the requirements specified
in paras 607–618 and, in addition, the requirements of para. 636 if it contains
fissile material allowed by one of the provisions of subparagraphs (a)–(f) of
para. 417, and the requirements of paras 619–621 if carried by air.
REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL PACKAGES
Requirements for Type IP-1
623. A Type IP-1 package shall be designed to meet the requirements specified
in paras 607–618 and 636 and, in addition, the requirements of paras 619–621 if
carried by air.
Requirements for Type IP-2
624. A package to be qualified as Type IP-2 shall be designed to meet the
requirements for Type IP-1 as specified in para. 623 and, in addition, if it were
subjected to the tests specified in paras 722 and 723, it would prevent:
(a) Loss or dispersal of the radioactive contents;

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS FOR PACKAGES
(b) More than a 20% increase in the maximum dose rate at any external surface
of the package.
Requirements for Type IP-3
625. A package to be qualified as Type IP-3 shall be designed to meet the
requirements for Type IP-1 as specified in para. 623 and, in addition, the
requirements specified in paras 636–649.
Alternative requirements for Type IP-2 and Type IP-3
626. Packages may be used as Type IP-2, provided that:
(a) They satisfy the requirements for Type IP-1 specified in para. 623.
(b) They are designed to satisfy the requirements prescribed for UN Packing
Group I or II in Chapter 6.1 of the United Nations Recommendations on the
Transport of Dangerous Goods, Model Regulations [17].
(c) When subjected to the tests required for UN Packing Group I or II, they
would prevent:
(i) Loss or dispersal of the radioactive contents;
(ii) More than a 20% increase in the maximum dose rate at any external
surface of the package.
627. Portable tanks may also be used as Type IP-2 or Type IP-3, provided that:
(a) They satisfy the requirements for Type IP-1 specified in para. 623.
(b) They are designed to satisfy the requirements prescribed in Chapter 6.7
of the United Nations Recommendations on the Transport of Dangerous
Goods, Model Regulations [17], or other requirements, at least equivalent,
and are capable of withstanding a test pressure of 265 kPa.
(c) They are designed so that any additional shielding that is provided shall
be capable of withstanding the static and dynamic stresses resulting from
handling and routine conditions of transport and of preventing more than
a 20% increase in the maximum dose rate at any external surface of the
portable tanks.
628. Tanks, other than portable tanks, may also be used as Type IP-2 or Type IP-3
for transporting LSA-I and LSA-II as prescribed in Table 5, provided that:
(a) They satisfy the requirements for Type IP-1 specified in para. 623.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VI
(b) They are designed to satisfy the requirements prescribed in regional or
national regulations for the transport of dangerous goods and are capable of
withstanding a test pressure of 265 kPa.
(c) They are designed so that any additional shielding that is provided shall
be capable of withstanding the static and dynamic stresses resulting from
handling and routine conditions of transport and of preventing more than
a 20% increase in the maximum dose rate at any external surface of the
tanks.
629. Freight containers with the characteristics of a permanent enclosure may
also be used as Type IP-2 or Type IP-3, provided that:
(a) The radioactive contents are restricted to solid materials.
(b) They satisfy the requirements for Type IP-1 specified in para. 623.
(c) They are designed to conform to the International Organization for
Standardization document: Series 1 Freight containers — Specifications
and Testing — Part 1: General Cargo Containers for General Purposes
(ISO 1496-1) [18] excluding dimensions and ratings. They shall be so
designed that if subjected to the tests prescribed in that document, and to
the accelerations occurring during routine conditions of transport, they
would prevent:
(i) Loss or dispersal of the radioactive contents;
(ii) More than a 20% increase in the maximum dose rate at any external
surface of the freight containers.
630. Metal IBCs may also be used as Type IP-2 or Type IP-3, provided that:
(a) They satisfy the requirements for Type IP-1 specified in para. 623.
(b) They are designed to satisfy the requirements prescribed for UN Packing
Group I or II in Chapter 6.5 of the United Nations Recommendations on the
Transport of Dangerous Goods, Model Regulations [17], and if they were
subjected to the tests prescribed in that document, but with the drop test
conducted in the most damaging orientation, they would prevent:
(i) Loss or dispersal of the radioactive contents;
(ii) More than a 20% increase in the maximum dose rate at any external
surface of the IBC.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS FOR PACKAGES
REQUIREMENTS FOR PACKAGES CONTAINING URANIUM
HEXAFLUORIDE
631. Packages designed to contain uranium hexafluoride shall meet the
requirements that pertain to the radioactive and fissile properties of the material
prescribed elsewhere in these Regulations. Except as allowed in para. 634,
uranium hexafluoride in quantities of 0.1 kg or more shall also be packaged and
transported in accordance with the provisions of the International Organization
for Standardization document: Nuclear Energy — Packaging of Uranium
Hexafluoride (UF ) for Transport (ISO 7195) [19], and the requirements of

paras 632 and 633.
632. Each package designed to contain 0.1 kg or more of uranium hexafluoride
shall be so designed that the package will meet the following requirements:
(a) Withstand, without leakage and without unacceptable stress, as specified
in ISO 7195 [19], the structural test as specified in para. 718, except as
allowed in para. 634;
(b) Withstand, without loss or dispersal of the uranium hexafluoride, the free
drop test specified in para. 722;
(c) Withstand, without rupture of the containment system, the thermal test
specified in para. 728, except as allowed in para. 634.
633. Packages designed to contain 0.1 kg or more of uranium hexafluoride shall
not be provided with pressure relief devices.
634. Subject to multilateral approval, packages designed to contain 0.1 kg or
more of uranium hexafluoride may be transported if the packages are designed:
(a) To international or national standards other than ISO 7195 [19], provided
an equivalent level of safety is maintained; and/or
(b) To withstand, without leakage and without unacceptable stress, a test
pressure of less than 2.76 MPa as specified in para. 718; and/or
(c) To contain 9000 kg or more of uranium hexafluoride and the packages do
not meet the requirement of para. 632(c).
In all other respects, the requirements specified in paras 631–633 shall be
satisfied.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VI
REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE A PACKAGES
635. Type A packages shall be designed to meet the requirements specified in
paras 607–618 and, in addition, the requirements of paras 619–621 if carried by
air, and of paras 636–651.
636. The smallest overall external dimension of the package shall not be less
than 10 cm.
637. The outside of the package shall incorporate a feature such as a seal that is
not readily breakable and which, while intact, will be evidence that the package
has not been opened.
638. Any tie-down attachments on the package shall be so designed that, under
normal and accident conditions of transport, the forces in those attachments
shall not impair the ability of the package to meet the requirements of these
Regulations.
639. The design of the package shall take into account temperatures ranging
from −40°C to +70°C for the components of the packaging. Attention shall be
given to freezing temperatures for liquids and to the potential degradation of
packaging materials within the given temperature range.
640. The design and manufacturing techniques shall be in accordance with
national or international standards, or other requirements, acceptable to the
competent authority.
641. The design shall include a containment system securely closed by a positive
fastening device that cannot be opened unintentionally or by a pressure that may
arise within the package.
642. Special form radioactive material may be considered as a component of the
containment system.
643. If the containment system forms a separate unit of the package, the
containment system shall be capable of being securely closed by a positive
fastening device that is independent of any other part of the packaging.
644. The design of any component of the containment system shall take
into account, where applicable, the radiolytic decomposition of liquids and

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS FOR PACKAGES
other vulnerable materials and the generation of gas by chemical reaction and
radiolysis.
645. The containment system shall retain its radioactive contents under a
reduction of ambient pressure to 60 kPa.
646. All valves, other than pressure relief valves, shall be provided with an
enclosure to retain any leakage from the valve.
647. A radiation shield that encloses a component of the package specified as a
part of the containment system shall be so designed as to prevent the unintentional
release of that component from the shield. Where the radiation shield and such
component within it form a separate unit, the radiation shield shall be capable of
being securely closed by a positive fastening device that is independent of any
other packaging structure.
648. A package shall be so designed that if it were subjected to the tests specified
in paras 719–724, it would prevent:
(a) Loss or dispersal of the radioactive contents;
(b) More than a 20% increase in the maximum dose rate at any external surface
of the package.
649. The design of a package intended for liquid radioactive material shall
make provision for ullage to accommodate variations in the temperature of the
contents, dynamic effects and filling dynamics.
650. A Type A package designed to contain liquid radioactive material shall, in
addition:
(a) Be adequate to meet the conditions specified in para. 648(a) if the package
is subjected to the tests specified in para. 725; and
(b) Either:
(i) Be provided with sufficient absorbent material to absorb twice the
volume of the liquid contents. Such absorbent material must be suitably
positioned so as to contact the liquid in the event of leakage; or
(ii) Be provided with a containment system composed of primary inner
and secondary outer containment components designed to enclose
the liquid contents completely and to ensure their retention within the
secondary outer containment components, even if the primary inner
components leak.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VI
651. A Type A package designed for gases shall prevent loss or dispersal of
the radioactive contents if the package were subjected to the tests specified in
para. 725, except for a Type A package designed for tritium gas or for noble gases.
REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE B(U) PACKAGES
652. Type B(U) packages shall be designed to meet the requirements specified
in paras 607–618, the requirements specified in paras 619–621 if carried by air,
and in paras 636–649, except as specified in para. 648(a), and, in addition, the
requirements specified in paras 653–666.
653. A package shall be so designed that, under the ambient conditions specified
in paras 656 and 657, heat generated within the package by the radioactive
contents shall not, under normal conditions of transport, as demonstrated by
the tests in paras 719–724, adversely affect the package in such a way that it
would fail to meet the applicable requirements for containment and shielding if
left unattended for a period of one week. Particular attention shall be paid to the
effects of heat that may cause one or more of the following:
(a) Alteration of the arrangement, the geometrical form or the physical state of
the radioactive contents or, if the radioactive material is enclosed in a can
or receptacle (for example, clad fuel elements), cause the can, receptacle or
radioactive material to deform or melt;
(b) Lessening of the efficiency of the packaging through differential thermal
expansion, or cracking or melting of the radiation shielding material;
(c) Acceleration of corrosion when combined with moisture.
654. A package shall be so designed that, under the ambient condition specified
in para. 656 and in the absence of insolation, the temperature of the accessible
surfaces of a package shall not exceed 50°C, unless the package is transported
under exclusive use.
655. Except as required in para. 619 for a package transported by air, the
maximum temperature of any surface readily accessible during transport of a
package under exclusive use shall not exceed 85°C in the absence of insolation
under the ambient condition specified in para. 656. Account may be taken of
barriers or screens intended to give protection to persons without the need for the
barriers or screens being subject to any test.
656. The ambient temperature shall be assumed to be 38°C.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS FOR PACKAGES
657. The solar insolation conditions shall be assumed to be as specified in
Table 12.
658. A package that includes thermal protection for the purpose of satisfying
the requirements of the thermal test specified in para. 728 shall be so designed
that such protection will remain effective if the package is subjected to the
tests specified in paras 719–724 and 727(a) and 727(b) or 727(b) and 727(c),
as appropriate. Any such protection on the exterior of the package shall not be
rendered ineffective by ripping, cutting, skidding, abrading or rough handling.
659. A package shall be so designed that if it were subjected to:
(a) The tests specified in paras 719–724, it would restrict the loss of radioactive
contents to not more than 10−6A per hour.

(b) The tests specified in paras 726, 727(b), 728 and 729 and either the test in:
— Para. 727(c), when the package has a mass not greater than 500 kg,
an overall density not greater than 1000 kg/m3 based on the external
dimensions, and radioactive contents greater than 1000A not as special

form radioactive material; or
— Para. 727(a), for all other packages.
(i) It would retain sufficient shielding to ensure that the dose rate 1 m
from the surface of the package would not exceed 10 mSv/h with
the maximum radioactive contents that the package is designed to
contain.
TABLE 12. INSOLATION DATA
Insolation
Case Form and location of surface
for 12 h per day (W/m2)
1 Flat surfaces transported horizontally — downward facing 0
2 Flat surfaces transported horizontally — upward facing 800
a
3 Surfaces transported vertically 200
a
4 Other downward facing (not horizontal) surfaces 200
a
5 All other surfaces 400
a Alternatively, a sine function may be used, with an absorption coefficient adopted and the
effects of possible reflection from neighbouring objects neglected.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VI
(ii) It would restrict the accumulated loss of radioactive contents in a
period of one week to not more than 10A for krypton-85 and not

more than A for all other radionuclides.

Where mixtures of different radionuclides are present, the provisions of
paras 405–407 shall apply, except that for krypton-85 an effective A (i) value

equal to 10A may be used. For case (a), the assessment shall take into account

the external non-fixed contamination limits of para. 508.
660. A package for radioactive contents with activity greater than 105A shall

be so designed that if it were subjected to the enhanced water immersion test
specified in para. 730, there would be no rupture of the containment system.
661. Compliance with the permitted activity release limits shall depend neither
upon filters nor upon a mechanical cooling system.
662. A package shall not include a pressure relief system from the containment
system that would allow the release of radioactive material to the environment
under the conditions of the tests specified in paras 719–724 and 726–729.
663. A package shall be so designed that if it were at the maximum normal
operating pressure and it were subjected to the tests specified in paras 719–724
and 726–729, the levels of strains in the containment system would not attain
values that would adversely affect the package in such a way that it would fail to
meet the applicable requirements.
664. A package shall not have a maximum normal operating pressure in excess
of a gauge pressure of 700 kPa.
665. A package containing low dispersible radioactive material shall be so
designed that any features added to the low dispersible radioactive material that
are not part of it, or any internal components of the packaging, shall not adversely
affect the performance of the low dispersible radioactive material.
666. A package shall be designed for an ambient temperature range of −40°C
to +38°C.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS FOR PACKAGES
REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE B(M) PACKAGES
667. Type B(M) packages shall meet the requirements for Type B(U) packages
specified in para. 652, except that for packages to be transported solely within
a specified country or solely between specified countries, conditions other
than those given in paras 639, 655–657 and 660–666 may be assumed with the
approval of the competent authorities of these countries. The requirements for
Type B(U) packages specified in paras 655 and 660–666 shall be met as far as
practicable.
668. Intermittent venting of Type B(M) packages may be permitted during
transport, provided that the operational controls for venting are acceptable to the
relevant competent authorities.
REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE C PACKAGES
669. Type C packages shall be designed to meet the requirements specified
in paras 607–621 and 636–649, except as specified in para. 648(a), and the
requirements specified in paras 653–657, 661–666 and 670–672.
670. A package shall be capable of meeting the assessment criteria prescribed for
tests in paras 659(b) and 663 after burial in an environment defined by a thermal
conductivity of 0.33 W/(m·K) and a temperature of 38°C in the steady state.
Initial conditions for the assessment shall assume that any thermal insulation of
the package remains intact, the package is at the maximum normal operating
pressure and the ambient temperature is 38°C.
671. A package shall be so designed that if it were at the maximum normal
operating pressure and subjected to:
(a) The tests specified in paras 719–724, it would restrict the loss of radioactive
contents to not more than 10−6A per hour.

(b) The test sequences in para. 734:
(i) It would retain sufficient shielding to ensure that the dose rate 1 m
from the surface of the package would not exceed 10 mSv/h with the
maximum radioactive contents that the package is designed to contain.
(ii) It would restrict the accumulated loss of radioactive contents in a
period of one week to not more than 10A for krypton-85 and not more

than A for all other radionuclides.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VI
Where mixtures of different radionuclides are present, the provisions of
paras 405–407 shall apply, except that for krypton-85 an effective A (i) value

equal to 10A may be used. For case (a), the assessment shall take into account

the external contamination limits of para. 508.
672. A package shall be so designed that there will be no rupture of the
containment system following performance of the enhanced water immersion test
specified in para. 730.
REQUIREMENTS FOR PACKAGES CONTAINING FISSILE MATERIAL
673. Fissile material shall be transported so as to:
(a) Maintain subcriticality during routine, normal and accident conditions of
transport; in particular, the following contingencies shall be considered:
(i) Leakage of water into or out of packages;
(ii) Loss of efficiency of built-in neutron absorbers or moderators;
(iii) Rearrangement of the contents either within the package or as a result
of loss from the package;
(iv) Reduction of spaces within or between packages;
(v) Packages becoming immersed in water or buried in snow;
(vi) Temperature changes.
(b) Meet the requirements:
(i) Of para. 636 except for unpackaged material when specifically allowed
by para. 417(e);
(ii) Prescribed elsewhere in these Regulations that pertain to the radioactive
properties of the material;
(iii) Of para. 637 unless the material is excepted by para. 417;
(iv) Of paras 676–686, unless the material is excepted by para. 417, 674
or 675.
674. Packages containing fissile material that meets the requirements of
para. 674(d) and one of the provisions of para. 674(a)–(c) are excepted from the
requirements of paras 676–686.
(a) Packages containing fissile material in any form provided that:
(i) The smallest external dimension of the package is not less than 10 cm.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS FOR PACKAGES
(ii) The CSI of the package is calculated using the following formula:
CSI = 50 × 5 × {[mass of uranium-235 in package (g)]/Z
+ [mass of other fissile nuclides1 in package (g)]/280}
where the values of Z are taken from Table 13.
(iii) The CSI of any package does not exceed 10.
(b) Packages containing fissile material in any form provided that:
(i) The smallest external dimension of the package is not less than 30 cm.
(ii) The package, after being subjected to the tests specified in
paras 719–724:
― Retains its fissile material contents;
― Preserves the minimum overall outside dimensions of the package
to at least 30 cm;
― Prevents the entry of a 10 cm cube.
(iii) The CSI of the package is calculated using the following formula:
CSI = 50 × 2 × {[mass of uranium-235 in package (g)]/Z
+ [mass of other fissile nuclides1 in package (g)]/280}
where the values of Z are taken from Table 13.
(iv) The CSI of any package does not exceed 10.
(c) Packages containing fissile material in any form provided that:
(i) The smallest external dimension of the package is not less than 10 cm.
TABLE 13. VALUES OF Z FOR CALCULATION OF CSI IN
ACCORDANCE WITH PARA. 674
Enrichmenta Z
Uranium enriched up to 1.5% 2200
Uranium enriched up to 5% 850
Uranium enriched up to 10% 660
Uranium enriched up to 20% 580
Uranium enriched up to 100% 450
a If a package contains uranium with varying enrichments of uranium-235,
then the value corresponding to the highest enrichment shall be used
for Z.
1 Plutonium may be of any isotopic composition provided that the amount of
plutonium-241 is less than that of plutonium-240 in the package.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VI
(ii) The package, after being subjected to the tests specified in
paras 719–724:
― Retains its fissile material contents;
― Preserves the minimum overall outside dimensions of the package
to at least 10 cm;
― Prevents the entry of a 10 cm cube.
(iii) The CSI of the package is calculated using the following formula:
CSI = 50 × 2 × {[mass of uranium-235 in package (g)]/450
+ [mass of other fissile nuclides1 in package (g)]/280}
(iv) The total mass of fissile nuclides in any package does not exceed 15 g.
(d) The total mass of beryllium, hydrogenous material enriched in deuterium,
graphite and other allotropic forms of carbon in an individual package shall
not be greater than the mass of fissile nuclides in the package except where
the total concentration of these materials does not exceed 1 g in any 1000 g
of material. Beryllium incorporated in copper alloys up to 4% by weight of
the alloy does not need to be considered.
675. Packages containing not more than 1000 g of plutonium are excepted from
the application of paras 676–686 provided that:
(a) Not more than 20% of the plutonium by mass is fissile nuclides.
(b) The CSI of the package is calculated using the following formula:
CSI = 50 × 2 × [mass of plutonium (g)/1000]
(c) If uranium is present with the plutonium, the mass of uranium shall be no
more than 1% of the mass of the plutonium.
Contents specification for assessments of package designs containing fissile
material
676. Where the chemical or physical form, isotopic composition, mass or
concentration, moderation ratio or density, or geometric configuration is not
known, the assessments of paras 680–685 shall be performed assuming that
each parameter that is not known has the value that gives the maximum neutron
multiplication consistent with the known conditions and parameters in these
assessments.
677. For irradiated nuclear fuel, the assessments of paras 680–685 shall be based
on an isotopic composition demonstrated to provide either:
(a) The maximum neutron multiplication during the irradiation history; or

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS FOR PACKAGES
(b) A conservative estimate of the neutron multiplication for the package
assessments. After irradiation but prior to shipment, a measurement shall be
performed to confirm the conservatism of the isotopic composition.
Geometry and temperature requirements
678. The package, after being subjected to the tests specified in paras 719–724,
shall:
(a) Preserve the minimum overall outside dimensions of the package to at least
10 cm;
(b) Prevent the entry of a 10 cm cube.
679. The package shall be designed for an ambient temperature range of −40°C
to +38°C unless the competent authority specifies otherwise in the certificate of
approval for the package design.
Assessment of an individual package in isolation
680. For a package in isolation, it shall be assumed that water can leak into or
out of all void spaces of the package, including those within the containment
system.
However, if the design incorporates special features to prevent such leakage of
water into or out of certain void spaces, even as a result of error, absence of
leakage may be assumed in respect of those void spaces. Special features shall
include either of the following:
(a) Multiple high standard water barriers, not less than two of which would
remain watertight if the package were subject to the tests prescribed
in para. 685(b), a high degree of quality control in the manufacture,
maintenance and repair of packagings, and tests to demonstrate the closure
of each package before each shipment; or
(b) For packages containing uranium hexafluoride only, with a maximum
uranium enrichment of 5 mass per cent uranium-235:
(i) Packages where, following the tests prescribed in para. 685(b),
there is no physical contact between the valve or the plug and any
other component of the packaging other than at its original point of
attachment and where, in addition, following the test prescribed in
para. 728, the valve and the plug remain leaktight;

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VI
(ii) A high degree of quality control in the manufacture, maintenance and
repair of packagings, coupled with tests to demonstrate closure of each
package before each shipment.
681. It shall be assumed that the confinement system is closely reflected by at
least 20 cm of water or such greater reflection as may additionally be provided by
the surrounding material of the packaging. However, when it can be demonstrated
that the confinement system remains within the packaging following the tests
prescribed in para. 685(b), close reflection of the package by at least 20 cm of
water may be assumed in para. 682(c).
682. The package shall be subcritical under the conditions of paras 680
and 681 and with the package conditions that result in the maximum neutron
multiplication consistent with:
(a) Routine conditions of transport (incident free);
(b) The tests specified in para. 684(b);
(c) The tests specified in para. 685(b).
683. For packages to be transported by air:
(a) The package shall be subcritical under conditions consistent with the
Type C package tests specified in para. 734, assuming reflection by at least
20 cm of water but no water in-leakage.
(b) In the assessment of para. 682, use of special features as specified in
para. 680 is allowed provided that leakage of water into or out of the void
spaces is prevented when the package is submitted to the Type C package
tests specified in para. 734 followed by the water leakage test specified in
para. 733.
Assessment of package arrays under normal conditions of transport
684. A number N shall be derived, such that five times N packages shall be
subcritical for the arrangement and package conditions that provide the maximum
neutron multiplication consistent with the following:
(a) There shall not be anything between the packages, and the package
arrangement shall be reflected on all sides by at least 20 cm of water.
(b) The state of the packages shall be their assessed or demonstrated condition
if they had been subjected to the tests specified in paras 719–724.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REQUIREMENTS FOR PACKAGES
Assessment of package arrays under accident conditions of transport
685. A number N shall be derived, such that two times N packages shall be
subcritical for the arrangement and package conditions that provide the maximum
neutron multiplication consistent with the following:
(a) Hydrogenous moderation between the packages and the package
arrangement reflected on all sides by at least 20 cm of water.
(b) The tests specified in paras 719–724 followed by whichever of the
following is the more limiting:
(i) The tests specified in para. 727(b) and either para. 727(c) for packages
having a mass not greater than 500 kg and an overall density not greater
than 1000 kg/m3 based on the external dimensions or para. 727(a) for
all other packages, followed by the test specified in para. 728 and
completed by the tests specified in paras 731–733; or
(ii) The test specified in para. 729.
(c) Where any part of the fissile material escapes from the containment system
following the tests specified in para. 685(b), it shall be assumed that fissile
material escapes from each package in the array and that all of the fissile
material shall be arranged in the configuration and moderation that results
in the maximum neutron multiplication with close reflection by at least
20 cm of water.
Determination of criticality safety index for packages
686. The CSI for packages containing fissile material shall be obtained by
dividing the number 50 by the smaller of the two values of N derived in
paras 684 and 685 (i.e. CSI = 50/N). The value of the CSI may be zero, provided
that an unlimited number of packages are subcritical (i.e. N is effectively equal to
infinity in both cases).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Section VII
TEST PROCEDURES
DEMONSTRATION OF COMPLIANCE
701. Demonstration of compliance with the performance standards required in
Section VI shall be accomplished by any of the following methods listed below
or by a combination thereof:
(a) Performance of tests with specimens representing special form radioactive
material, or low dispersible radioactive material, or with prototypes
or samples of the packaging, where the contents of the specimen or the
packaging for the tests shall simulate as closely as practicable the expected
range of radioactive contents and the specimen or packaging to be tested
shall be prepared as presented for transport.
(b) Reference to previous satisfactory demonstrations of a sufficiently similar
nature.
(c) Performance of tests with models of appropriate scale, incorporating those
features that are significant with respect to the item under investigation when
engineering experience has shown the results of such tests to be suitable for
design purposes. When a scale model is used, the need for adjusting certain
test parameters, such as penetrator diameter or compressive load, shall be
taken into account.
(d) Calculation, or reasoned argument, when the calculation procedures and
parameters are generally agreed to be reliable or conservative.
702. After the specimen, prototype or sample has been subjected to the tests,
appropriate methods of assessment shall be used to ensure that the requirements
of this section have been fulfilled in compliance with the performance and
acceptance standards prescribed in Section VI.
LEACHING TEST FOR LOW DISPERSIBLE RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
703. A solid material sample representing the entire contents of the package
shall be immersed for 7 days in water at ambient temperature. The volume of
water to be used in the test shall be sufficient to ensure that at the end of the 7 day
test period, the free volume of the unabsorbed and unreacted water remaining
shall be at least 10% of the volume of the solid test sample itself. The water shall

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VII
have an initial pH of 6–8 and a maximum conductivity of 1 mS/m at 20°C. The
total activity of the free volume of water shall be measured following the 7 day
immersion of the test sample.
TESTS FOR SPECIAL FORM RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
General
704. Specimens that comprise or simulate special form radioactive material
shall be subjected to the impact test, the percussion test, the bending test and the
heat test specified in paras 705–708. A different specimen may be used for each
of the tests. Following each test, a leaching assessment or volumetric leakage
test shall be performed on the specimen by a method no less sensitive than the
methods given in para. 710 for indispersible solid material or in para. 711 for
encapsulated material.
Test methods
705. Impact test: The specimen shall drop onto the target from a height of 9 m.
The target shall be as defined in para. 717.
706. Percussion test: The specimen shall be placed on a sheet of lead that is
supported by a smooth solid surface and struck by the flat face of a mild steel bar
so as to cause an impact equivalent to that resulting from a free drop of 1.4 kg
from a height of 1 m. The lower part of the bar shall be 25 mm in diameter
with the edges rounded off to a radius of 3.0 ± 0.3 mm. The lead, of hardness
number 3.5–4.5 on the Vickers scale and not more than 25 mm thick, shall cover
an area greater than that covered by the specimen. A fresh surface of lead shall be
used for each impact. The bar shall strike the specimen so as to cause maximum
damage.
707. Bending test: The test shall apply only to long, slender sources with both a
minimum length of 10 cm and a length to minimum width ratio of not less than
10. The specimen shall be rigidly clamped in a horizontal position so that one half
of its length protrudes from the face of the clamp. The orientation of the specimen
shall be such that the specimen will suffer maximum damage when its free end
is struck by the flat face of a steel bar. The bar shall strike the specimen so as to
cause an impact equivalent to that resulting from a free vertical drop of 1.4 kg
from a height of 1 m. The lower part of the bar shall be 25 mm in diameter with
the edges rounded off to a radius of 3.0 ± 0.3 mm.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
TEST PROCEDURES
708. Heat test: The specimen shall be heated in air to a temperature of 800°C
and held at that temperature for a period of 10 min and shall then be allowed to
cool.
709. Specimens that comprise or simulate radioactive material enclosed in a
sealed capsule may be excepted from:
(a) The tests prescribed in paras 705 and 706, provided that the specimens are
alternatively subjected to the impact test prescribed in the International
Organization for Standardization document: Radiological Protection —
Sealed Radioactive Sources — General Requirements and Classification
(ISO 2919) [20]:
(i) The Class 4 impact test if the mass of the special form radioactive
material is less than 200 g;
(ii) The Class 5 impact test if the mass of the special form radioactive
material is more than 200 g but less than 500 g.
(b) The test prescribed in para. 708, provided the specimens are alternatively
subjected to the Class 6 temperature test specified in ISO 2919 [20].
Leaching and volumetric leakage assessment methods
710. For specimens that comprise or simulate indispersible solid material, a
leaching assessment shall be performed as follows:
(a) The specimen shall be immersed for 7 days in water at ambient temperature.
The volume of water to be used in the test shall be sufficient to ensure that
at the end of the 7 day test period the free volume of the unabsorbed and
unreacted water remaining shall be at least 10% of the volume of the solid
test sample itself. The water shall have an initial pH of 6–8 and a maximum
conductivity of 1 mS/m at 20°C.
(b) The water and the specimen shall then be heated to a temperature of
50 ± 5°C and maintained at this temperature for 4 h.
(c) The activity of the water shall then be determined.
(d) The specimen shall then be kept for at least 7 days in still air at not less than
30°C and with a relative humidity of not less than 90%.
(e) The specimen shall then be immersed in water of the same specification as
that in (a) and the water and the specimen shall be heated to 50 ± 5°C and
maintained at this temperature for 4 h.
(f) The activity of the water shall then be determined.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VII
711. For specimens that comprise or simulate radioactive material enclosed in a
sealed capsule, either a leaching assessment or a volumetric leakage assessment
shall be performed as follows:
(a) The leaching assessment shall consist of the following steps:
(i) The specimen shall be immersed in water at ambient temperature. The
water shall have an initial pH of 6–8 with a maximum conductivity of
1 mS/m at 20°C.
(ii) The water and the specimen shall then be heated to a temperature of
50 ± 5°C and maintained at this temperature for 4 h.
(iii) The activity of the water shall then be determined.
(iv) The specimen shall then be kept for at least 7 days in still air at not
less than 30°C and with a relative humidity of not less than 90%.
(v) The process in (i), (ii) and (iii) shall be repeated.
(b) The alternative volumetric leakage assessment shall comprise any of the
tests prescribed in the International Organization for Standardization
document: Radiation Protection — Sealed Radioactive Sources — Leakage
Test Methods (ISO 9978) [16] provided that they are acceptable to the
competent authority.
TESTS FOR LOW DISPERSIBLE RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
712. A specimen that comprises or simulates low dispersible radioactive
material shall be subjected to the enhanced thermal test specified in para. 736
and the impact test specified in para. 737. A different specimen may be used for
each of the tests. Following each test, the specimen shall be subjected to the leach
test specified in para. 703. After each test it shall be determined if the applicable
requirements of para. 605 have been met.
TESTS FOR PACKAGES
Preparation of a specimen for testing
713. All specimens shall be inspected before testing in order to identify and
record faults or damage, including the following:
(a) Divergence from the design;
(b) Defects in manufacture;

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
TEST PROCEDURES
(c) Corrosion or other deterioration;
(d) Distortion of features.
714. The containment system of the package shall be clearly specified
715. The external features of the specimen shall be clearly identified so that
reference may be made simply and clearly to any part of such a specimen.
Testing the integrity of the containment system and shielding and assessing
criticality safety
716. After each test or group of tests or sequence of the applicable tests, as
appropriate, specified in paras 718–737:
(a) Faults and damage shall be identified and recorded.
(b) It shall be determined whether the integrity of the containment system and
shielding has been retained to the extent required in Section VI for the
package under test.
(c) For packages containing fissile material, it shall be determined whether
the assumptions and conditions used in the assessments required by
paras 673–686 for one or more packages are valid.
Target for drop tests
717. The target for the drop test specified in paras 705, 722, 725(a), 727 and 735
shall be a flat, horizontal surface of such a character that any increase in its
resistance to displacement or deformation upon impact by the specimen would
not significantly increase damage to the specimen.
Test for packagings designed to contain uranium hexafluoride
718. Specimens that comprise or simulate packagings designed to contain
0.1 kg or more of uranium hexafluoride shall be tested hydraulically at an internal
pressure of at least 1.38 MPa, but when the test pressure is less than 2.76 MPa,
the design shall require multilateral approval. For retesting packagings, any
other equivalent non-destructive testing may be applied, subject to multilateral
approval.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VII
Tests for demonstrating ability to withstand normal conditions of transport
719. The tests are the water spray test, the free drop test, the stacking test and
the penetration test. Specimens of the package shall be subjected to the free
drop test, the stacking test and the penetration test, preceded in each case by the
water spray test. One specimen may be used for all the tests, provided that the
requirements of para. 720 are fulfilled.
720. The time interval between the conclusion of the water spray test and the
succeeding test shall be such that the water has soaked in to the maximum extent,
without appreciable drying of the exterior of the specimen. In the absence of
any evidence to the contrary, this interval shall be taken to be 2 h if the water
spray is applied from four directions simultaneously. No time interval shall
elapse, however, if the water spray is applied from each of the four directions
consecutively.
721. Water spray test: The specimen shall be subjected to a water spray test that
simulates exposure to rainfall of approximately 5 cm per hour for at least 1 h.
722. Free drop test: The specimen shall drop onto the target so as to suffer
maximum damage in respect of the safety features to be tested:
(a) The height of the drop, measured from the lowest point of the specimen to
the upper surface of the target, shall be not less than the distance specified in
Table 14 for the applicable mass. The target shall be as defined in para. 717.
(b) For rectangular fibreboard or wood packages not exceeding a mass of
50 kg, a separate specimen shall be subjected to a free drop onto each
corner from a height of 0.3 m.
(c) For cylindrical fibreboard packages not exceeding a mass of 100 kg, a
separate specimen shall be subjected to a free drop onto each of the quarters
of each rim from a height of 0.3 m.
723. Stacking test: Unless the shape of the packaging effectively prevents
stacking, the specimen shall be subjected, for a period of 24 h, to a compressive
load equal to the greater of the following:
(a) The equivalent of 5 times the maximum weight of the package;
(b) The equivalent of 13 kPa multiplied by the vertically projected area of the
package.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
TEST PROCEDURES
TABLE 14. FREE DROP DISTANCE FOR TESTING
PACKAGES TO NORMAL CONDITIONS OF TRANSPORT
Package mass (kg) Free drop distance (m)
package mass < 5 000 1.2
5 000 ≤ package mass < 10 000 0.9
10 000 ≤ package mass < 15 000 0.6
15 000 ≤ package mass 0.3
The load shall be applied uniformly to two opposite sides of the specimen, one of
which shall be the base on which the package would typically rest.
724. Penetration test: The specimen shall be placed on a rigid, flat, horizontal
surface that will not move significantly while the test is being carried out:
(a) A bar, 3.2 cm in diameter with a hemispherical end and a mass of 6 kg,
shall be dropped and directed to fall with its longitudinal axis vertical
onto the centre of the weakest part of the specimen so that if it penetrates
sufficiently far it will hit the containment system. The bar shall not be
significantly deformed by the test performance.
(b) The height of the drop of the bar, measured from its lower end to the
intended point of impact on the upper surface of the specimen, shall be 1 m.
Additional tests for Type A packages designed for liquids and gases
725. A specimen, or separate specimens, shall be subjected to each of the
following tests unless it can be demonstrated that one test is more severe for
the specimen in question than the other, in which case one specimen shall be
subjected to the more severe test:
(a) Free drop test: The specimen shall drop onto the target so as to suffer
the maximum damage in respect of containment. The height of the drop,
measured from the lowest part of the specimen to the upper surface of the
target, shall be 9 m. The target shall be as defined in para. 717.
(b) Penetration test: The specimen shall be subjected to the test specified in
para. 724, except that the height of the drop shall be increased to 1.7 m
from the 1 m specified in para. 724(b).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VII
Tests for demonstrating ability to withstand accident conditions of transport
726. The specimen shall be subjected to the cumulative effects of the tests
specified in paras 727 and 728, in that order. Following these tests, either this
specimen or a separate specimen shall be subjected to the effect(s) of the water
immersion test(s), as specified in para. 729 and, if applicable, para. 730.
727. Mechanical test: The mechanical test consists of three different drop tests.
Each specimen shall be subjected to the applicable drops, as specified in para. 659
or para. 685. The order in which the specimen is subjected to the drops shall be
such that, on completion of the mechanical test, the specimen shall have suffered
such damage as will lead to maximum damage in the thermal test that follows:
(a) For drop I, the specimen shall drop onto the target so as to suffer maximum
damage, and the height of the drop, measured from the lowest point of the
specimen to the upper surface of the target, shall be 9 m. The target shall be
as defined in para. 717.
(b) For drop II, the specimen shall drop onto a bar rigidly mounted
perpendicularly on the target so as to suffer maximum damage. The height
of the drop, measured from the intended point of impact of the specimen
to the upper surface of the bar, shall be 1 m. The bar shall be of solid mild
steel of circular cross-section, 15.0 ± 0.5 cm in diameter and 20 cm long,
unless a longer bar would cause greater damage, in which case a bar of
sufficient length to cause maximum damage shall be used. The upper end
of the bar shall be flat and horizontal with its edge rounded off to a radius
of not more than 6 mm. The target on which the bar is mounted shall be as
described in para. 717.
(c) For drop III, the specimen shall be subjected to a dynamic crush test by
positioning the specimen on the target so as to suffer maximum damage
by the drop of a 500 kg mass from 9 m onto the specimen. The mass shall
consist of a solid mild steel plate 1 m × 1 m and shall fall in a horizontal
attitude. The lower face of the steel plate shall have its edges and corners
rounded off to a radius of not more than 6 mm. The height of the drop
shall be measured from the underside of the plate to the highest point of
the specimen. The target on which the specimen rests shall be as defined in
para. 717.
728. Thermal test: The specimen shall be in thermal equilibrium under conditions
of an ambient temperature of 38°C, subject to the solar insolation conditions
specified in Table 12 and subject to the design maximum rate of internal heat
generation within the package from the radioactive contents. Alternatively, any

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
TEST PROCEDURES
of these parameters are allowed to have different values prior to, and during,
the test, provided due account is taken of them in the subsequent assessment of
package response. The thermal test shall then consist of (a) followed by (b).
(a) Exposure of a specimen for a period of 30 min to a thermal environment
that provides a heat flux at least equivalent to that of a hydrocarbon fuel–air
fire in sufficiently quiescent ambient conditions to give a minimum average
flame emissivity coefficient of 0.9 and an average temperature of at least
800°C, fully engulfing the specimen, with a surface absorptivity coefficient
of 0.8 or that value that the package may be demonstrated to possess if
exposed to the fire specified.
(b) Exposure of the specimen to an ambient temperature of 38°C, subject to
the solar insolation conditions specified in Table 12 and subject to the
design maximum rate of internal heat generation within the package by
the radioactive contents for a sufficient period to ensure that temperatures
in the specimen are decreasing in all parts of the specimen and/or are
approaching initial steady state conditions. Alternatively, any of these
parameters are allowed to have different values following cessation of
heating, provided due account is taken of them in the subsequent assessment
of package response. During and following the test, the specimen shall not
be artificially cooled and any combustion of materials of the specimen shall
be permitted to proceed naturally.
729. Water immersion test: The specimen shall be immersed under a head of
water of at least 15 m for a period of not less than 8 h in the attitude that will lead
to maximum damage. For demonstration purposes, an external gauge pressure of
at least 150 kPa shall be considered to meet these conditions.
Enhanced water immersion test for Type B(U) and Type B(M) packages
containing more than 105A and Type C packages

730. Enhanced water immersion test: The specimen shall be immersed under a
head of water of at least 200 m for a period of not less than 1 h. For demonstration
purposes, an external gauge pressure of at least 2 MPa shall be considered to
meet these conditions.
Water leakage test for packages containing fissile material
731. Packages for which water in-leakage or out-leakage to the extent that
results in greatest reactivity has been assumed for purposes of assessment under
paras 680–685 shall be excepted from the water leakage test.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VII
732. Before the specimen is subjected to the water leakage test specified below,
it shall be subjected to the tests in para. 727(b) and either para. 727(a) or 727(c),
as required by para. 685 and the test specified in para. 728.
733. The specimen shall be immersed under a head of water of at least 0.9 m for
a period of not less than 8 h and in the attitude for which maximum leakage is
expected.
Tests for Type C packages
734. Specimens shall be subjected to the effects of the following test sequences:
(a) The tests specified in paras 727(a), 727(c), 735 and 736, in this order;
(b) The test specified in para. 737.
Separate specimens are allowed to be used for the sequence in (a) and for (b).
735. Puncture–tearing test: The specimen shall be subjected to the damaging
effects of a vertical solid probe made of mild steel. The orientation of the package
specimen and the impact point on the package surface shall be such as to cause
maximum damage at the conclusion of the test sequence specified in para. 734(a):
(a) The specimen, representing a package having a mass of less than 250 kg,
shall be placed on a target and subjected to a probe having a mass of 250 kg
falling from a height of 3 m above the intended impact point. For this test
the probe shall be a 20 cm diameter cylindrical bar with the striking end
forming the frustum of a right circular cone with the following dimensions:
30 cm height and 2.5 cm diameter at the top with its edge rounded off to a
radius of not more than 6 mm. The target on which the specimen is placed
shall be as specified in para. 717.
(b) For packages having a mass of 250 kg or more, the base of the probe shall
be placed on a target and the specimen dropped onto the probe. The height
of the drop, measured from the point of impact with the specimen to the
upper surface of the probe, shall be 3 m. The probe for this test shall have
the same properties and dimensions as specified in (a), except that the
length and mass of the probe shall be such as to cause maximum damage to
the specimen. The target on which the base of the probe is placed shall be
as specified in para. 717.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
TEST PROCEDURES
736. Enhanced thermal test: The conditions for this test shall be as specified in
para. 728, except that the exposure to the thermal environment shall be for a
period of 60 min.
737. Impact test: The specimen shall be subject to an impact on a target at a
velocity of not less than 90 m/s, at such an orientation as to suffer maximum
damage. The target shall be as defined in para. 717, except that the target surface
may be at any orientation as long as the surface is normal to the specimen path.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Section VIII
APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL
801. For package designs where it is not required that a competent authority
issue a certificate of approval, the consignor shall, on request, make available
for inspection by the relevant competent authority, documentary evidence of the
compliance of the package design with all the applicable requirements.
802. Competent authority approval shall be required for the following:
(a) Designs for:
(i) Special form radioactive material (see paras 803, 804 and 823);
(ii) Low dispersible radioactive material (see paras 803 and 804);
(iii) Fissile material excepted under para. 417(f) (see paras 805 and 806);
(iv) Packages containing 0.1 kg or more of uranium hexafluoride (see
para. 807);
(v) Packages containing fissile material, unless excepted by para. 417,
674 or 675 (see paras 814–816 and 820);
(vi) Type B(U) packages and Type B(M) packages (see paras 808–813 and
820);
(vii) Type C packages (see paras 808–810).
(b) Special arrangements (see paras 829–831).
(c) Certain shipments (see paras 825–828).
(d) Radiation protection programme for special use vessels (see para. 576(a)).
(e) Calculation of radionuclide values that are not listed in Table 2 (see
para. 403(a)).
(f) Calculation of alternative activity limits for an exempt consignment of
instruments or articles (see para. 403(b)).
The certificates of approval for the package design and the shipment may be
combined into a single certificate.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VIII
APPROVAL OF SPECIAL FORM RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL AND LOW
DISPERSIBLE RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL
803. The design for special form radioactive material shall require unilateral
approval. The design for low dispersible radioactive material shall require
multilateral approval. In both cases, an application for approval shall include:
(a) A detailed description of the radioactive material or, if a capsule, the
contents; particular reference shall be made to both physical and chemical
states.
(b) A detailed statement of the design of any capsule to be used.
(c) A statement of the tests that have been carried out and their results, or
evidence based on calculations, to show that the radioactive material is
capable of meeting the performance standards, or other evidence that the
special form radioactive material or low dispersible radioactive material
meets the applicable requirements of these Regulations.
(d) A specification of the applicable management system, as required in
para. 306.
(e) Any proposed pre-shipment actions for use in the consignment of special
form radioactive material or low dispersible radioactive material.
804. The competent authority shall establish a certificate of approval stating
that the approved design meets the requirements for special form radioactive
material or low dispersible radioactive material and shall attribute to that design
an identification mark.
APPROVAL OF MATERIAL EXCEPTED FROM FISSILE
CLASSIFICATION
805. The design for fissile material excepted from “FISSILE” classification in
accordance with Table 1, under para. 417(f) shall require multilateral approval.
An application for approval shall include:
(a) A detailed description of the material; particular reference shall be made to
both physical and chemical states.
(b) A statement of the tests that have been carried out and their results, or
evidence based on calculations, to show that the material is capable of
meeting the requirements specified in para. 606.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
(c) A specification of the applicable management system as required in
para. 306.
(d) A statement of specific actions to be taken prior to shipment.
806. The competent authority shall establish a certificate of approval stating that
the approved material meets the requirements for fissile material excepted by
the competent authority in accordance with para. 606 and shall attribute to that
design an identification mark.
APPROVAL OF PACKAGE DESIGNS
Approval of package designs to contain uranium hexafluoride
807. The approval of designs for packages containing 0.1 kg or more of uranium
hexafluoride requires that:
(a) Each design that meets the requirements of para. 634 shall require
multilateral approval.
(b) Each design that meets the requirements of paras 631–633 shall require
unilateral approval by the competent authority of the country of origin
of the design, unless multilateral approval is otherwise required by these
Regulations.
(c) The application for approval shall include all information necessary to
satisfy the competent authority that the design meets the requirements of
para. 631 and a specification of the applicable management system, as
required in para. 306.
(d) The competent authority shall establish a certificate of approval stating that
the approved design meets the requirements of para. 631 and shall attribute
to that design an identification mark.
Approval of Type B(U) and Type C package designs
808. Each Type B(U) and Type C package design shall require unilateral
approval, except that:
(a) A package design for fissile material, which is also subject to paras 814–816,
shall require multilateral approval.
(b) A Type B(U) package design for low dispersible radioactive material shall
require multilateral approval.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VIII
809. An application for approval shall include:
(a) A detailed description of the proposed radioactive contents with reference
to their physical and chemical states and the nature of the radiation emitted.
(b) A detailed statement of the design, including complete engineering
drawings and schedules of materials and methods of manufacture.
(c) A statement of the tests that have been carried out and their results, or
evidence based on calculations or other evidence that the design is adequate
to meet the applicable requirements.
(d) The proposed operating and maintenance instructions for the use of the
packaging.
(e) If the package is designed to have a maximum normal operating pressure in
excess of 100 kPa gauge, a specification of the materials of manufacture of
the containment system, the samples to be taken and the tests to be made.
(f) If the package is to be used for shipment after storage, a justification of
considerations to ageing mechanisms in the safety analysis and within the
proposed operating and maintenance instructions.
(g) Where the proposed radioactive contents are irradiated nuclear fuel, the
applicant shall state and justify any assumption in the safety analysis
relating to the characteristics of the fuel and describe any pre-shipment
measurement required by para. 677(b).
(h) Any special stowage provisions necessary to ensure the safe dissipation of
heat from the package considering the various modes of transport to be
used and the type of conveyance or freight container.
(i) A reproducible illustration, not larger than 21 cm × 30 cm, showing the
make-up of the package.
(j) A specification of the applicable management system as required in
para. 306.
(k) For packages which are to be used for shipment after storage, a gap analysis
programme describing a systematic procedure for a periodic evaluation of
changes of regulations, changes in technical knowledge and changes of the
state of the package design during storage.
810. The competent authority shall establish a certificate of approval stating that
the approved design meets the requirements for Type B(U) or Type C packages
and shall attribute to that design an identification mark.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
Approval of Type B(M) package designs
811. Each Type B(M) package design, including those for fissile material which
are also subject to paras 814–816 and those for low dispersible radioactive
material, shall require multilateral approval.
812. An application for approval of a Type B(M) package design shall include,
in addition to the information required in para. 809 for Type B(U) packages:
(a) A list of the requirements specified in paras 639, 655–657 and 660–666
with which the package does not conform;
(b) Any proposed supplementary operational controls to be applied during
transport not regularly provided for in these Regulations, but which are
necessary to ensure the safety of the package or to compensate for the
deficiencies listed in (a);
(c) A statement relative to any restrictions on the mode of transport and to any
special loading, carriage, unloading or handling procedures;
(d) A statement of the range of ambient conditions (temperature, solar
insolation) that are expected to be encountered during transport and which
have been taken into account in the design.
813. The competent authority shall establish a certificate of approval stating that
the approved design meets the applicable requirements for Type B(M) packages
and shall attribute to that design an identification mark.
Approval of package designs to contain fissile material
814. Each package design for fissile material that is not excepted by any of the
paras 417(a)–(f), 674 and 675 shall require multilateral approval.
815. An application for approval shall include all information necessary
to satisfy the competent authority that the design meets the requirements of
para. 673 and a specification of the applicable management system, as required in
para. 306.
816. The competent authority shall establish a certificate of approval stating that
the approved design meets the requirements of para. 673 and shall attribute to
that design an identification mark.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VIII
APPROVAL OF ALTERNATIVE ACTIVITY LIMITS FOR AN EXEMPT
CONSIGNMENT OF INSTRUMENTS OR ARTICLES
817. Alternative activity limits for an exempt consignment of instruments or
articles in accordance with para. 403(b) shall require multilateral approval. An
application for approval shall include:
(a) An identification, and a detailed description, of the instrument or article, its
intended uses and the radionuclide(s) incorporated;
(b) The maximum activity of the radionuclide(s) in the instrument or article;
(c) The maximum external dose rate arising from the instrument or article;
(d) The chemical and physical forms of the radionuclide(s) contained in the
instrument or article;
(e) Details of the construction and design of the instrument or article,
particularly as related to the containment and shielding of the radionuclide
in routine, normal and accident conditions of transport;
(f) The applicable management system, including the quality testing and
verification procedures to be applied to radioactive sources, components
and finished products to ensure that the maximum specified activity of
radioactive material or the maximum dose rate specified for the instrument
or article are not exceeded, and that the instruments or articles are
constructed according to the design specifications;
(g) The maximum number of instruments or articles expected to be shipped per
consignment and annually;
(h) Dose assessments in accordance with the principles and methodologies
set out in GSR Part 3 [2], including individual doses to transport workers
and members of the public and, if appropriate, collective doses arising
from routine, normal and accident conditions of transport, based on
representative transport scenarios that the consignments are subject to.
818. The competent authority shall establish a certificate of approval stating that
the approved alternative activity limit for an exempt consignment of instruments
or articles meets the requirements of para. 403(b) and shall attribute to that
certificate an identification mark.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
TRANSITIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Packages not requiring competent authority approval of design under the
1985, 1985 (As Amended 1990), 1996 Edition, 1996 Edition (Revised), 1996
(As Amended 2003), 2005, 2009 and 2012 Editions of these Regulations
819. Packages not requiring competent authority approval of design (excepted
packages, Type IP-1, Type IP-2, Type IP-3 and Type A packages) shall meet this
edition of these Regulations in full, except that:
(a) Packages that meet the requirements of the 1985 or 1985 (As Amended
1990) Editions of these Regulations:
(i) May continue in transport provided that they were prepared
for transport prior to 31 and are subject to the
requirements of para. 822, if applicable; or
(ii) May continue to be used, provided that all the following conditions
are met:
(1) They were not designed to contain uranium hexafluoride.
(2) The applicable requirements of para. 306 of this edition of these
Regulations are applied.
(3) The activity limits and classification in Section IV of this edition
of these Regulations are applied.
(4) The requirements and controls for transport in Section V of this
edition of these Regulations are applied.
(5) The packaging was not manufactured or modified after
31 .
(b) Packages that meet the requirements of the 1996 Edition, 1996 Edition
(Revised), 1996 (As Amended 2003), 2005, 2009 or 2012 Editions of these
Regulations:
(i) May continue in transport provided that they were prepared
for transport prior to 31 and are subject to the
requirements of para. 822, if applicable; or
(ii) May continue to be used, provided that all the following conditions
are met:
(1) The applicable requirements of para. 306 of this edition of these
Regulations are applied;
(2) The activity limits and classification in Section IV of this edition
of these Regulations are applied;
(3) The requirements and controls for transport in Section V of this
edition of these Regulations are applied; and

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VIII
(4) The packaging was not manufactured or modified after
31 .
Package designs approved under the 1985, 1985 (As Amended 1990), 1996
Edition, 1996 Edition (Revised), 1996 (As Amended 2003), 2005, 2009 and
2012 Editions of these Regulations
820. Packages requiring competent authority approval of the design shall meet
this edition of these Regulations in full except that:
(a) Packagings that were manufactured to a package design approved
by the competent authority under the provisions of 1985 or 1985
(As Amended 1990) Editions of these Regulations may continue to be used
provided that all of the following conditions are met:
(i) The package design is subject to multilateral approval.
(ii) The applicable requirements of para. 306 of this edition of these
Regulations are applied.
(iii) The activity limits and classification in Section IV of this edition of
these Regulations are applied.
(iv) The Requirements and controls for transport in Section V of this
edition of these Regulations are applied.
(v) For a package containing fissile material and transported by air, the
requirement of para. 683 is met.
(b) Packagings that were manufactured to a package design approved by the
competent authority under the provisions of the 1996 Edition, 1996 Edition
(Revised), 1996 (As Amended 2003), 2005, 2009 and 2012 Editions of
these Regulations may continue to be used provided that all of the following
conditions are met:
(i) The package design is subject to multilateral approval after
31 .
(ii) The applicable requirements of para. 306 of this edition of the
Regulations are applied.
(iii) The activity limits and material restrictions of Section IV of this
edition of these Regulations are applied.
(iv) The requirements and controls for transport in Section V of this edition
of these Regulations are applied.
821. No new manufacture of packagings to a package design meeting the
provisions of the 1985 and 1985 (As Amended 1990) Editions of these
Regulations shall be permitted to commence.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
821A. No new manufacture of packagings of a package design meeting the
provisions of the 1996 Edition, 1996 Edition (Revised), 1996 (As Amended 2003),
2005, 2009 and 2012 Editions of these Regulations shall be permitted to
commence after 31 .
Packages excepted from the requirements for fissile material under the 2009
Edition of these Regulations
822. Packages containing fissile material that is excepted from classification
as “FISSILE” according to para. 417(a)(i) or (iii) of the 2009 Edition of these
Regulations prepared for transport before 31 may continue in
transport and may continue to be classified as non-fissile or fissile-excepted
except that the consignment limits in Table 4 of the 2009 Edition of these
Regulations shall apply to the conveyance. The consignment shall be transported
under exclusive use.
Special form radioactive material approved under the 1985, 1985
(As Amended 1990), 1996 Edition, 1996 Edition (Revised), 1996
(As Amended 2003), 2005, 2009 and 2012 Editions of these Regulations
823. Special form radioactive material manufactured to a design that had
received unilateral approval by the competent authority under the 1985,
1985 (As Amended 1990), 1996 Edition, 1996 Edition (Revised), 1996
(As Amended 2003), 2005, 2009 and 2012 Editions of these Regulations may
continue to be used when in compliance with the mandatory management system
in accordance with the applicable requirements of para. 306. There shall be no new
manufacture of special form radioactive material to a design that had received
unilateral approval by the competent authority under the 1985 or 1985 (As
Amended 1990) Editions of these Regulations. No new manufacture of special
form radioactive material to a design that had received unilateral approval by
the competent authority under the 1996 Edition, 1996 Edition (Revised), 1996
(As Amended 2003), 2005, 2009 and 2012 Editions of these Regulations shall be
permitted to commence after 31 .
NOTIFICATION AND REGISTRATION OF SERIAL NUMBERS
824. The competent authority shall be informed of the serial number of each
packaging manufactured to a design approved under paras 808, 811, 814 and 820.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VIII
APPROVAL OF SHIPMENTS
825. Multilateral approval shall be required for:
(a) The shipment of Type B(M) packages not conforming with the requirements
of para. 639 or designed to allow controlled intermittent venting.
(b) The shipment of Type B(M) packages containing radioactive material with
an activity greater than 3000A or 3000A , as appropriate, or 1000 TBq,
1 2
whichever is the lower.
(c) The shipment of packages containing fissile material if the sum of the
CSIs of the packages in a single freight container or in a single conveyance
exceeds 50. Excluded from this requirement shall be shipments by
sea-going vessels if the sum of the CSIs does not exceed 50 for any hold,
compartment or defined deck area and the distance of 6 m between groups
of packages or overpacks, as required in Table 11, is met.
(d) Radiation protection programmes for shipments by special use vessels in
accordance with para. 576(a).
(e) The shipment of SCO-III.
826. A competent authority may authorize transport through or into its country
without shipment approval, by a specific provision in its design approval.
827. An application for approval of shipment shall include:
(a) The period of time, related to the shipment, for which the approval is
sought;
(b) The actual radioactive contents, the expected modes of transport, the type
of conveyance and the probable or proposed route;
(c) The details of how the precautions and administrative or operational
controls, referred to in the certificates of approval for the package design, if
applicable, issued under paras 810, 813 and 816, are to be put into effect.
827A. An application for approval of SCO-III shipments shall include:
(a) A statement of the respects in which, and of the reasons why, the
consignment is considered SCO-III.
(b) Justification for choosing SCO-III by demonstrating that:
(i) No suitable packaging currently exists;
(ii) Designing and/or constructing a packaging or segmenting the object is
not practically, technically or economically feasible;
(iii) No other viable alternative exists.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
(c) A detailed description of the proposed radioactive contents with reference
to their physical and chemical states and the nature of the radiation emitted.
(d) A detailed statement of the design of the SCO-III, including complete
engineering drawings and schedules of materials and methods of
manufacture.
(e) All information necessary to satisfy the competent authority that the
requirements of para. 520(e) and the requirements of para. 522, if
applicable, are satisfied.
(f) A transport plan.
(g) A specification of the applicable management system as required in
para. 306.
828. Upon approval of the shipment, the competent authority shall issue a
certificate of approval.
APPROVAL OF SHIPMENTS UNDER SPECIAL ARRANGEMENT
829. Each consignment transported under special arrangement shall require
multilateral approval.
830. An application for approval of shipments under special arrangement shall
include all the information necessary to satisfy the competent authority that the
overall level of safety in transport is at least equivalent to that which would be
provided if all the applicable requirements of these Regulations had been met.
The application shall also include:
(a) A statement of the respects in which, and of the reasons why, the shipment
cannot be made in full accordance with the applicable requirements;
(b) A statement of any special precautions or special administrative or
operational controls that are to be employed during transport to compensate
for the failure to meet the applicable requirements.
831. Upon approval of shipments under special arrangement, the competent
authority shall issue a certificate of approval.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VIII
COMPETENT AUTHORITY CERTIFICATES OF APPROVAL
Competent authority identification marks
832. Each certificate of approval issued by a competent authority shall be
assigned an identification mark. The mark shall be of the following generalized
type:
VRI/Number/Type code
(a) Except as provided in para. 833(b), VRI represents the international vehicle
registration identification code of the country issuing the certificate.
(b) The number shall be assigned by the competent authority and shall be
unique and specific with regard to the particular design, shipment or
alternative activity limit for exempt consignment. The identification mark
of the approval of shipment shall be clearly related to the identification
mark of the approval of design.
(c) The following type codes shall be used in the order listed to indicate the
types of certificate of approval issued:
AF Type A package design for fissile material
B(U) Type B(U) package design (B(U)F if for fissile material)
B(M) Type B(M) package design (B(M)F if for fissile material)
C Type C package design (CF if for fissile material)
IF Industrial package design for fissile material
S Special form radioactive material
LD Low dispersible radioactive material
FE Fissile material complying with the requirements of para. 606
T Shipment
X Special arrangement
AL Alternative activity limits for an exempt consignment of instruments
or articles
In the case of package designs for non-fissile or fissile-excepted uranium
hexafluoride, where none of the above codes apply, the following type codes
shall be used:
H(U) Unilateral approval
H(M) Multilateral approval.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
833. These identification marks shall be applied as follows:
(a) Each certificate and each package shall bear the appropriate identification
mark comprising the symbols prescribed in para. 832(a)–(c), except
that, for packages, only the applicable design type codes shall appear
following the second stroke, that is, the “T” or “X” shall not appear in the
identification mark on the package. Where the approval of design and the
approval of shipment are combined, the applicable type codes do not need
to be repeated. For example:
A/132/B(M)F: A Type B(M) package design approved for fissile material,
requiring multilateral approval, for which the competent
authority of Austria has assigned the design number 132
(to be marked both on the package and on the certificate of
approval for the package design)
A/132/B(M)FT: The approval of shipment issued for a package bearing the
identification mark elaborated above (to be marked on the
certificate only)
A/137/X: An approval of special arrangement issued by the
competent authority of Austria, to which the number 137
has been assigned (to be marked on the certificate only)
A/139/IF: An industrial package design for fissile material approved
by the competent authority of Austria, to which package
design number 139 has been assigned (to be marked both
on the package and on the certificate of approval for the
package design)
A/145/H(U): A package design for fissile-excepted uranium
hexafluoride approved by the competent authority of
Austria, to which package design number 145 has been
assigned (to be marked both on the package and on the
certificate of approval for the package design).
(b) Where multilateral approval is effected by validation in accordance with
para. 840, only the identification mark issued by the country of origin of the
design or shipment shall be used. Where multilateral approval is effected
by issue of certificates by successive countries, each certificate shall bear
the appropriate identification mark and the package whose design was so
approved shall bear all appropriate identification marks.
For example:
A/132/B(M)F
CH/28/B(M)F

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VIII
would be the identification mark of a package that was originally approved
by Austria and was subsequently approved, by separate certificate, by
Switzerland. Additional identification marks would be tabulated in a similar
manner on the package.
(c) The revision of a certificate shall be indicated by a parenthetical expression
following the identification mark on the certificate. For example,
A/132/B(M)F (Rev. 2) would indicate revision 2 of the Austrian certificate
of approval for the package design; or A/132/B(M)F (Rev. 0) would
indicate the original issuance of the Austrian certificate of approval for the
package design. For original issuances, the parenthetical entry is optional
and other words such as “original issuance” may also be used in place of
“Rev. 0”. Certificate revision numbers may only be issued by the country
issuing the original certificate of approval.
(d) Additional symbols (as may be necessitated by national requirements) may
be added in brackets to the end of the identification mark, for example,
A/132/B(M)F (SP503).
(e) It is not necessary to alter the identification mark on the packaging each
time that a revision to the design certificate is made. Such re-marking shall
be required only in those cases where the revision to the package design
certificate involves a change in the letter type codes for the package design
following the second stroke.
CONTENTS OF CERTIFICATES OF APPROVAL
Certificates of approval for special form radioactive material and low
dispersible radioactive material
834. Each certificate of approval issued by a competent authority for special
form radioactive material or low dispersible radioactive material shall include
the following information:
(a) Type of certificate;
(b) The competent authority identification mark;
(c) The issue date and an expiry date;
(d) A list of applicable national and international regulations, including the
edition of the IAEA Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive
Material under which the special form radioactive material or low
dispersible radioactive material is approved;
(e) The identification of the special form radioactive material or low
dispersible radioactive material;

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
(f) A description of the special form radioactive material or low dispersible
radioactive material;
(g) Design specifications for the special form radioactive material or low
dispersible radioactive material, which may include references to drawings;
(h) A specification of the radioactive contents that includes the activities
involved and which may include the physical and chemical forms;
(i) A specification of the applicable management system, as required in
para. 306;
(j) Reference to information provided by the applicant relating to specific
actions to be taken prior to shipment;
(k) If deemed appropriate by the competent authority, reference to the identity
of the applicant;
(l) Signature and identification of the certifying official.
Certificates of approval for material excepted from fissile classification
835. Each certificate of approval issued by a competent authority for material
excepted from classification as “FISSILE” shall include the following
information:
(a) Type of certificate;
(b) The competent authority identification mark;
(c) The issue date and an expiry date;
(d) A list of applicable national and international regulations, including the
edition of the IAEA Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive
Material under which the exception is approved;
(e) A description of the excepted material;
(f) Limiting specifications for the excepted material;
(g) A specification of the applicable management system, as required in
para. 306;
(h) Reference to information provided by the applicant relating to specific
actions to be taken prior to shipment;
(i) If deemed appropriate by the competent authority, reference to the identity
of the applicant;
(j) Signature and identification of the certifying official;
(k) Reference to documentation that demonstrates compliance with para. 606.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VIII
Certificates of approval for special arrangement
836. Each certificate of approval issued by a competent authority for a special
arrangement shall include the following information:
(a) Type of certificate.
(b) The competent authority identification mark.
(c) The issue date and an expiry date.
(d) Mode(s) of transport.
(e) Any restrictions on the modes of transport, type of conveyance, freight
container and any necessary routeing instructions.
(f) A list of applicable national and international regulations, including the
edition of the IAEA Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive
Material under which the special arrangement is approved.
(g) The following statement: “This certificate does not relieve the consignor
from compliance with any requirement of the government of any country
through or into which the package will be transported”.
(h) References to certificates for alternative radioactive contents, other
competent authority validation, or additional technical data or information,
as deemed appropriate by the competent authority.
(i) Description of the packaging by reference to the drawings or a specification
of the design. If deemed appropriate by the competent authority, a
reproducible illustration not larger than 21 cm × 30 cm, showing the
make-up of the package, should also be provided, accompanied by a brief
description of the packaging, including materials of manufacture, gross
mass, general external dimensions and appearance.
(j) A specification of the authorized radioactive contents, including any
restrictions on the radioactive contents that might not be obvious from
the nature of the packaging. This specification shall include the physical
and chemical forms, the activities involved (including those of the various
isotopes, if appropriate), mass in grams (for fissile material or for each
fissile nuclide, when appropriate) and whether the special arrangement is
for special form radioactive material, low dispersible radioactive material
or fissile material excepted under para. 417(f), if applicable.
(k) Additionally, for packages containing fissile material:
(i) A detailed description of the authorized radioactive contents;
(ii) The value of the CSI;
(iii) Reference to the documentation that demonstrates the criticality safety
of the package;
(iv) Any special features on the basis of which the absence of water from
certain void spaces has been assumed in the criticality assessment;

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
(v) Any allowance (based on para. 677(b)) for a change in neutron
multiplication assumed in the criticality assessment as a result of
actual irradiation experience;
(vi) The ambient temperature range for which the special arrangement has
been approved.
(l) A detailed listing of any supplementary operational controls required for
preparation, loading, carriage, unloading and handling of the consignment,
including any special stowage provisions for the safe dissipation of heat.
(m) If deemed appropriate by the competent authority, reasons for the special
arrangement.
(n) Description of the compensatory measures to be applied as a result of the
shipment being under special arrangement.
(o) Reference to information provided by the applicant relating to the use of
the packaging or specific actions to be taken prior to the shipment.
(p) A statement regarding the ambient conditions assumed for purposes of
design if these are not in accordance with those specified in paras 656, 657
and 666, as applicable.
(q) Any emergency arrangements deemed necessary by the competent
authority.
(r) A specification of the applicable management system, as required in
para. 306.
(s) If deemed appropriate by the competent authority, reference to the identity
of the applicant and to the identity of the carrier.
(t) Signature and identification of the certifying official.
Certificates of approval for shipments
837. Each certificate of approval for a shipment issued by a competent authority
shall include the following information:
(a) Type of certificate.
(b) The competent authority identification mark(s).
(c) The issue date and an expiry date.
(d) A list of applicable national and international regulations, including the
edition of the IAEA Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive
Material under which the shipment is approved.
(e) Any restrictions on the modes of transport, type of conveyance, freight
container and any necessary routeing instructions.
(f) The following statement: “This certificate does not relieve the consignor
from compliance with any requirement of the government of any country
through or into which the package will be transported”.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VIII
(g) A detailed listing of any supplementary operational controls required for
preparation, loading, carriage, unloading and handling of the consignment,
including any special stowage provisions for the safe dissipation of heat or
maintenance of criticality safety.
(h) Reference to information provided by the applicant relating to specific
actions to be taken prior to shipment.
(i) Reference to the applicable certificate(s) of approval of design.
(j) A specification of the actual radioactive contents, including any restrictions
on the radioactive contents that might not be obvious from the nature of
the packaging. This specification shall include the physical and chemical
forms, the total activities involved (including those of the various isotopes,
if appropriate), mass in grams (for fissile material or for each fissile nuclide,
when appropriate) and whether the shipment is for special form radioactive
material, low dispersible radioactive material or fissile material excepted
under para. 417(f), if applicable.
(k) Any emergency arrangements deemed necessary by the competent
authority.
(l) A specification of the applicable management system, as required in
para. 306.
(m) If deemed appropriate by the competent authority, reference to the identity
of the applicant.
(n) Signature and identification of the certifying official.
Certificates of approval for package design
838. Each certificate of approval of the design of a package issued by a
competent authority shall include the following information:
(a) Type of certificate.
(b) The competent authority identification mark.
(c) The issue date and an expiry date.
(d) Any restriction on the modes of transport, if appropriate.
(e) A list of applicable national and international regulations, including the
edition of the IAEA Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive
Material under which the design is approved.
(f) The following statement: “This certificate does not relieve the consignor
from compliance with any requirement of the government of any country
through or into which the package will be transported”.
(g) References to certificates for alternative radioactive contents, other
competent authority validation, or additional technical data or information,
as deemed appropriate by the competent authority.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
(h) A statement authorizing shipment, where approval of shipment is required
under para. 825, if deemed appropriate.
(i) Identification of the packaging.
(j) Description of the packaging by reference to the drawings or specification
of the design. If deemed appropriate by the competent authority, a
reproducible illustration not larger than 21 cm × 30 cm, showing the
make-up of the package, should also be provided, accompanied by a brief
description of the packaging, including materials of manufacture, gross
mass, general external dimensions and appearance.
(k) Specification of the design by reference to the drawings.
(l) A specification of the authorized radioactive contents, including any
restrictions on the radioactive contents that might not be obvious from
the nature of the packaging. This specification shall include the physical
and chemical forms, the activities involved (including those of the
various isotopes, if appropriate), the mass in grams (for fissile material,
the total mass of fissile nuclides or the mass for each fissile nuclide, when
appropriate) and whether the package design is for special form radioactive
material, low dispersible radioactive material or fissile material excepted
under para. 417(f), if applicable.
(m) A description of the containment system.
(n) For package designs containing fissile material that require multilateral
approval of the package design in accordance with para. 814:
(i) A detailed description of the authorized radioactive contents;
(ii) A description of the confinement system;
(iii) The value of the CSI;
(iv) Reference to the documentation that demonstrates the criticality safety
of the package;
(v) Any special features on the basis of which the absence of water from
certain void spaces has been assumed in the criticality assessment;
(vi) Any allowance (based on para. 677(b)) for a change in neutron
multiplication assumed in the criticality assessment as a result of
actual irradiation experience;
(vii) The ambient temperature range for which the package design has been
approved.
(o) For Type B(M) packages, a statement specifying those prescriptions of
paras 639, 655–657 and 660–666 with which the package does not conform
and any amplifying information that may be useful to other competent
authorities.
(p) For package designs subject to para. 820, a statement specifying those
requirements of the current regulations with which the package does not
conform.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SECTION VIII
(q) For packages containing more than 0.1 kg of uranium hexafluoride, a
statement specifying those prescriptions of para. 634 that apply, if any,
and any amplifying information that may be useful to other competent
authorities.
(r) A detailed listing of any supplementary operational controls required for
preparation, loading, carriage, unloading and handling of the consignment,
including any special stowage provisions for the safe dissipation of heat.
(s) Reference to information provided by the applicant relating to the use of
the packaging or to specific actions to be taken prior to shipment.
(t) A statement regarding the ambient conditions assumed for purposes of
design, if these are not in accordance with those specified in paras 656, 657
and 666, as applicable.
(u) A specification of the applicable management system, as required in
para. 306.
(v) Any emergency arrangements deemed necessary by the competent
authority.
(w) If deemed appropriate by the competent authority, reference to the identity
of the applicant.
(x) Signature and identification of the certifying official.
Certificates of approval for alternative activity limits for an exempt
consignment of instruments or articles
839. Each certificate issued by a competent authority for alternative activity
limits for an exempt consignment of instruments or articles according to para. 818
shall include the following information:
(a) Type of certificate;
(b) The competent authority identification mark;
(c) The issue date and an expiry date;
(d) List of applicable national and international regulations, including the
edition of the IAEA Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive
Material under which the exemption is approved;
(e) The identification of the instrument or article;
(f) A description of the instrument or article;
(g) Design specifications for the instrument or article;
(h) A specification of the radionuclide(s) and the approved alternative activity
limit(s) for the exempt consignment(s) of the instrument(s) or article(s);
(i) Reference to documentation that demonstrates compliance with
para. 403(b);

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
APPROVAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
(j) If deemed appropriate by the competent authority, reference to the identity
of the applicant;
(k) Signature and identification of the certifying official.
VALIDATION OF CERTIFICATES
840. Multilateral approval may be by validation of the original certificate issued
by the competent authority of the country of origin of the design or shipment.
Such validation may take the form of an endorsement on the original certificate
or the issuance of a separate endorsement, annex, supplement, etc., by the
competent authority of the country through or into which the shipment is made.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REFERENCES
References are to editions that are current as of the time of publication of
these Regulations. Editions that supersede these may be adopted under national
legislation.
[1] EUROPEAN ATOMIC ENERGY COMMUNITY, FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS, INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC
ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION,
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION, OECD NUCLEAR ENERGY
AGENCY, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS
ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION,
Fundamental Safety Principles, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SF-1, IAEA, Vienna
(2006).
[2] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF
THE UNITED NATIONS, INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY,
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION, OECD NUCLEAR ENERGY
AGENCY, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS
ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION Radiation
Protection and Safety of Radiation Sources: International Basic Safety Standards, IAEA
Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 3, IAEA, Vienna (2014).
[3] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Governmental, Legal and
Regulatory Framework for Safety, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 1
(Rev. 1), IAEA, Vienna (2016).
[4] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Leadership and Management for
Safety, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 2, IAEA, Vienna (2016).
[5] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Advisory Material for the IAEA
Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material (2012 Edition), IAEA Safety
Standards Series No. SSG-26, IAEA, Vienna (2014). (A revision of this publication is in
preparation.)
[6] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Planning and Preparing for
Emergency Response to Transport Accidents Involving Radioactive Material, IAEA
Safety Standards Series No. TS-G-1.2 (ST-3), IAEA, Vienna (2002). (A revision of this
publication is in preparation.)
[7] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Compliance Assurance for the Safe
Transport of Radioactive Material, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. TS-G-1.5, IAEA,
Vienna (2009).
[8] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, The Management System for the
Safe Transport of Radioactive Material, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. TS-G-1.4,
IAEA, Vienna (2008).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REFERENCES
[9] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Radiation Protection Programmes
for the Transport of Radioactive Material, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. TS-G-1.3,
IAEA, Vienna (2007).
[10] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Schedules of Provisions of the
IAEA Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material (2012 Edition), IAEA
Safety Standards Series No. SSG-33, IAEA, Vienna (2015). (A revision of this
publication is in preparation.)
[11] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL CIVIL
AVIATION ORGANIZATION, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION,
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION, INTERPOL, OECD NUCLEAR
ENERGY AGENCY, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, PREPARATORY
COMMISSION FOR THE COMPREHENSIVE NUCLEAR-TEST-BAN TREATY
ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME, UNITED
NATIONS OFFICE FOR THE COORDINATION OF HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS,
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, WORLD METEOROLOGICAL
ORGANIZATION, Preparedness and Response for a Nuclear or Radiological
Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 7, IAEA, Vienna (2015).
[12] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR
OFFICE, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION, Criteria for Use in Preparedness and Response for a Nuclear or
Radiological Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSG-2, IAEA,
Vienna (2011).
[13] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR
OFFICE, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS
OFFICE FOR THE COORDINATION OF HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS, WORLD
HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Arrangements for Preparedness for a Nuclear or
Radiological Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GS-G-2.1, IAEA, Vienna
(2007).
[14] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL CIVIL
AVIATION ORGANIZATION, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE,
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION, INTERPOL, UNITED NATIONS
OFFICE FOR THE COORDINATION OF HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS, WORLD
HEALTH ORGANIZATION, WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION,
Arrangements for the Termination of a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency, IAEA
Safety Standards Series No. GSG-11, IAEA, Vienna (2018).
[15] INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION, International Maritime Dangerous
Goods (IMDG) Code, IMO, London (2014).
[16] INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION, Radiation
Protection — Sealed Radioactive Sources — Leakage Test Methods, ISO 9978:1992,
ISO, Geneva (1992).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
REFERENCES
[17] UNITED NATIONS, Recommendations on the Transport of Dangerous Goods, Model
Regulations, ST/SG/AC.10/1/Rev.19, 2 vols, UN, New York and Geneva (2015).
[18] INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION, Series 1 Freight
Containers — Specifications and Testing — Part 1: General Cargo Containers for
General Purposes, ISO 1496-1:1990, ISO, Geneva (1990); and subsequent Amendments
1:1993, 2:1998, 3:2005, 4:2006, 5:2006 and ISO 1496-1:2013.
[19] INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION, Nuclear Energy
— Packaging of Uranium Hexafluoride (UF6) for Transport, ISO 7195:2005, ISO,
Geneva (2005).
[20] INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION, Radiological
Protection — Sealed Radioactive Sources — General Requirements and Classification,
ISO 2919:2012, ISO, Geneva (2012).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Annex I
SUMMARY OF APPROVAL AND PRIOR NOTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS
This summary reflects the contents of the Regulations for the Safe Transport
of Radioactive Material (2018 Edition). The user’s attention is called to the fact
that there may be deviations (exceptions, additions, etc.) relative to:
(a) National regulations relating to safety;
(b) Carrier restrictions;
(c) National regulations relating to security, physical protection, liability,
insurance, pre-notification and/or routeing and import/export/transit
licensing.1
1 In particular, additional measures are taken to provide appropriate physical protection
in the transport of nuclear material and to prevent acts without lawful authority that constitute
the receipt, possession, use, transfer, alteration, disposal or dispersal of nuclear material and
which cause or are likely to cause, death or serious injury to any person or substantial damage
to property (see Refs [I–1] to [I–8]).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ANNEX I
ANNEX I: SUMMARY OF APPROVAL AND PRIOR NOTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS (Part 1)
Competent authority Consignor required
approval required to notify country of
Key paragraphs in Class of package
origin and countries
the Regulations or material
Country of Countries en en routea of each
origin routea shipment
Excepted package b,c No No No
LSA material c,d,e and No No No
SCO-I c,e and SCO-II c,e
— Type IP-1,
— Type IP-2 or
— Type IP-3
Type A c,d,e No No No
SCO-III Yes Yes No
520, 825, 826 — Shipment
a
Countries through or into which (but not over which) the consignment is transported
(see para. 204 of the Regulations).
b
For international transport by post, the consignment shall be deposited with the postal service
only by consignors authorized by the national authority.
c
If the radioactive contents are fissile material excepted under para. 417(f) of the Regulations,
multilateral approval shall be required (see para. 805 of the Regulations).
d
If the radioactive contents are uranium hexafluoride in quantities of 0.1 kg or more, the
approval requirements for packages containing it shall additionally apply (see paras 802 and
807 of the Regulations).
e
If the radioactive contents are fissile material that is not excepted from the requirements for
packages containing fissile material, then the approval requirements in paras 814, 825 and
826 of the Regulations shall additionally apply.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SUMMARY OF APPROVAL AND PRIOR NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
ANNEX I: SUMMARY OF APPROVAL AND PRIOR NOTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS (Part 2)
Competent authority Consignor required
approval required to notify country of
Key paragraphs in Class of package
origin and countries
the Regulations or material
Country of Countries en en route a of each
origin route a shipment
Type B(U) b,c,d
808 — Package design Yes No e
559, 560, 825, 826 — Shipment No No (see Notes 1 and 2)
Type B(M) b,c,e
811 — Package design Yes Yes Yes
559, 560, 825, 826 — Shipment (see Note 3)(see Note 3) (see Note 1)
Type C b,c,d
808 — Package design Yes No
559, 560, 825, 826 — Shipment No No (see Notes 1 and 2)
a Countries through or into which (but not over which) the consignment is transported (see
para. 204 of the Regulations).
b If the radioactive contents are fissile material that is not excepted from the requirements for
packages containing fissile material, then the approval requirements in paras 814, 825 and
826 of the Regulations shall additionally apply.
c If the radioactive contents are uranium hexafluoride in quantities of 0.1 kg or more, the
approval requirements for packages containing it shall additionally apply (see paras 802 and
807 of the Regulations).
d If the radioactive contents are fissile material excepted under para. 417(f) of the Regulations,
multilateral approval shall be required (see para. 805 of the Regulations).
e If the radioactive contents are low dispersible radioactive material and the package is to be
shipped by air, multilateral approval of the package design is required (see para. 808(b) of
the Regulations).
Note 1: Before the first shipment of any package requiring competent authority approval of
the design, the consignor shall ensure that a copy of the certificate of approval for that
design has been submitted to the competent authority of each country (see para. 557
of the Regulations).
Note 2: Notification is required if the radioactive contents exceed 3000A or 3000A or
1 2
1000 TBq, whichever is the lower (see para. 558 of the Regulations).
Note 3: Multilateral approval of shipment required if the radioactive contents exceed 3000A

or 3000A or 1000 TBq, whichever is the lower, or if controlled intermittent venting is

allowed (see paras 825 and 826 of the Regulations).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ANNEX I
ANNEX I: SUMMARY OF APPROVAL AND PRIOR NOTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS (Part 3)
Competent authority Consignor required
approval required to notify country of
Key paragraphs in Class of package
origin and countries
the Regulations or material
Country of Countries en en route a of each
origin route a shipment
Packages for fissile
material
814 — Package design Yesb Yesb
825, 826 — Shipment
ΣCSI ≤ 50 No No (see Notes 1 and 2)
ΣCSI > 50 Yes Yes (see Notes 1 and 2)
Packages containing
0.1 kg or more of uranium
hexafluorided
807 — Package design Yes Yes for H(M)/
no for H(U)
825, 826 — Shipment Noc Noc (see Notes 1 and 2)
a
Countries through or into which (but not over which) the consignment is transported (see
para. 204 of the Regulations).
b
Designs of packages containing fissile material may also require approval in respect of one of
the other items in Annex I.
c
Shipments may, however, require approval in respect of one of the other items in Annex I.
d
If the radioactive contents are fissile material excepted under para. 417(f) of the Regulations,
multilateral approval shall be required (see para. 805 of the Regulations).
Note 1: The multilateral approval requirement for fissile packages, and for some uranium
hexafluoride packages, automatically satisfies the requirement of para. 557 of the
Regulations.
Note 2: Notification is required if the radioactive contents exceed 3000A or 3000A or
1 2
1000 TBq, whichever is the lower (see para. 558 of the Regulations).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
SUMMARY OF APPROVAL AND PRIOR NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
ANNEX I: SUMMARY OF APPROVAL AND PRIOR NOTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS (Part 4)
Competent authority Consignor required
approval required to notify country of
Key paragraphs in Class of package
origin and countries
the Regulations or material
Country of Countries en en routea of each
origin routea shipment
Special form
radioactive material
803 — Design Yes No No
825, 826 — Shipment (see Note 1)(see Note 1) (see Note 1)
Low dispersible
radioactive material
803 — Design Yes Yes No
825, 826 — Shipment (see Note 1)(see Note 1) (see Note 1)
Special arrangement
560, 802, 831 — Shipment Yes Yes Yes
Type B (U) packages for
which design is approved
under
820 — 1973 Regulations Yes Yes (see Note 2)
820 — 1985 Regulations Yes Yes (see Note 2)
805 Fissile material excepted Yes Yes No
from “FISSILE”
classification, in
accordance with para. 606
817 Exempt consignment of Yes Yes No
instruments or articles
a Countries through or into which (but not over which) the consignment is transported (see
para. 204 of the Regulations).
Note 1: See approval and prior notification requirements for the applicable package.
Note 2: Before the first shipment of any package requiring competent authority approval of
the design, the consignor shall ensure that a copy of the certificate of approval for that
design has been submitted to the competent authority of each country (see para. 557
of the Regulations).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ANNEX I
REFERENCES TO ANNEX I
[I–1] Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, INFCIRC/274/Rev.1,
IAEA, Vienna (1980).
[I–2] Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material,
GOV/INF/2005/10-GC(49)/INF/6, IAEA, Vienna (2005).
[I–3] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Nuclear Security Recommendations
on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities
(INFCIRC/225/Revision 5), IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 13, IAEA,
Vienna (2011).
[I–4] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material and Nuclear Facilities, IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 27-G, IAEA, Vienna
(2018).
[I–5] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Security in the Transport of
Radioactive Material, IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 9, IAEA, Vienna (2008).
[I–6] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Code of Conduct on the Safety and
Security of Radioactive Sources, IAEA, Vienna (2004).
[I–7] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Guidance on the Import and Export
of Radioactive Sources, IAEA, Vienna (2012).
[I–8] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Security of Nuclear Material in
Transport, IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 26-G, IAEA, Vienna (2015).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Annex II
CONVERSION FACTORS AND PREFIXES
This edition of the Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive
Material uses the International System of Units (SI). The conversion factors for
non-SI units are:
RADIATION UNITS
Activity in becquerel (Bq) or curie (Ci)
1 Ci = 3.7 × 1010 Bq
1 Bq = 2.7 × 10−11 Ci
Dose equivalent in sievert (Sv) or rem
1 rem = 1.0 × 10−2 Sv
1 Sv = 100 rem
PRESSURE
Pressure in pascal (Pa) or (kgf/cm2)
1 kgf/cm2 = 9.806 808 × 104 Pa
1 Pa = 1.020 × 10−5 kgf/cm2
CONDUCTIVITY
Conductivity in siemens per metre (S/m) or (mho/cm)
10 µmho/cm = 1 mS/m
or
1 mho/cm = 100 S/m
1 S/m = 10−2 mho/cm

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
ANNEX II
SI PREFIXES AND SYMBOLS
The decimal multiples and submultiples of a unit may be formed by
prefixes or symbols, having the following meanings, placed before the name or
symbol of the unit:
Multiplying factor Prefix Symbol
1 000 000 000 000 000 000 = 1018 exa E
1 000 000 000 000 000 = 1015 peta P
1 000 000 000 000 = 1012 tera T
1 000 000 000 = 109 giga G
1 000 000 = 106 mega M
1 000 = 103 kilo k
100 = 102 hecto h
10 = 101 deca da
0.1 = 10−1 deci d
0.01 = 10−2 centi c
0.001 = 10−3 milli m
0.000 001 = 10−6 micro µ
0.000 000 001 = 10−9 nano n
0.000 000 000 001 = 10−12 pico p
0.000 000 000 000 001 = 10−15 femto f
0.000 000 000 000 000 001 = 10−18 atto a

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Annex III
SUMMARY OF CONSIGNMENTS REQUIRING EXCLUSIVE USE
The following consignments are required to be shipped under exclusive use:
(a) Unpackaged LSA-I material, SCO-I and SCO-III (see para. 520);
(b) Liquid LSA-I material in a Type IP-1 package (see para. 521 and Table 5);
(c) Gaseous and/or liquid LSA-II material in a Type IP-2 package (see para. 521
and Table 5);
(d) LSA-III material in a Type IP-2 package (see para. 521 and Table 5);
(e) Packages or overpacks having an individual TI greater than 10 or a
consignment CSI greater than 50 (see paras 526 and 567);
(f) Packages or overpacks having the maximum dose rate at any point on the
external surfaces that exceed 2 mSv/h (see para. 527);
(g) Loaded conveyance or large freight containers with a total sum of TI
exceeding the values given in Table 10 (see para. 566(a));
(h) Loaded conveyances or large freight containers with a total sum of CSI
exceeding the values given in Table 11 for “not under exclusive use”
(see para. 569);
(i) Type B(U), Type B(M) or Type C package whose temperature of accessible
surfaces exceeds 50°C when subject to an ambient temperature of 38°C in
the absence of insolation (see para. 654);
(j) Up to 45 g of fissile nuclides on a conveyance, either packaged or
unpackaged, in accordance with the provisions of paras 417(e) and 520(d);
(k) Packages containing fissile material classified as non-fissile or
fissile-excepted under para. 417(a)(i) or (iii) of the 2009 Edition of these
Regulations (see para. 822).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
CONTRIBUTORS TO DRAFTING AND REVIEW (2018)
Aceña, V. Nuclear Safety Council, Spain
Alcocer Ávila, M.E. National Commission for Nuclear Safety and Safeguards,
Mexico
Alvano, P. National Institute for Environmental Protection and
Research, Italy
Basic, S. Serbian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency,
Serbia
Börst, F.-M. Federal Office for Radiation Protection, Germany
Boyle, R. US Department of Transportation, United States of America
Brajic, B. Serbian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency,
Serbia
Buchelnikov, A. State Atomic Energy Corporation “ROSATOM”, Russian
Federation
Budu, M.E. Sosny Research and Development Company, Russian
Federation
Bujnova, A. Ministry of Transport and Construction of the Slovak
Republic, Slovakia
Butchins, L. Office of Nuclear Regulation, United Kingdom
Capadona, N. International Atomic Energy Agency
Charbonneau, S. Nordion, Canada
Charrette, M.A. Cameco Corporation, Canada
Cordier, N. Nuclear Safety Authority, France
Davidson, I. Office for Nuclear Regulation, United Kingdom
Desnoyers, B. World Nuclear Transport Institute
Doner, K. National Atomic Energy Agency, Poland

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
CONTRIBUTORS TO DRAFTING AND REVIEW (2018)
Droste, B. Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing,
Germany
Duchácek, V. State Office for Nuclear Safety, Czech Republic
Elechosa, C.F. Nuclear Regulatory Authority, Argentina
Ellappan, S. Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, India
Ershov, V.N. State Atomic Energy Corporation “Rosatom”, Russian
Federation
Faille, S. Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission, Canada
Fasten, C. Federal Office for Radiation Protection, Germany
Ferran, G. Nuclear Safety Authority, France
Fulford, G. Nordion, Canada
Georgievska-Dimitrievski, B. Radiation Safety Directorate, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia
Haidl, E. Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation and
Technology, Austria
Hellsten, S. Radiation and Nuclear Safety Authority, Finland
Hinrichsen, P.J. National Nuclear Regulator, South Africa
Hirose, M. Nuclear Regulation Authority, Japan
Hornkjol, S. Norwegian Radiation Protection Authority, Norway
Ilijas, B. State Office for Radiological and Nuclear Safety, Croatia
Ito, D. World Nuclear Transport Institute
Karasinski, C. TRANSNUBEL, Belgium
Kervella, O. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
Kirchnawy, F. Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation and
Technology, Austria
Kirkin, A. Scientific and Engineering Centre for Nuclear and
Radiation Safety, Russian Federation

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
CONTRIBUTORS TO DRAFTING AND REVIEW (2018)
Koch, F. Swiss Federal Nuclear Safety Inspectorate, Switzerland
Komann, S.-M. Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing,
Germany
Konnai, A. National Maritime Research Institute, Japan
Krochmaluk, J. Institute for Radiological Protection and Nuclear Safety,
France
Lizot, M.-T. Institute for Radiological Protection and Nuclear Safety,
France
Lourtie, G. Federal Agency for Nuclear Control, Belgium
Malesys, P. International Organization for Standardization
Moutarde, M. Institute for Radiological Protection and Nuclear Safety,
France
Muneer, M. Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Authority, Pakistan
Patko, A. Nuclear Assurance Corp. International, United States of
America
Petrová, I. State Office for Nuclear Safety, Czech Republic
Phimister, I. Nuclear Decommissioning Authority, United Kingdom
Presta, A. World Nuclear Transport Institute
Quevedo Garcia, J.R. National Nuclear Safety Centre, Cuba
Rakouth, M. Maritime and Fluvial Port Agency of Madagascar,
Madagascar
Reiche, I. Federal Office for Radiation Protection, Germany
Riahi, A. National Centre for Nuclear Science and Technology,
Tunisia
Rooney, K. International Civil Aviation Organization
Sáfár, J. Hungarian Atomic Energy Authority, Hungary
Sahyun, A. Brazilian Association of Nondestructive Tests and
Inspection, Brazil

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
CONTRIBUTORS TO DRAFTING AND REVIEW (2018)
Saini, M. Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, India
Sallit, G. Office for Nuclear Regulation, United Kingdom
Sampson, M. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, United States of
America
Sert, G. Institute for Radiological Protection and Nuclear Safety,
France
Smith, A. Office of Nuclear Regulation, United Kingdom
Spielmann, F. World Nuclear Transport Institute
Takahashi, K. Nuclear Regulation Authority, Japan
Tremblay, I. Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission, Canada
Trivelloni, S. National Institute for Environmental Protection and
Research, Italy
Václav, J. Nuclear Regulatory Authority of the Slovak Republic,
Slovakia
van Aarle, J. Axpo Power AG - Nuclear Energy, Switzerland
Wallin, M.L. Swedish Radiation Safety Authority, Sweden
Whittingham, S. International Atomic Energy Agency
Wille, F. Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing,
Germany
Yagihashi, H. Nuclear Regulation Authority, Japan
Yatsu, S. Nuclear Regulation Authority, Japan
Zamora Martin, F. Nuclear Safety Council, Spain
Zika, H. Swedish Radiation Safety Authority, Sweden
Zimmermann, U.M. Paul Scherrer Institute, Switzerland
Numerous other participants in Member States took part in the review and revision of this
publication. Their invaluable contribution to the process is recognized.

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
INDEX
(by paragraph number)
Accident conditions: 106, 313, 403, 638, 673, 685, 726–730, 817
Activity limit: 111, 201, 231, 402, 403, 405, 411, 414, 422, 423, 802, 817–820,
832, 839
A : 201, 402, 404, 405–407, 422, 429, 430, 433, 558, 825

A : 201, 402–407, 409, 410, 422, 429, 430, 433, 522, 546, 558, 605, 659, 660,

671, 730, 825
Alternative activity limit: 403, 802, 817, 818, 832, 839
Air (transport by): 106, 217, 243, 410, 433, 527, 577–579, 581, 606, 619–623,
635, 652, 655, 683, 820
Ambient conditions: 616, 619, 620, 645, 653–657, 666, 670, 679, 703, 710, 711,
728, 812, 836, 838
Approval: 104, 111, 204, 205, 238, 306, 310, 403, 418, 431–433, 501, 503, 520,
530, 535, 541, 546, 557, 559, 560, 565, 570, 576, 634, 667, 679, 718,
801–820, 823–840
Basic Safety Standards (GSR Part 3): 101, 308, 403, 817
Carrier: 203, 206, 304, 309, 550, 554, 556, 584, 586–588, 836
Categories of package: 529, 530, 538, 540, 546, 563, 574
Certificate of approval: 418, 431–433, 501, 503, 530, 541, 546, 556, 557,
559–561, 565, 570, 679, 718, 801, 802, 804, 806, 807, 810, 813, 816, 818,
827, 828, 831–840
Competent authority: 104, 204, 205, 207–209, 238, 302, 306–310, 313, 315, 403,
431, 510, 530, 534, 535, 541, 546, 556–558, 565, 576, 583, 603, 640, 667,
668, 679, 711, 801, 802, 804, 806, 807, 810, 813, 815, 816, 818–820, 823,
824, 826, 827A, 828, 830–840

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
INDEX
Compliance assurance: 102, 105, 208, 307
Confinement system: 209, 501, 681, 838
Consignee: 210, 221, 309, 531, 546, 582, 585
Consignment: 203, 204, 210–212, 222, 236–238, 243, 305, 310, 402, 403, 405,
417, 423, 506, 525, 526, 536A, 541, 544, 546, 547, 553, 554, 556–559,
562, 564, 566, 567, 570, 572, 573, 576, 577, 580, 581, 583–586, 802, 803,
817, 818, 822, 827A, 829, 832, 836–839
Consignor: 211, 212, 221, 230, 304, 306, 309, 524, 531, 546–549, 554–558, 560,
561, 581, 801, 836–838
Containment: 104, 232, 501, 620, 650, 653, 725, 817
Containment system: 213, 229, 501, 503, 621, 632, 641–645, 647, 650, 660, 662,
663, 672, 680, 685, 714, 716, 724, 809, 838
Contamination: 107, 214–216, 309, 413, 427, 508–510, 512, 513, 520, 659, 671
Conveyance: 104, 217, 221, 411, 414, 509, 510, 512–514, 520, 522, 524, 525,
546, 554, 566, 569, 570, 607, 809, 822, 825, 827, 836, 837
Cooling system: 229, 578, 661
Criticality: 101, 104, 209, 501, 673, 716, 836–838
Criticality safety index (CSI): 218, 525, 526, 541, 542, 546, 566–569, 674, 675,
686, 825, 836, 838
Customs: 582
Dangerous goods: 110, 506, 507, 546, 550, 551, 562, 626–628, 630
Deck area: 217, 219, 825
Decontamination: 505, 511, 513, 610
Dose limits: 301

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
INDEX
Dose rate: 104, 220A, 233, 309, 411, 414, 423, 510, 513, 516, 517, 523, 524,
527–529, 566, 573, 575, 579, 605, 617, 624, 626–630, 648, 659, 671, 817
Emergency: 102, 104, 304, 305, 309, 313, 520, 554, 836–838
Empty packaging: 422, 427, 509, 581
Excepted package: 231, 419, 422–427, 515, 516, 543, 622, 819
Exclusive use: 221, 514, 520, 526–529, 537, 544, 546, 566, 567, 570, 572, 573,
575, 577, 654, 655, 822
Fissile material: 209, 218, 220, 222, 231, 409, 417–419, 423, 424, 427, 501,
503, 518–520, 538, 540, 546, 559, 568–570, 606, 622, 631, 673–686,
716, 731–733, 802, 805, 806, 808, 811, 814–816, 820, 822, 825, 832, 833,
835–838
Freight container: 218, 221, 223, 244, 313, 505, 509, 514, 523–525, 529,
538–540, 542–544, 546, 551, 554, 562, 566, 568, 569, 571, 574, 629, 809,
825, 836, 837
Gas: 235, 242, 409, 605, 644, 651, 725
Heat: 104, 501, 554, 565, 603, 653, 704, 708, 728, 809, 836–838
Identification mark: 535, 546, 559, 804, 806, 807, 810, 813, 816, 818, 832–839
Industrial package (IP): 231, 517–524, 534, 623–630, 819, 832, 833
Insolation: 619, 654, 655, 657, 728, 812
Inspection: 302, 306, 503, 582, 801
Intermediate bulk container (IBC): 224, 505, 630
Label: 313, 427, 507, 530, 538–543, 545–547, 571, 574
Leaching: 603, 703, 704, 710–712
Leakage: 510, 603, 632, 634, 646, 650, 673, 680, 683, 704, 710, 711, 731–733

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
INDEX
Low dispersible radioactive material: 220, 225, 416, 433, 546, 559, 605, 665,
701, 703, 712, 802–804, 808, 811, 832, 834, 836–838
Low specific activity (LSA): 226, 244, 408–411, 517–523, 537, 540, 543, 544,
546, 566, 571, 572, 628
Maintenance: 104, 106, 680, 809, 837
Management system: 102, 105, 228, 306, 803, 805, 807, 809, 815, 817, 823,
827A, 834–838
Manufacture: 106, 306, 403, 422, 423, 426, 501, 534, 604, 640, 680, 713, 809,
819–821A, 823, 824, 827A, 836, 838
Mark: 313, 423, 424, 507, 530–537, 539, 545, 547, 581, 833
Mass: 240, 247, 417, 420, 425, 533, 540, 546, 559, 607, 609, 659, 674–676, 680,
685, 709, 722–724, 727, 735, 836–838
Maximum normal operating pressure: 229, 621, 663, 664, 670, 671, 809
Multilateral approval: 204, 310, 403, 520, 634, 718, 803, 805, 807, 808, 811,
814, 817, 820, 825, 829, 832, 833, 838, 840
N: 684–686
Normal conditions: 106, 403, 511, 638, 653, 673, 684, 719–725, 817
Notification: 557–560, 824
Operational controls: 229, 520, 578, 668, 812, 827, 830, 836–838
Other dangerous properties: 110, 507, 538, 618
Overpack: 218, 230, 244, 505, 509, 523–532, 538–540, 542, 546, 554, 562, 563,
565–569, 571, 573–575, 579, 825
Package design: 104, 220, 418, 420, 431, 433, 502, 504, 530, 534–536, 546, 557,
607, 672, 676–680, 801, 802, 807–816, 819–821A, 827, 832, 833, 838,

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
INDEX
Packaging: 104, 106, 111, 209, 213, 220, 224, 231, 232, 235, 313, 427, 501, 503,
505, 509, 531, 533–535, 581, 610, 614, 631, 639, 643, 647, 653, 665, 680,
681, 701, 718, 723, 809, 819–821A, 824, 827A, 833, 836–838
Placard: 313, 507, 543–545, 547, 571, 572
Post: 423, 424, 515, 580, 581
Pressure: 229, 420, 501, 503, 616, 621, 627, 628, 633, 634, 641, 645, 646,
662–664, 670, 671, 718, 729, 730, 809
Pressure relief: 633, 646, 662
Radiation exposure: 244, 301–303, 309, 311, 313, 562, 582
Radiation protection: 102, 104, 234, 301–304, 308, 311, 313, 403, 510, 520, 576,
603, 802, 817, 825
Rail (transport by): 106, 107, 217, 242, 248, 520, 527, 566, 571–573
Responsibility: 101, 103
Road (transport by): 106, 107, 217, 242, 248, 520, 527, 566, 571–574
Routine conditions: 106, 215, 424, 508, 520, 566, 573, 613, 616, 617, 627–629,
673, 682, 817
Segregation: 313, 506, 562, 563, 568, 569
Serial number: 535, 824
Shielding: 226, 409, 501, 520, 617, 627, 628, 647, 653, 659, 671, 716, 817
Shipment: 106, 204, 221, 237, 501–503, 520, 524, 530, 546, 557–561, 573, 576,
677, 680, 802, 803, 805, 809, 825–828, 830–838, 840
Shipping name: 530, 536A, 546, 547
Special arrangement: 238, 310, 434, 527, 529, 546, 558, 575, 579, 802, 829–833,

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
INDEX
Special form radioactive material: 201, 220, 239, 415, 429, 430, 433, 546, 559,
602–604, 642, 659, 701, 704, 709, 802–804, 823, 832, 834, 836–838
Specific activity: 226, 240, 409
Storage: 106, 503, 505, 507, 562, 565, 568, 569, 809
Stowage: 219, 230, 313, 554, 564, 565, 566, 576, 809, 836–838
Surface contaminated object (SCO): 241, 244, 412–414, 517–523, 537, 540, 543,
544, 546, 571, 572, 825, 827A
Tank: 242, 505, 523, 538, 539, 543, 544, 551, 571, 627, 628
Tank container: 242
Tank vehicle: 242
Temperature: 229, 420, 503, 616, 619, 620, 639, 649, 654–656, 666, 670, 673,
679, 703, 708–711, 728, 812, 836, 838
Test(s): 111, 224, 503, 520, 603, 605, 624, 626–630, 632, 634, 648, 650, 651,
653, 655, 658–660, 662, 663, 670–672, 674, 678, 680–685, 701–713,
716–737, 803, 805, 809, 817
Tie-down: 638
Transport document(s): 313, 540, 545–547, 552–555, 584–588
Transport index (TI): 244, 523, 524, 524A, 526, 529, 540, 546, 566, 567
Type A package: 231, 428–430, 534, 635–651, 725, 819, 832
Type B(M) package: 231, 431–433, 501, 503, 535, 536, 558, 577, 578, 667, 668,
730, 802, 811–813, 825, 832, 833, 838
Type B(U) package: 231, 431–433, 501, 503, 535, 536, 558, 652–666, 730, 802,
808–810, 812, 832
Type C package: 231, 431, 432, 501, 503, 535, 536, 558, 669–672, 683, 730,
734–737, 802, 808–810, 832

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
INDEX
Ullage: 420, 649
Unilateral approval: 205, 503, 803, 807, 808, 823, 832
UN number: 401, 419, 530, 536A, 544, 546, 572
Unpackaged: 222, 244, 417, 423, 514, 520, 522, 523, 543, 544, 562, 570–572,

Uranium hexafluoride: 231, 419, 420, 422, 425, 523, 580, 581, 631–634, 680,
718, 802, 807, 819, 832, 833, 838
Vehicle: 217, 219, 223, 242, 248, 313, 534, 551, 552, 566, 571–575, 832
Venting: 229, 578, 668, 825
Vessel: 217, 219, 249, 527, 575, 576, 802, 825
Water: 409, 536, 603, 605, 611, 660, 672, 673, 680, 681, 683–685, 703, 710, 711,
719–721, 726, 729–733, 836, 838
Waterway (transport by): 106, 217, 249, 520, 522

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).

@
This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
No. 25
ORDERING LOCALLY
In the following countries, IAEA priced publications may be purchased from the sources listed below or
from major local booksellers.
Orders for unpriced publications should be made directly to the IAEA. The contact details are given at
the end of this list.
CANADA
Renouf Publishing Co. Ltd
22-1010 Polytek Street, Ottawa, ON K1J 9J1, CANADA
Telephone: +1 613 745 2665  Fax: +1 643 745 7660
Email: order@renoufbooks.com  Web site: 
Bernan / Rowman & Littlefield
15200 NBN Way, Blue Ridge Summit, PA 17214, USA
Tel: +1 800 462 6420 • Fax: +1 800 338 4550
Email: orders@rowman.com Web site: 
CZECH REPUBLIC
Suweco CZ, s.r.o.
Sestupná 153/11, 162 00 Prague 6, CZECH REPUBLIC
Telephone: +420 242 459 205  Fax: +420 284 821 646
Email: nakup@suweco.cz  Web site: 
FRANCE
Form-Edit
5 rue Janssen, PO Box 25, 75921 Paris CEDEX, FRANCE
Telephone: +33 1 42 01 49 49  Fax: +33 1 42 01 90 90
Email: formedit@formedit.fr  Web site: 
GERMANY
Goethe Buchhandlung Teubig GmbH
Schweitzer Fachinformationen
Willstätterstrasse 15, 40549 Düsseldorf, GERMANY
Telephone: +49 (0) 211 49 874 015  Fax: +49 (0) 211 49 874 28
Email: kundenbetreuung.goethe@schweitzer-online.de  Web site: 
INDIA
Allied Publishers
1st Floor, Dubash House, 15, J.N. Heredi Marg, Ballard Estate, Mumbai 400001, INDIA
Telephone: +91 22 4212 6930/31/69  Fax: +91 22 2261 7928
Email: alliedpl@vsnl.com  Web site: 
Bookwell
3/79 Nirankari, Delhi 110009, INDIA
Telephone: +91 11 2760 1283/4536
Email: bkwell@nde.vsnl.net.in  Web site: 

ITALY
Libreria Scientifica “AEIOU”
Via Vincenzo Maria Coronelli 6, 20146 Milan, ITALY
Telephone: +39 02 48 95 45 52  Fax: +39 02 48 95 45 48
Email: info@libreriaaeiou.eu  Web site: 
JAPAN
Maruzen-Yushodo Co., Ltd
10-10 Yotsuyasakamachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-0002, JAPAN
Telephone: +81 3 4335 9312  Fax: +81 3 4335 9364
Email: bookimport@maruzen.co.jp  Web site: 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Scientific and Engineering Centre for Nuclear and Radiation Safety
107140, Moscow, Malaya Krasnoselskaya st. 2/8, bld. 5, RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Telephone: +7 499 264 00 03  Fax: +7 499 264 28 59
Email: secnrs@secnrs.ru  Web site: 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Bernan / Rowman & Littlefield
15200 NBN Way, Blue Ridge Summit, PA 17214, USA
Tel: +1 800 462 6420 • Fax: +1 800 338 4550
Email: orders@rowman.com  Web site: 
Renouf Publishing Co. Ltd
812 Proctor Avenue, Ogdensburg, NY 13669-2205, USA
Telephone: +1 888 551 7470  Fax: +1 888 551 7471
Email: orders@renoufbooks.com  Web site: 
Orders for both priced and unpriced publications may be addressed directly to:
Marketing and Sales Unit
International Atomic Energy Agency
Vienna International Centre, PO Box 100, 1400 Vienna, Austria
Telephone: +43 1 2600 22529 or 22530 • Fax: +43 1 2600 29302 or +43 1 26007 22529
Email: sales.publications@iaea.org • Web site: 
17254-71
This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).

This publication has been superseded by IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6 (Rev. 2).
Safety through international standards
“Governments, regulatory bodies and operators everywhere must
ensure that nuclear material and radiation sources are used
beneficially, safely and ethically. The IAEA safety standards are
designed to facilitate this, and I encourage all Member States to
make use of them.”
Yukiya Amano
Director General
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
VIENNA
ISBN 978–92–0–107917–6
ISSN 1020–525X