October 6, 2025
Cover Photo: NASA
What will international partnerships look
like post-International Space Station?
BY Annalise Johnson
“Tonight, I am directing NASA to develop a cooperation is shifting to become more commercially
permanently manned space station and to do it led in place of government-to-government agreements.
within a decade,” President Ronald Reagan stated in
The Canadian government cited many motivations to
his 1984 State of the Union address.1 In the following
join the ISS project, including national prestige in
decade, Canada, Japan, and the European Space
technology, developing a technologically skilled
Agency (ESA) joined with the United States in a
workforce, and securing access to space for Canadian
successful multilateral effort to build the International
Space Station (ISS). This massive international project Annalise Johnson was a research intern and Brooke
marked a shifting paradigm in international space Owens fellow with the Aerospace Security Project (ASP)
at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in
activity from mainly single-nation projects to large,
Washington, D.C. This piece was researched, analyzed,
cooperative endeavors. Another major shift is
and written by a next generation scholar. ASP supports
happening in today’s space ecosystem as the ISS is the next generation of space professionals through its
internship program. For more information, see
nearing the end of its lifetime. The nature of

international relationships for space station
AEROSPACE.CSIS.ORG | 1

following decade. The Canadian Space Agency (CSA)
added its most famous element, the robotic arm
(“Canadarm”), to the station in 2001.7 The Japan
Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) and European
Space Agency (ESA) both added their first modules in
2008.8 Throughout the almost 25 years of continuous
human habitation of the International Space Station,
astronauts from twenty-one countries — and
experiments from even more — have flown on the
station.9 The ISS now is known as a symbol of
international collaboration and peace.
Three Roscosmos components on the International Space
Station / NASA
NASA has announced that the International Space
research.2 Europe’s reasoning was similar. Leaders
Station will be decommissioned and deorbited in 2030.10
hoped that the program would improve European
Following the decommissioning of ISS, the agency will
knowledge in technology, automation, materials, and
make use of commercially owned and operated space
telecommunications.3 Russia did not join the ISS until
stations in the same commonly used orbit closest to the
1994 because of its adversarial relationship with the
earth, low Earth orbit (LEO). The use of commercial
West during the Cold War. The new Russian Federation
stations and activities in LEO is expected to cost less
improved diplomatic relations with the United States
than continuing to maintain the ISS or building a new
and its allies after the Soviet Union's collapse in 1991.
station, therefore allowing NASA to shift money toward
The ISS benefited from Russian expertise in engineering
other programs.11 NASA supports commercial station
and rocketry. Russia’s Mir space station was already in
ventures through new types of Space Act Agreements
orbit and would be used for astronaut training before
and contracts, which allow companies to leverage NASA
the launch of the ISS. Adding another partner also
expertise, experience, and capital.12
helped redistribute costs for all countries.4 In total,
fifteen participating nations signed the Inter- The ISS brought together adversarial nations through
Governmental Agreement (IGA) in 1998 outlining the space. The decommissioning of the ISS will further the
role of each country in the ISS widening divide between the
and establishing a cooperative United States and Russia. It will
The landscape of
framework for the program.5 also likely lead to a closer
international partnerships in partnership between nations of
The first module of the ISS was
BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India,
human habitation of LEO will
built by the Russian space
China, South Africa) because
agency Roscosmos and be substantially shifted after
China‘s Tiangong station will be
launched in .6
the ISS is decommissioned. the only governmental station in
The first component built by the
LEO and be used as a diplomatic
U.S. National Aeronautics and
tool by China. However, the
Space Administration (NASA)
other nations involved in ISS,
launched just two weeks later, attaching to the Russian
and many new spacefaring nations, are involved in the
control module. Three other international partners
creation of commercial space stations by U.S.
added modules and components to the station in the
2 | Johnson | What will international partnerships in LEO habitation look like post-ISS?

companies. The involvement of both U.S. and non-U.S. relation to the ISS, such as sending American astronauts
companies and foreign governments and agencies has to the station on Russian Soyuz rockets.16 However, the
led to agreements between different entities and with longer the Russia-Ukraine war goes on, the less likely it
purposes other than those made to build ISS. The becomes that Russia or the West will want to or be able
landscape of international partnerships in human to work with each other after the station is
habitation of LEO will be substantially shifted after the decommissioned.17 While collaboration through ISS
ISS is decommissioned, including a deepening divide does not improve the United States’ and West’s
between the West and Global South, the inclusion of relationship with Russia, the loss of the station likely will
countries not previously involved in the space industry, be felt in the relationship as it continues to decline.
and new types of international arrangements outside of
government-to-government agreements being Lack of further cooperation between the United States
employed. and Russia will leave Beijing as Moscow’s only partner in
space. Later in his interview on NPR’s All Things
Russian and Chinese Collaboration Considered, Colonel Virts addressed a likely future
The partnership between Russia and the United States scenario in LEO: “If they [Russia] leave ISS, either they
formed the “foundation for the international Space build their own space station…or they partner with the
Station,” and the ISS served as a key diplomatic tie Chinese.”18 Many experts do not think that Russia has
between the United States and Russia despite the lack the resources to build its own station due to its declining
of political alignment between the nations on Earth.13 economy and agree with Virts’ assertion; Russia is
Roscosmos and the Russian government have agreed to expected to turn to China in the future. However, China
continue being a part of ISS until 2028 despite multiple has rapidly become a leading global power in
previous threats to leave the station earlier due to technology and space and is seen as a “pacing
political tensions.14 However, the decommissioning of
the ISS widens the already large gap between Russia
and the United States. Former commander of ISS,
Colonel Terry Virts of the United States, spoke in a 2022
National Public Radio (NPR) interview about his time on
ISS during the Russian invasion of Crimea and echoed
this idea: “you could count on one finger the number of
good [aspects of] international relations between the
West and Russia – and that was the space station.”15
There are no plans for U.S.-Russia collaboration in the
creation of any new LEO habitats by government A Soyuz rocket launches with Expedition 33/34 crew
members from Baikonur, Kazakhstan / NASA
agencies or commercial companies. Space and
technology sanctions in response to Russia’s 2014 and challenge” for U.S. military and technological
2022 invasions of Ukraine and the ongoing conflict in the capabilities. The Chinese Tiangong station is the only
country have weakened the Russian space program, and other current LEO space station besides the ISS, which
the invasion furthered the lack of scientific and saw three of its modules launched in 2021 and 2022.19
diplomatic engagement between the West and Russia. The station has a lifespan beyond that of the ISS
The United States and Russia continue to cooperate in because it is over two decades newer and boasts more
| 3

advanced systems.20 China announced that Tiangong the first commercial station company to be awarded a
was open to foreign visitors in October of 2023.21 contract by NASA to build a station that would first
However, Russia and China do not have any public plans attach to the ISS then detach to become free-flying.
for cooperation in LEO on China’s Tiangong station. Starlab and Orbital Reef (made by Blue Origin and Sierra
U.S. experts fear that a gap in LEO service will lead other Space) were awarded funds through Space Act
countries with developing space programs to also Agreements by NASA to develop free-flying stations in
partner with China alongside Russia.22 The expansion of the first phase of NASA’s Commercial LEO Destinations
China's international collaboration through Tiangong (CLD) program. Vast and Starmax (made by the
would threaten the technological security and company Gravitics) have unfunded Space Act
dominance of the United States. Dr. Mary Lynne Dittmar Agreements with NASA. Through these agreements, the
of Axiom Space emphasized this point in her February companies can access NASA facilities and expertise for
2024 testimony to the Space and Aeronautics development and testing but are not given any funding.
Subcommittee of the House Science Space and Both companies aim to eventually produce stations with
Technology Committee. She stated, “In the face of
uncertainty and an absence of American capability,
international industry and scientific institutions will be
forced to partner with the Chinese in order to ensure
their ability to continue to operate in low-Earth orbit.”23
While no official plans have been announced by Russia
and China so far, the lack of American platforms would
leave researchers and astronauts globally with only
Tiangong as a destination. This makes American
commercial stations critical to continuing U.S. presence
in LEO.
View of Earth from the U.S. Space Shuttle / NASA
A Shift from Government to Commercial Partnerships
artificial gravity. A final company, ABOVE: Space,
NASA’s transition to commercial stations is an element
announced the development of a space station and was
of a larger shift in government space strategy to projects
awarded a technology development contract through
being commercially designed and manufactured rather
the U.S. Space Force’s SpaceWERX organization.
than designed by NASA, as in previous stations. This
paradigm shift has brought about different kinds of
Two commercial stations currently in development
international partnerships than in prior decades. To
stand out for their international partnerships and
build the ISS, agreements were made directly between
exemplify the shift from government to commercial
governments: for example, between the United States
agreements. Axiom Space, which received a NASA
and Japan. Today, U.S. companies are cementing
contract in 2020, has established agreements with
agreements directly with foreign governments through
foreign companies and governments for its commercial
their space agencies, and with non-U.S. companies, to
station program.24 Axiom’s major collaborating partner
collaborate on their commercial stations.
for its station, Thales Alenia Space—a joint venture
between the French technology company Thales and
As of , six commercial space stations
Italian defense company Leonardo—is headquartered in
have been announced by U.S. companies. Axiom was
4 | Johnson | What will international partnerships in LEO habitation look like post-ISS?

Cannes, France.25 Axiom also founded a joint venture ESA and the Indian National Space Promotion and
with the South Korean company Boryung Corporation to Authorisation Centre (IN-SPACe) and NewSpace India
jointly explore business opportunities related to the Limited (NSIL), both government agencies of India.
station and manage business partnerships in South Jeffrey Manber, President of International and Space
Korea.26 Axiom signed Memorandums of Understanding Stations at Voyager Space, told Forbes that Starlab will
(MoUs) agreeing to work with the space agencies of “replicate the ISS partnership on a commercial basis but
Canada and the United Arab Emirates (UAE), and with without the Russians.”28
the governments of Italy, Hungary, and New Zealand.
The company also signed a letter of intent with the Policy and Regulatory Questions Remain
Bavarian State Chancellery, the government of the Despite the many plans made, further questions
German state of Bavaria.27 regarding U.S. government policy and the government’s
role in commercial station development and operations
must be addressed to maximize the potential of the
stations. For example, NASA has not officially
announced plans for the future of research through the
ISS National Lab. The ISS National Lab facilitates
research on the station by companies, organizations,
and academics outside of NASA. In ,
NASA published a report exploring models for how it
would conduct research on commercial stations.29 The
study proposed a range of models from NASA acting as a
Plant Progress at the Plant Processing Area / NASA
permanent tenant—buying space and lending it to other
researchers, similar to the current ISS National Lab
system—to NASA functioning as a customer alongside
A second Space Act Agreement recipient, Starlab, which
other commercial or academic entities and paying fees
received a NASA contract award in 2021, also boasts
for service by project and not managing any type of
numerous international partnerships between U.S. and
National Lab. Commercial companies looking to
non-U.S. companies, foreign government agencies, and
perform research on commercial stations will be
universities. The station is a joint venture between the
significantly impacted by NASA’s final decision. These
U.S. company Voyager Space and the German and
companies prefer that NASA purchase missions and do
French corporation Airbus. Two other international
not want the agency to have any management oversight
companies hold equity in Starlab LLC: Mitsubishi
of a station. NASA’s decisions could also provide a
Corporation of Japan and MDA Space, which was
framework for how companies work with foreign
founded in Canada and has locations in Canada, the
governments. NASA and the companies it supports must
United States, and the United Kingdom. Starlab is also
firmly establish the framework through which the
partnering with the Universities Space Research
government uses and oversees stations.
Association (USRA), which includes numerous American
and international universities, and the International
Clarity on these questions as well as the creation of
Association of Science Parks (IASP), which includes
regulations for commercial stations will allow
hundreds of science and business parks across the
companies to confidently move into the future of human
globe. Finally, Starlab has also signed MoUs with the
habitation in LEO in collaboration with a variety of
| 5

international partners. A recent executive order makes Conclusion
strides in giving regulatory guidance for novel space The growth of the commercial space industry has
activity but expressly excludes human spaceflight.30 The allowed NASA to transition from the government-owned
slow process of regulatory changes will also likely and operated International Space Station to supporting
prevent any regulations from being updated quickly. new commercially-owned space stations in LEO. The
decommissioning of the ISS will widen the already
The use of commercial stations also raises questions dangerous divide between the United States and Russia
about what role the government should play in in space and diplomatic relations. With the current
commercial agreements. Can, or should, the political climate and attitudes toward Russia due to its
government restrict the customers U.S.-based invasion of Ukraine, U.S. collaboration with Roscosmos
companies do business with? NASA continues to seems unlikely despite its critical involvement in ISS.
collaborate with Russia on ISS missions, but current U.S While no official plans have been announced, the only
sanctions restrict companies’ collaboration in space other option for Russia in LEO is thought by U.S. experts
with Russia due to its invasion of Ukraine. It is unclear to be the Chinese Tiangong station, stoking U.S.
how leasing experimental or living space to the space concerns about the Sino-Russian relationship and
agencies or companies of sanctioned countries will be growing Chinese dominance in space. Despite the lack
handled. A change in political climate, such as an end to of currently public plans for collaboration on Tiangong,
the Russia-Ukraine conflict, could directly affect Russian and Chinese military cooperation in other
partnerships and customer bases for companies. Could domains inflates this concern.
commercial agreements then be used to help repair the
relationship between the United States and Russia? It is not all doom and gloom, however. Despite the many
remaining questions policymakers need to address,
Similar questions can be asked about commercial commercially owned stations already have exhibited a
collaboration with China or Chinese companies. U.S. law shift in the kinds of international partnerships with U.S.
prohibits NASA and the Office of Science and companies. Commercial stations in LEO involve
Technology Policy (OSTP) from bilateral collaboration collaboration between U.S. and non-U.S. corporations
with China without the authorization that the activities and partnerships between U.S. companies and foreign
posed no risk of technology transfer.31 In the current governments. Many involve the same players as ISS as
geopolitical climate, direct collaboration with China by well as new space agencies and companies. These
the U.S. government is unlikely, with rare exceptions like commercial destinations offer international partnership
the exchange of data for China’s 2019 lunar landing.32 opportunities in the human habitation of LEO that ISS
Should the same restriction be applied to U.S. did not due to the many new countries participating in
commercial space companies? The United States needs space and on current stations.
to address questions such as these to ensure that
commercial stations have the regulatory stability to
thrive as this commercial shift in LEO continues.
6 | Johnson | What will international partnerships in LEO habitation look like post-ISS?

About CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research organization
dedicated to advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding former U.S. Senator Sam
Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president and chief executive officer
since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of values—nonpartisanship,
independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity and professionalism, and talent
development. CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research, analysis, and
recommendations. We organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media appearances that aim to increase the
knowledge, awareness, and salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decision making of key policymakers and the thinking of key
influencers. We work toward a vision of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be understood to be solely
those of the author(s).
| 7

Notes
1 Ronald Reagan, “Address before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union,” Ronald Reagan Library, January 25, 1984,

2 Lynne C. Myers, “The International Space Station: Canada’s Involvement,” Government of Canada, revised September 5, 2001,

3 “The Story of the ISS,” Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt, 2025, 
missions/iss/the-story-of-the-iss.
4 “The Story of the ISS,” Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt.
5 “International Space Station Legal Framework,” European Space Agency, 2025,

ework.
6 “ISS History & Timeline,” ISS National Lab, March 28, 2025, 
7 “Mobile Servicing System,” NASA, September 27, 2023, 
8 “ISS History & Timeline,” ISS National Lab.
9 “International Space Station: Expeditions,” NASA, January 17, 2025, 
nav-7.
10 “International Space Station Transition Report,” NASA, , 
content/uploads/2015/01/2022_iss_transition_report-final_tagged.pdf.
11 “Commercial Space Stations in Low Earth Orbit,” NASA, September 5, 2025, 
earth-orbit-economy/commercial-destinations-in-low-earth-orbit/.
12 “NASA Adjusts Agreements to Benefit Commercial Station Development,” NASA, January 5, 2024, 
space/commercial-space/leo-economy/nasa-adjusts-agreements-to-benefit-commercial-station-development/.
13 “Space Station: Agreement Between the United States of America and Other Governments,” U.S. Department of State, January 29, 1998,

14 “Roscosmos Chief Informs Partners of Space Station’s Life Extension to 2028,” TASS, April 25, 2023, 
15 Ailsa Chang, Kai McNamee, and Christopher Intagliata, “To This Retired Commander, the ISS Was the Last Good Bond between the U.S. and
Russia,” NPR, August 4, 2022, 
16 “Russia Takes an American Astronaut to the Space Station | Reuters,” Reuters, April 8, 2025, 
carrying-russians-american-takes-off-baikonur-cosmodrome-2025-04-08/.
17 Jeremy Grunert, “The Future of Western-Russian Civil-Space Cooperation,” War on the Rocks, May 26, 2022,

18 Chang, McNamee, and Intagliata, “To This Retired Commander, the ISS Was the Last Good Bond between the U.S. and Russia.”
19 “Tiangong, China’s Space Station,” The Planetary Society, 2025, 
20 Scott Pace, Charles Bolden, and Bill Liquori, “Beyond ISS: America Must Lead in Leo, Cislunar and Beyond,” SpaceNews, May 15, 2024,

21 Rachael Zisk, “China Opens Tiangong’s Doors to Foreign Visitors,” Payload, October 26, 2023, 
doors-to-foreign-visitors/.
22 Pace, Bolden, Liquori, “Beyond ISS.”
23 “Written Testimony of Dr. Mary Lynne Dittmar to the House Science Space and Technology Committee, Space and Aeronautics Subcommittee
Hearing,” House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, February 14, 2024, 
science.house.gov/_cache/files/8/0/80e8a68d-5586-44b5-bbf1-ce900d12fb08/DA581C07F76A4A478C0337258007CFB5.2024-02-14-dittmar---
testimony.pdf.
24 “NASA Selects First Commercial Destination Module for International Space Station,” NASA, January 27, 2020, 
release/nasa-selects-first-commercial-destination-module-for-international-space-station/.
25 “Who We Are,” Thales Alenia Space, 2025, 
26 “Boryung Corporation, Axiom Space Announce Joint Venture to Revolutionize Space Industry in Korea,” Axiom Space, January 12, 2024,

27 “Bavarian State Government Intends to Collaborate with U.S. Space Company Axiom Space,” Axiom Space, June 26, 2024,

28 Kevin Holden Platt, “Above the Earth’s Wars, Starlab Aims to Be Orbital Beacon of Peace,” Forbes, June 7, 2024,

peace/?sh=4c7ca3da7cb9.
29 Erica Rodgers et al., “Models for Facilitating Government-Funded Activities in the PostISS LEO Ecosystem ,” NASA, November 2, 2023,

30 “Enabling Competition in the Commercial Space Industry,” The White House, August 13, 2025, 
actions/2025/08/enabling-competition-in-the-commercial-space-industry/.
31 “Department of Defense and Full-Year Continuing Appropriations Act, 2011,” Library of Congress, 2011,

32 Yanan Wang, “China Says It Exchanged Data with NASA on Far Side Landing,” Associated Press, January 14, 2019, 
news-
f04bf12313f344d7a5ca06d86195bef1#:~:text=BEIJING%20(AP)%20%E2%80%94%20China%20exchanged,do%20not%20have%20prior%20congressi
onal.
8 | Johnson | What will international partnerships in LEO habitation look like post-ISS?