A REPORT OF

THE CSIS
AEROSPACE
SECURITY
PROJECT
S P A C E
T H R E A T
A S S E S S M E N T
2 0 2 1
Authors
TODD HARRISON
KAITLYN JOHNSON
JOE MOYE
MAKENA YOUNG

ABOUT CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy re-
search organization dedicated to advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest
challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding
former U.S. senator Sam Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has
served as president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of
values—nonpartisanship, independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary schol-
arship, integrity and professionalism, and talent development. CSIS’s values work in concert
toward the goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research,
analysis, and recommendations. We organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media
appearances that aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and salience of policy issues with
relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policymakers and
the thinking of key influencers. We work toward a vision of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be
understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2021 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
202-887-0200 | 
ABOUT ASP
The Aerospace Security Project (ASP) at CSIS explores the technological, budgetary, and policy
issues related to the air and space domains and innovative operational concepts for air and
space forces. Part of the International Security Program at CSIS, the Aerospace Security Project
is led by Senior Fellow Todd Harrison. ASP’s research focuses on space security, air dominance,
long-range strike, and civil and commercial space. Learn more at aerospace.csis.org.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report is made possible by general support to CSIS. No direct sponsorship contributed to
this report. As always, the Aerospace Security Project team would like to thank Jeeah Lee, Phillip
Meylan, and Emily Tiemeyer for their contributions to the editing, publication, and design of this
report. Additional thanks to Thomas G. Roberts for his substantive contributions to this effort.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed above should be
understood to be solely those of the authors. These views similarly do not necessarily reflect
the official policy or position of the U.S. Marine Corps, the Department of the Navy, the Depart-
ment of Defense, or the U.S. government.
All information is accurate as of March 12, 2021.
II SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................1
TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS .....................................3
Kinetic Physical .....................................................................................4
Non-kinetic Physical ..............................................................................4
Electronic ................................................................................................4
Cyber ........................................................................................................4
CHINA ............................................................................................8
Space Organization ................................................................................9
Counterspace Weapons ........................................................................10
RUSSIA ..........................................................................................12
Space Organization ................................................................................12
Counterspace Weapons ........................................................................13
IRAN ..............................................................................................17
Space Organization ................................................................................17
Space Launch Capabilities ...................................................................18
Counterspace Weapons ........................................................................19
NORTH KOREA .............................................................................21
Space Organization ................................................................................21
Space Launch Capabilities ...................................................................22
Counterspace Weapons ........................................................................22
INDIA .............................................................................................24
Space Organization ................................................................................24
Counterspace Weapons ........................................................................25
OTHERS ........................................................................................26
France ......................................................................................................26
Israel ........................................................................................................26
Japan .......................................................................................................27
South Korea ............................................................................................27
United Kingdom ......................................................................................27
WHAT TO WATCH .........................................................................28
ABOUT THE AUTHORS .................................................................30
III SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

INTRODUCTION
THE PAST YEAR HAS BEEN ONE OF UNCERTAINTY and
unpredictability driven by the Covid-19 pandemic, the
ensuing global recession, and political change in the
United States. For space security, however, 2020 was
largely a year of continuity and predictability. Perhaps the most
notable change in the space environment since the last CSIS
Space Threat Assessment was published is the addition of some
900 SpaceX Starlink satellites to low Earth orbit (LEO), bring-
ing the total constellation size to more than 1,200, as shown in
Figure 1. This is the largest satellite constellation in history by a
wide margin, and it already makes up roughly a third of all oper-
ating satellites in space.1 SpaceX continues to build out its con-
stellation, with launches of 60 Starlink satellites at a time every
few weeks.
Several notable developments in space policy also occurred in
the United States over the past year. Before leaving office, the
Trump administration issued three new space policy directives
(SPDs). SPD-5 directed government departments and agencies
Figure 1 SpaceX’s Starlink Constellation as of February
to develop cybersecurity policies and practices to improve the
25, 2021
protection of government and commercial space assets from cy-
astriagraph
berattacks.2 SPD-6 updated national policy for the development
and use of space nuclear power and propulsion, and SPD-7 up-
dated policy and guidance for space-based positioning, naviga-
tion, and timing (PNT) programs and activities.3 The National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) also unveiled the
Artemis Accords in 2020, which includes 10 principles nations
must agree to abide by to be part of the Artemis program. By
the end of the year, eight other countries had signed on to the
accords and Brazil issued a statement of intent to sign.4
The standup of the U.S. Space Force and U.S. Space Command
continued throughout the year as expected. The Space Force
submitted its first budget request for $15.4 billion, and $15.3 bil-
lion of this was transfers from existing accounts within the Air
Force.5 The Space Force also published its first capstone docu-
ment, Spacepower Doctrine for Space Forces, which was more
notable for its continuity with current policy and doctrine than
any significant changes.6 The new commander of U.S. Space
Command, U.S. Army General James Dickinson, issued his com-
mander’s strategic vision in , which focused on
developing a warfighting mindset throughout the command,
maintaining key relationships with allies and partners, and im-
proving integration across the U.S. government and with com-
mercial space organizations.7
Throughout the year, other nations continued development and
testing of counterspace weapons. Most notably, Russia conduct-
ed several antisatellite (ASAT) tests in 2020. As detailed later in
this report, Russia tested a co-orbital ASAT weapon in ,
and it tested a direct-ascent anti-satellite (ASAT) weapon in De-
cember 2020. These activities are not new and reflect a pattern
of behavior in which Russia has continued to develop and recon-
stitute its counterspace capabilities.
1 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

The purpose of this annual report from the CSIS Aerospace Security Project
is to aggregate and analyze publicly available information on the counter-
space capabilities of other nations. It is intended to raise awareness and
understanding of the threats, debunk myths and misinformation, and
highlight areas in which senior leaders and policymakers should pay more
attention. This year’s report focuses on the changes in counterspace capa-
bilities and new developments that have occurred or come to light over
the past year. A more complete history of counterspace developments can
be found on the new CSIS space threat interactive timeline, available at:
 This online
tool will be updated periodically throughout the year and allows users to
easily navigate through the large body of publicly available information on
space threats, sorting by country, type of threat, and year.
This report and the interactive tool are not a comprehensive assessment of
all counterspace activities because much of the information on what other
countries are doing is not publicly available. The information in this report
is current as of March 12, 2021.
2 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
TYPES OF
COUNTERSPACE
WEAPONS
SPACE IS AN INCREASINGLY IMPORTANT ENABLER OF econom-
ic and military power. The strategic importance of space has led
some nations to build arsenals of counterspace weapons to dis-
rupt, degrade, or destroy space systems and hold at risk the ability
of others to use the space domain. However, the strategic importance of
space has also spurred renewed efforts to deter or mitigate conflict and pro-
tect the domain for peaceful uses. For example, the U.S. Space Force’s cap-
stone publication on spacepower notes that, “military space forces should
make every effort to promote responsible norms of behavior that perpetu-
ate space as a safe and open environment in accordance with the Laws of
Armed Conflict, the Outer Space Treaty, and international law, as well as
Illustration A ballistic
U.S. government and DoD policy.”8
missile can be used
as a kinetic phys- Counterspace weapons, particularly those that produce orbital debris,
ical counterspace
pose a serious risk to the space environment and the ability of all nations
weapon.
to use the space domain for prosperity and security. This chapter provides
an overview and taxonomy for different types of counterspace weapons.
Counterspace weapons vary significantly in the types of effects they create,
how they are deployed, how easy they are to detect and attribute, and the
level of technology and resources needed to develop and field them. This
report categorizes counterpace weapons into four broad groups of capabil-
ities: kinetic physical, non-kinetic physical, electronic, and cyber.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
lites or cause components to overheat. including from other satellites pass-
KINETIC PHYSICAL
High-powered microwave (HPM) weap- ing by in orbit. For both laser and HPM
ons can disrupt a satellite’s electronics weapons, the attacker may have limited
KINETIC PHYSICAL COUNTERSPACE or cause permanent damage to electri- ability to know if the attack was success-
weapons attempt to strike directly or cal circuits and processors in a satellite. ful because it is not likely to produce vis-
detonate a warhead near a satellite or A nuclear device detonated in space can ible indicators.
ground station. The three main forms of create a high radiation environment and
The use of a nuclear weapon in space
kinetic physical attack are direct-ascent an electromagnetic pulse (EMP) that
would have large-scale, indiscriminate
ASAT weapons, co-orbital ASAT weapons, would have indiscriminate effects on
effects that would be attributable and
and ground station attacks. Direct-as- satellites in affected orbits. These at-
publicly visible. A nuclear detonation in
cent ASAT weapons are launched from tacks operate at the speed of light and,
space would immediately affect satel-
Earth on a suborbital trajectory to strike in some cases, can be less visible to
lites within range of its EMP, and it would
a satellite in orbit, while co-orbital ASAT third-party observers and more difficult
also create a high radiation environment
weapons are first placed into orbit and to attribute.
that would accelerate the degradation of
then later maneuvered into or near their
Satellites can be targeted with lasers satellite components over the long term
intended target. Attacks on ground sta-
and HPM weapons from ground- or
tions are targeted at the terrestrial sites
ship-based sites, airborne platforms, or
responsible for command and control of
other satellites. A satellite lasing system
satellites or the relay of satellite mission
requires high beam quality, adaptive
data to users.
optics (if being used through the atmos-
Kinetic physical attacks tend to cause ir- phere), and advanced pointing control
reversible damage to the systems affect- to steer the laser beam precisely—tech-
ed and demonstrate a strong show of nology that is costly and requires a high
force that would likely be attributable and degree of sophistication. A laser can be
publicly visible. A successful kinetic phys- effective against a sensor on a satellite if
ical attack in space will produce orbital it is within the field of view of the sen-
debris, which can indiscriminately affect sor, making it possible to attribute the
other satellites in similar orbits. These attack to its approximate geographical
types of attacks are one of the only coun- origin. An HPM weapon can be used to
disrupt a satellite’s electronics, corrupt
terspace actions that carry the potential
data stored in memory, cause processors
for the loss of human life if targeted at
to restart, and, at higher power levels,
crewed ground stations or at satellites in
cause permanent damage to electrical
orbits where humans are present, such
circuits and processors. HPM attacks can
as the International Space Station (ISS) in
be more difficult to attribute because the
LEO. To date, no country has conducted
attack can come from a variety of angles,
a kinetic physical attack against another
country’s satellite, but four countries—
the United States, Russia, China, and In-
dia—have successfully tested direct-as-
cent ASAT weapons.
NON-KINETIC PHYSICAL
NON-KINETIC PHYSICAL COUNTER-
SPACE weapons have physical effects
on satellites or ground systems without
making physical contact. Lasers can
Illustration A laser is an
be used to temporarily dazzle or per- example of a non-kinetic
manently blind the sensors on satel- counterspace weapon.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
for unshielded satellites in the affected technology needed to jam and spoof
orbital regime. The detonation of nucle- many types of satellite signals is commer-
ar weapons in space is banned under the cially available and inexpensive, making
Partial Test Ban Treaty of 1963, which it relatively easy to proliferate among
has more than 100 signatories, although
state and non-state actors.
China and North Korea are not included.9
CYBER
ELECTRONIC
Illustration A truck-mounted WHILE ELECTRONIC FORMS OF ATTACK
ELECTRONIC COUNTERSPACE weapons
jammer is a type of electronic attempt to interfere with the transmission
target the electromagnetic spectrum
counterspace weapon. of RF signals, cyberattacks target the data
through which space systems transmit
itself and the systems that use, transmit,
and receive data. Jamming devices in-
and control the flow of data. Cyberat-
terfere with the communications to or
tacks on satellites can be used to monitor
from satellites by generating noise in the
same radio frequency (RF) band. An up- data traffic patterns, intercept data, or
link jammer interferes with the signal go- insert false or corrupted data in a system.
ing from Earth to a satellite, such as the These attacks can target ground stations,
command and control uplink. Downlink end-user equipment, or the satellites
jammers target the signal from a satel- themselves. While cyberattacks require
lite as it propagates down to users on the a high degree of understanding of the
Earth. Spoofing is a form of electronic at-
systems being targeted, they do not nec-
tack where the attacker tricks a receiver
essarily require significant resources to
into believing a fake signal, produced by
conduct. The barrier to entry is relatively
the attacker, is the real signal it is trying
low and cyberattacks can be contracted
to receive. A spoofer can be used to inject
out to private groups or individuals. Even
false information into a data stream or,
if a state or non-state actor lacks internal
in extremis, to issue false commands to
cyber capabilities, it may still pose a cy-
a satellite to disrupt its operations. User
ber threat.
terminals with omnidirectional antennas,
such as many GPS receivers and satellite A cyberattack on space systems can re-
phones, have a wider field of view and sult in the loss of data or services be-
thus are susceptible to downlink jamming
ing provided by a satellite, which could
and spoofing from a wider range of angles
have widespread systemic effects if used
on the ground.10
against a system such as GPS. Cyberat-
Electronic forms of attack can be difficult tacks could have permanent effects if, for
to detect or distinguish from acciden-
example, an adversary seizes control of a
tal interference, making attribution and
satellite through its command and con-
awareness more difficult. Both jamming
trol system. An attacker could shut down
and spoofing are reversible forms of at-
all communications and permanently
tack because once they are turned off,
damage the satellite by expending its
communications can return to normal.
propellant supply or issuing commands
Through a type of spoofing called “mea-
that would damage its electronics and
Illustration coning,” even encrypted military GPS sig-
sensors. Accurate and timely attribution
Cyberattacks can be nals can be spoofed. Meaconing does not
used to take control require cracking the GPS encryption be- of a cyberattack can be difficult because
of a satellite and cause it merely rebroadcasts a time-de- attackers can use a variety of methods to
damage or destroy it. layed copy of the original signal without conceal their identity, such as using hi-
decrypting it or altering the data.11 The jacked servers to launch an attack.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
Kinetic Physical Non-kinetic Physical
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

kcattA
fo
sepyT
High Altitude High-
Ground Direct-Ascent High- Laser Dazzling
Co-orbital ASAT Nuclear Powered
Station Attack ASAT Powered Laser or Blinding
Detonation Microwave
noitubirttA Variable Can be Clear attribution
attribution, Launch site can attributed by Launch site can Limited of the laser’s Limited
depending on be attributed tracking previous- be attributed attribution location at the attribution
mode of attack ly known oribt time of attack
ytilibisreveR Reversible or Reversible or
Irreversible or re- irreversible; irreversible;
Irreversible Irreversible versible depend- Irreversible Irreversible attacker may or attacker may or
ing on capabilities may not be able may not be able
to control to control
ssenerawA May or May or
Publicly known Only satellite Only satellite Only satellite
may not be may not be
depending on Publicly known operator will be operator will be operator will be
publicly publicly
trajectory aware aware aware
known known
egamaD
rekcattA
tnemssessA Limited Limited
Near real-time Near real-time Near real-time Near real-time confirmation of confirmation of
No confirmation
confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of success if satellite success if satellite
of success
success success success success begins to drift begins to drift
uncontrolled uncontrolled
egamaD
laretalloC
Table 1
TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
Station may
Orbital debris Higher radiation Could leave Could leave target
control multi- May or may not
could affect levels in orbit target satellite satellite disabled
ple satellites; produce orbital None
other satellites in would persist for disabled and and uncontrol-
potential for loss debris
similar orbits months or years uncontrollable lable
of life

Electronic Cyber
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

kcattA
fo
sepyT
Uplink Downlink Data Interccept Data Seizure
Spoofing
Jamming Jamming or Monitoring Corruption of Control
noitubirttA
Modest attribution Modest attribution Modest attribution Limited or Limited or Limited or
depending on mode depending on mode depending on mode uncertain uncertain uncertain
of attack of attack of attack attribution attribution attribution
ytilibisreveR
Irreversible or
Reversible Reversible Reversible Reversible Reversible reversible, depending
on mode of attack
ssenerawA Satellite operator Satellite operator Satellite operator Satellite operator
May or may not be May or may not be
will be aware; may will be aware; may will be aware; may will be aware; may
known to the known to the
or may not be or may not be known or may not be known or may not be known
public public
known to the public to the public to the public to the public
egamaD
rekcattA
tnemssessA
Limited
confirmation of Limited
Near real-time Near real-time Near real-time
No confirmation success if monitoring confirmation of
confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of
of success of the local RF success if effects
success success success
environment is are visible
possible
egamaD
laretalloC
COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
Only dirupts the Only disrupts the
Only corrupts the Could leave target
signals targeted and signals targeted and
specific RF signals None None satellite disabled
possible adjacent possible adjacent
targeted and uncontrollable
frequencies frequencies

CHINA
CHINA
MINIMAL COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS DEVELOPMENTS or tests
were identified in open-source information over the past year.
However, as has been reported in previous iterations of this re-
port, China has a robust direct-ascent ASAT program, dual-use
capabilities on orbit that are necessary for co-orbital ASAT weapons, and
widely used electronic and cyber counterspace capabilities.12
Despite the global pandemic, 2020 saw many accomplishments for China in
civil space missions. The Chang’e-5 Moon mission returned 2 kilograms, or
about 4.5 pounds, of lunar regolith in .13 The Yutu-2 rover is
still operating on the far side of the Moon and has traveled over 600 meters,
or over 2,000 feet, on the lunar surface.14 China also plans to launch the core
section of its national space station in 2021.15
In , China launched its first Mars rover, Tianwen 1, which entered
Martian orbit in and will likely land on Mars in May or . The planned mission is for the rover to operate for 92 Martian days
(about 95 days on Earth).16 China is one of three countries pursuing mis-
sions to Mars in 2021, with the United States landing the Perseverance rover
on February 18, 2021 and an orbiter mission from the United Arab Emirates
entering Mars orbit in .
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

CHINA
China successfully launched the final po-
sitioning, navigation, and timing (PNT)
BeiDou satellite of the current constella-
tion in . Essentially a Chinese
version of GPS, the BeiDou constellation
is now composed of 35 satellites in orbit
that provide location and timing services
to over 120 countries.20 BeiDou has been
in the works for over two decades and al-
lows China to be independent of the U.S.
GPS system for national PNT.21 Notably,
BeiDou has been a cornerstone of the Chi-
nese Belt and Road Initiative.
China’s space launch vehicle (SLV) pro-
gram suffered a setback in 
when the inaugural launch of the Long
March 7A failed due to an engine malfunc-
tion and the payload was lost. However,
almost exactly one year later, on March
12, 2021, the Long March 7A SLV success-
fully delivered its first payload into orbit,
a classified, experimental satellite. The
China’s spaceplane is rumored to be similar to the United States’ X-37B (pictured above).
Long March 7 series is intended to deliver
payloads into geostationary (GEO) orbit u.s. air force
and to launch cargo to China’s upcoming
national space station. Long March 8, the
next SLV in the Long March family, is cur- China’s New Spaceplane Chinese Military Affairs report notes that,
rently in development and will boast a re- “another important principle that ap-
coverable and reusable first stage, much A NOTABLE DEVELOPMENT IN 2020 was pears to have influenced the design of
like SpaceX’s Falcon family.22 the launch and recovery of a national the SSF is the enduring Maoist impera-
spaceplane, similar to the United States’ tive of peacetime-wartime integration.”23
X-37B spaceplane program. The Chinese
This principle is well suited for the du-
SPACE ORGANIZATION space plane was launched by a Long-
al-use nature of many space and coun-
March 2F on September 4, 2020, and after
terspace capabilities.
orbiting Earth in LEO for two days, it suc-
The organization of space assets and
cessfully landed in northwest China on a Chinese civil space capabilities, such as
missions within China’s People’s Libera-
five-kilometer runway. The United States the Martian rover, are led by the China
tion Army (PLA) remains unclear. Many
has catalogued at least two new objects National Space Administration (CNSA),
space missions, such as space launch
and the acquisition and operation of in orbit that were likely deployed by the which falls within the purview of the
satellites, remain within the Strategic space plane.17 Experts, however, are uncer- State Council’s State Administration for
Support Force (SSF). Often presented tain of the motivations behind or mission Science, Technology, and Industry for
as the “information domain,” the SSF of this new space plane, but it is unlikely National Defense (SASTIND). The Chi-
maintains PLA efforts for cyber, electron- to be used as a counterspace weapon.18
na Aerospace Science and Technology
ic, and psychological warfare, as well as Unrelated to this space plane test is the
Corporation (CASC) and China Aero-
space. According to experts, the Space Tengyun project, a horizontal takeoff and
space Science and Industry Corporation
Systems Department and Network Sys- landing spacecraft to be completed by
(CASIC) are two examples of the many
tems Department (co-equal semi-inde- 2025. Not many details have been released
research and development arms of the
pendent branches within the SSF) share publicly about the success of this program,
joint missions, including counterspace which is intended to provide a rapid launch Chinese government which specialize in
capabilities. A Center for the Study of capability.19 space technologies.24
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

CHINA
ed its unusual movements in late 2019.
COUNTERSPACE
From through late Jan-
WEAPONS uary 2020, SJ-17 was in close proximity
to Chinasat 6B, a television broadcasting
communications satellite. SJ-17 then
Kinetic Physical
drifted slightly eastward to rendezvous
China continues to conduct tests of its with another experimental Chinese sat-
operational SC-19 direct-ascent ASAT sys- ellite, SJ-20, from late January through
tem.25 However, China no longer needs to early . The closest SJ-17 and
Illustration New robot designed by Tian-
use kinetic tests to prove its direct-ascent SJ-20 were to one another was under
jin University shown capturing a satellite
ASAT capabilities can threaten any U.S. five kilometers.26 After this encounter,
on orbit.
satellite in LEO, and likely medium Earth SJ-17 performed an unusual drift to sta-
orbit (MEO) and GEO as well. tion itself about 50 degrees eastward.
Three months later, SJ-17 performed a
The notorious Chinese inspector satel-
westward drift that allowed it to be in
lite, dubbed Shijan-17 (SJ-17), was rel-
close proximity with GF 13, a Chinese
atively quiet this past year but did make
a few stops near other satellites as it Earth observation satellite.27
moved around the GEO belt. According Tianjin University has developed a new
to CSIS analysis, SJ-17 performed three robot intended to support space de-
enduring rendezvous proximity opera- bris-removal missions. This tentacle-like
tions (RPOs) nearby other Chinese satel- robotic arm would be placed on sat-
lites, Chinasat 6B, SJ-20, and Gaofen 13 ellites and launched into orbit to then
(GF 13). After a long period of inactivity CHINA . . . CAN grapple debris and clear it from popular
that lasted about a year, SJ-17 restart- orbits. However, the robotic arm could
THREATEN ANY
in theory be used to grab an adversary’s
satellite.28 Furthermore, the design of the
U.S. SATELLITE
arm would probably require an extreme-
Chinese Rendezvous and Proximity Op- IN LEO, AND ly close RPO that would not be effective
erations in GEO. Publicly available orbital with debris or defunct satellites that
positioning data suggests that Chinese LIKELY IN MEO could be tumbling uncontrolled in space.
satellite SJ-17 has made several close The target debris would likely need to be
approaches and inspections in GEO. Learn AND GEO AS in a predictable motion in an established
more about SJ-17’s behavior, including a orbit in order for capture by the robotic
WELL.
list of the satellite’s nearest neighbors. at
arms to be possible. The design of this
aerospace.csis.org/SJ17.
satellite lends itself to a co-orbital ASAT,
space-track.org / csis aerospace security even if that is not the stated intent.
175˚E
155˚E
135˚E
115˚E
JAN MAR MAY JUL SEPT NOV
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

)˚(
EDUTIGNOL
SJ-17 Nearest
Neighbors in

SJ-17
Chinasat 6B
SJ-20
Apstar 6
Yamal 202
Gaofen 13

CHINA
PAKISTAN
CHINA
Ladakh Region
INDIA
Map of the Ladakh Region, where Chinese satellite jammers are rumored to be placed 60km
from the border.
60 kilometers of the Line of Actual Con-
Non-kinetic Physical
trol (LAC) in Ladakh , part of the disputed
Some analysts have made recent claims Kashmir region between India, Pakistan,
of massive developments in Chinese and China. The source asserts that the
ground-based laser stations, including movement of jamming technology into
the identification of five suspected lo- the region is intended to hide PLA move-
cations of such programs within China. ments in the area.30 Despite efforts from
While some of the programs identified the CSIS study team, these claims could
appear to be academic and therefore are not be substantiated by another source.
likely not ASAT systems, one location of
primary concern is a military base known Cyber
for conducting kinetic physical ASAT tests
There have been no recent publicly ac-
that is also rumored to house a laser
knowledged cyberattacks from China
weapon system.29 There is no indication
against the United States’ or other na-
of how advanced or “ready-to-mobilize”
tions’ space systems. However, China has
such a directed energy system may be,
successfully proven this capability before
and there has been no publicly available
and continues to be active with cyberat-
information about potential tests or at-
tacks in other domains against financial
tacks against space systems.
or defense-related targets.
Electronic
In late , an Indian news
source, the Hindustan Times, accused
China of moving mobile jammers within
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

RUSSIA
RUSSIA
THOUGH MOST INDUSTRIES, AND A LARGE PORTION OF OTHER
countries mentioned in this report, were slowed down due to the
Covid-19 pandemic, Russia’s military space capabilities kept a
steady pace. In the last year, Russia tested numerous counterspace
capabilities, performed complex RPOs, and expanded its space-based mil-
itary infrastructure. The country’s consistent space launch capability, the
continuous advance of counterspace capabilities, and civil space contri-
butions through the ISS have maintained Russia’s status as a major space
power, and its prowess in the space domain has fostered unique relation-
ships with foreign countries that are sometimes rivals in other domains.
SPACE ORGANIZATION
Russia’s state-sponsored space activities fall into either the Russian Aer-
ospace Forces (RAF) or the civil Roscosmos program. Within the Russian
military, space capabilities fall under the RAF. A subsection of the RAF is the
Russian Space Force, which was created in 1992 as the world’s first space
force and is responsible for the monitoring of all space-based assets, mili-
tary launches, and potential threats to space systems.31
Roscosmos is a longtime partner of NASA, and the two agencies, together
with Japan, Canada, and Europe, serve as the principal partners on the ISS.
Roscosmos CEO Dmitry Rogozin announced that there were 17 launches
of rockets in 2020 and 29 space launches planned for 2021. Rogozin also
confirmed the country will begin exploration of the Moon via automated
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

RUSSIA
modules and lunar probes, followed by a tary infrastructure. In addition to defend-
crewed program.32 The crewed program ing against conventional weapons, space-
is slated to land on the Moon in 2030, RUSSIA’S based weapons are mentioned as a threat
with regular missions to follow. Ros- in the document. The document also calls
cosmos has also announced plans for a PROWESS IN out the potential deployment of missile
permanent lunar base to begin in 2035.33 defense and offensive strike weapons in
Additionally, Russia has ongoing dis- THE SPACE space as posing a threat to Russia.39 The
cussions with China to establish a Moon approval of this document signals that
DOMAIN HAS
research base. Roscosmos and China’s Russia believes space-to-Earth weapons
space agency signed a 5-year space co- could pose as much of a threat as nuclear
FOSTERED
operation program in 2017.34 In February weapons and would elicit the same re-
sponse from the country.
of 2021, the Roscosmos press office con- UNIQUE
firmed that the agency was ready to sign
an agreement with the “Government of RELATIONSHIPS
People’s Republic of China on cooper- COUNTERSPACE
WITH FOREIGN
ation to create the International Lunar
WEAPONS
Research Station,” and the two space
COUNTRIES
agencies signed a memorandum of un-
derstanding on March 9, 2021.35 A state- Kinetic Physical
THAT ARE
ment from Roscosmos outlined a plan of
Russia has possessed kinetic physical
cooperation with international partners SOMETIMES
counterspace capabilities since the Sovi-
“with the goal of strengthening research
et Union’s first co-orbital ASAT test in the
cooperation and promoting the explora- RIVALS
1960s. The technology used in Soviet-era
tion and use of outer space for peaceful
programs proved to be solid building
purposes.” To further solidify their rela- IN OTHER
blocks for more recent Russian develop-
tionship in space going forward, the two
DOMAINS. ments, and the country has repeatedly
countries signed another agreement to
displayed direct-ascent and co-orbital
create a data center to assist in future
ASAT capabilities—both of which were
missions to the Moon and deep space.36
tested over the past year.
To aid in these goals, Russia continued
On April 15, 2020, Russia tested its PL-
testing a new SLV called the Angara, which
19/Nudol direct-ascent ASAT system,
is the first SLV fully developed in post-So-
which was publicly condemned by U.S.
viet Russia. The Angara family of vehicles Space Command.40 The PL-19/Nudol was
will include both heavy and light launch launched from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome
vehicles, all of which will be capable of in northern Russia, travelling 3,000 kilom-
reaching LEO and two of which will be eters before splashing down in the Arctic
capable of reaching GEO.37 Angara vehi- Ocean. This test did not appear to make
cles resumed testing in December of 2020 a kinetic impact with anything in LEO.41
and are planned to be batch-produced for On December 19, 2020, Russia tested the
both Roscosmos and the Russian Ministry system once again, further prompting
of Defence beginning in 2023. Roscosmos U.S. Space Command officials to state
also announced plans to begin building that “Russia’s persistent testing of these
satellites for foreign partners, which will systems demonstrates threats to U.S. and
include telecommunication and remote allied space systems are rapidly advanc-
sensing satellites.38 ing.”42 These appear to be the ninth and
tenth tests of this system, the last eight of
In 2020, Russian president Vladimir Putin
which were successful.43
approved a document which empowers
him to use nuclear weapons in response In addition to the repeated testing of the
to a conventional strike targeting the Nudol direct-ascent ASAT capability, the
country’s critical government and mili- United States accused Russia of conduct-
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

RUSSIA
COSMOS 2542
MANEUVERS
PROJECTILE
AWAY
RELEASED
FROM 2543
COSMOS 2543 RELEASED
FROM 2542
MANEUVERS
AWAY
COSMOS

MANEUVERS
BACK
COSMOS

JULY JUNE JULY AUG SEPT OCT 12TH 21ST NOV
2019 2020
Russian Co-orbital ASAT Test in LEO, 2019-2020
ing a co-orbital ASAT test in . ing, satellites are deployed for routine an additional satellite, Cosmos 2536. In
This test was more sophisticated than inspections and surveillance of Russia’s , Cosmos 2543 began to
the direct-ascent ASAT test, involving a other space assets.46 The Kremlin has con- drift away from the others, but Cosmos
Russian satellite Cosmos 2542 which con- tinued to assert that Russia has always 2535 and 2536 continued to remain close
tained a smaller satellite inside of it, labe- been and remains a country that is com- to one another for several weeks. The two
led Cosmos 2543. Cosmos 2542 ejected mitted to the goal of fully demilitarizing satellites were so close together that it is
Cosmos 2543 in 2019. On July 15, 2020, outer space and not deploying weapons possible they performed docking maneu-
Cosmos 2543 fired a small projectile near in outer space.47 vers; however, it is hard to be certain
an unrelated Russian satellite, Cosmos without increased space domain aware-
Since being ejected from its mother sat-
2535.44 This instance mimicked a similar ness (SDA). One SDA ground observation
ellite, Cosmos 2543 has been very active.
operation with nesting satellites in 2017 reported a single object, instead of two
Before firing the projectile in ,
when satellite Cosmos 2521 was ejected unique objects, which further increased
from its mother satellite Cosmos 2519.45 the inspector satellite was constantly speculation that the satellites docked. On
In response to the test, U.S. changing its orbit to synchronize with October 12, 2020, Cosmos 2536 and 2535
Space Command released a statement other Russian satellites. This is out of separated, and four days later Cosmos
which condemned this test and asserted the ordinary for most satellites, which 2536 was reportedly 20 kilometers from
that the small projectile fired from Cos- rarely maneuver in this way. In June of Cosmos 2535. By October 21, Cosmos
mos 2543 could be used to target satel- 2020, Cosmos 2543 joined Cosmos 2535 2536 was again within a kilometer of Cos-
lites. In response, the Russian Ministry of in orbit.48 For months the two satellites mos 2535.49 While not a weapons test, this
Defence said these matryoshka, or nest- performed RPOs with one another and much movement in orbit is highly unusu-
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

RUSSIA
Luch’s Nearest 110˚E
Neighbors in 2020
90˚E
Luch (Olymp)
Eutelsat 70B 70˚E
Eutelsat 21B
50˚E
Skynet 4E
Intelsat 3-F7 30˚E
Intelsat 4A-F6
10˚E
Eutelsat 5 West A
ABS 3A
10˚W
30˚W
JAN MAR MAY JUL SEPT NOV
al and raises suspicions about the motiva-
tions behind such space capabilities.
In addition to the movements of the
Cosmos satellites, the Russian satellite
Luch contributed co-orbital activities in
2020. Luch has been consistently mov-
ing around in the GEO belt since its 2014
launch and continued to perform RPOs
in the past year. According to CSIS analy-
sis, the satellite maneuvered next to sev-
en satellites, which included European,
UK, U.S., and Asian broadcast satellite
operators. Though these orbital maneu-
vers are no longer rare for this particular
satellite, the vast majority of satellites
that operate in GEO are stationary, which
makes the activity of Luch highly unusu-
al year after year.
Russia continues to develop its air and
missile defense systems. Though not of-
ficially designated as ASAT weapons, the
S-400 and S-500 series surface-to-air (SAM)
missile systems could likely reach a satel-
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

)˚(
EDUTIGNOL
Luch Continues to Explore the GEO Belt. lite in LEO.50 The S-500 was heavily tested
A New Update on an Old
The Russian satellite has made several close in 2020 and is scheduled to be completed
approaches and inspections in GEO since its Weapon in 2021 as a replacement for the capable
launch in 2014, including those depicted here S-400. Russian military sources claim that
in 2020. Learn more about Luch’s behavior, NEW INFORMATION EMERGED IN 2020 the missile is designed to strike objects in
including a list of the satellite’s nearest neigh- about an old Soviet-era space weapon. space as well as defend areas from space-
bors at aerospace.csis.org/luch. The Soviet Union’s R-23M cannon is known based weapons. The head of Russia’s Air
as being the only gun fired in space. The and Space Forces has said that the S-500
space-track.org / csis aerospace security
system reached orbit on June 25, 1974, is capable of destroying hypersonic weap-
and the cannon was tested on its last day ons and satellites in near space.51 Assert-
in space in 1975. A reported 20 shells were ing further that the missile class will be
fired from one to three blasts, which all able to be used as a counterspace weapon,
burned up in the atmosphere. The gun the deputy chief of the RAF’s SAM troops,
was originally developed to help protect Yuri Muravkin, said that “the boundaries
airborne bombers, but its small frame and between air and space are being and will
lightweight made it an easy choice to at- be erased as the aerial enemy gradually
tach to a spacecraft. A factory visit in early becomes an aerospace one.”52
2021 produced the second known photo of
the only cannon to be fired in orbit .53
Non-kinetic Physical
As with kinetic counterspace capabilities,
Russia continues to maintain a variety of
non-kinetic counterspace weapons. An-
nounced by Russian president Vladimir
Putin in 2018, the Peresvet laser system
was thought to be a mobile trailer-mount-
ed laser system, but plans to put Peresvet
on an airborne carrier were made public
in 2021.54 The Peresvet system will be the
second airborne laser system in develop-
ment by Russia, following Sokol-Echelon,
which was announced in 
and has been reported as likely to have

RUSSIA
The first Russian orbital launch of 2021
included a satellite to be added to the
Liana constellation, an electronic intelli-
gence program for space-based surveil-
lance and targeting.61 The satellites in this
constellation are designed to intercept
radio communications and can be used
to detect objects on the surface the size
of a car.62 Additionally, Russia is devel-
oping ground-based signals intelligence
(SIGINT) sites under the name Sledopyt
with the capability to gain access to ra-
dio signals emitted by foreign satellites
orbiting above Russian territory.63 Anoth-
er project, known as Tobol, or 8282, has
been described as “electronic warfare
complexes for space-related purposes,”
and infrastructure related to this system
was built near satellite tracking facilities.64
Cyber
Russia flexed its offensive cyber capabil-
ities in 2020 in what is being called “one
Mobile Tirada-2 satellite jamming systems of the most devastating cyberattacks in
history.”65 This hack, commonly known
russian ministry of defense
as the SolarWinds breach because ac-
cess was gained through a network man-
agement software company of the same
ASAT capabilities.55 Sokol-Echelon’s chief terspace weapons include the Tirada-2 ,
name, is reported to have affected over
designer claimed the laser system was a a mobile jamming system “for suppres-
250 U.S. federal agencies and business-
response to the U.S. withdrawal from the sion of space communications.”58 Anoth-
Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty in 2002 er electronic warfare system in develop- es, to include the U.S. State Department,
and that it was intended to counter “air- ment is the Bylina-MM, a ground-based parts of the Pentagon, and the cyberse-
based and space-based reconnaissance mobile system with a focus on jamming curity firm FireEye.66 Before President
assets.”56 satellite communication channels. Bylina Joe Biden took office, he affirmed that
has been reported as “a series of ground- the United States must be able to quick-
Electronic
based mobile automated stations” and a
ly deter and disrupt future cyberattacks
Russia continues to grow its electronic mobile command and control system with
and stated that he would “not stand idly
counterspace capabilities and has recent- artificial intelligence (AI).59 It includes an
by in the face of cyber assaults on our na-
ly focused on developing mobile ground- automated system that is able to recog-
tion.”67 The SolarWinds attack is the latest
based systems to interfere with foreign nize assets and determine how to attack
in a long line of large Russian hacking
satellites.57 Electronic capabilities have them, and it can be used against a variety
incidents, similar to the 2017 NotPetya
been increasing at a steady pace since of ground, air, and space-based targets.
attack. This incident targeted Ukrainian
the early-2000s and accelerated in 2009 Russia also reportedly has two radar jam-
with the standup of Electronic Warfare mers, called Krasukha-2 and Krasukha-4, companies such as Antonov, a Ukrainian
Troops within the Russian military. Re- which may be capable of interfering with aircraft manufacturing company, and the
cent developments in electronic coun- radar reconnaissance satellites.60 Kyiv International Airport in Zhuliany.68
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

IRAN
IRAN
DESPITE ADVANCEMENTS IN ITS SPACE LAUNCH PROGRAM in
the past year, Iran’s counterspace capabilities have not shown
significant progress. Iran still appears far from developing a vi-
able direct-ascent ASAT weapon; however, many scholars and
world leaders continue to accuse Iran of using space launches as a veil for
its ballistic missile program.69 To make significant progress on kinetic and
non-kinetic physical counterspace systems, Iran would likely need to ac-
quire technology and resources from a major counterspace actor, such as
Russia or China, as reports indicate they have in the past.70 Iran continues to
develop electronic and cyber counterspace capabilities and demonstrates
increased success in jamming and hacking attacks against foreign govern-
ments and civilian systems.
SPACE ORGANIZATION
Iran’s space programs fall under two primary organizations. The Iranian
Space Agency, under the oversight of the Ministry of Information and Com-
munication Technology and the direction of the Supreme Space Council,
is the civilian entity responsible for policy, research and development, and
cooperation for peaceful civilian space issues.71 Iran’s military space pro-
gram is headed by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) Aerospace
Force.72 The IRGC’s redesignated its Air Force to the Aerospace Force in
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

IRAN
2009, indicating Iran’s recognition and to the satellite as “multi-purpose,” high-
elevation of space forces and capabilities lighting its strategic intelligence-gath-
IRAN’S
within the military.73 As further evidence ering capabilities.78 An Iranian report
of this, Iran revealed the existence of its added that the Noor-1 satellite is a re-
COUNTERSPACE
own Space Command in after connaissance satellite with visual and
a successful satellite launch by the IRGC.74 thermal monitoring technology.79 Many
CAPABILITIES
There is no open-source reporting to experts believe it is a rudimentary sat-
HAVE NOT provide details as to the IRGC Space ellite with limited capabilities.80 Shortly
Command’s organization, capabilities, after launch, the U.S. Space Force’s 18th
SHOWN and missions; however, it is reasonable Space Control Squadron tweeted that it
to surmise that this new organization is was tracking both the satellite and the
SIGNIFICANT responsible for all space- and counter- rocket’s upper stage.81 This launch has
space-related forces and missions within three notable differences from previous
PROGRESS.
the IRGC. Iranian launches.
First, the Qased launch vehicle purport-
edly is a three-stage system. Its first
SPACE LAUNCH stage is comprised of a liquid-propellant
ballistic missile called Ghadr, which is an
CAPABILITIES
upgraded version of the Shahab.82 What
makes this launch vehicle different for
After several failed launch attempts by Iran is the second and third stages. The
the Iranian Space Agency in 2019 and ear- second stage used a solid-propellant
ly 2020, the IRGC successfully launched motor called the Salman, which has
its first military satellite into LEO on sophisticated technologies such as a
April 22, 2020.75 Named Noor-1, the sat- carbon-fiber motor casing and a swive-
ellite is reported to be a 3U or 6U Cube- ling thrust vector control nozzle. Less is
Sat, weighing roughly 15 to 30 pounds.76 known about the third stage; however,
Iranian news sources reported that the some statements indicate that it was a
satellite was successfully placed into a smaller solid-propellant kick motor, of-
425-kilometer orbit.77 IRGC Commander ten used to help deliver a satellite to its
Major General Hossein Salami referred final orbit.83 The successful incorpora-
image courtesy of the james martin center for nonproliferation studies at the mid-
dlebury institute of international studies in monterey, california
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

IRAN
tion of solid-fuel motors is a technolog-
A New Iranian Rocket, COUNTERSPACE
ical advancement not previously report-
ed in Iranian SLV capabilities. the Zuljanah WEAPONS
Second, the launch was conducted by
ON FEBRUARY 1, 2021, Iran announced
the IRGC, as opposed to the Iranian Kinetic Physical
that it again tested a new SLV.92 Called the
Space Agency, which was responsible
Zuljanah, it is reported to be able to send a Current open-source information does
for most previous launches. While Iran
485-pound satellite into LEO.93 The Zuljan- not indicate that Iran has or is attempt-
has confirmed the existence of an IRGC
ah features solid-fuel propelled engines in ing to develop either direct-ascent or
space program previously, a launch its first and second stages and a liquid-fu- co-orbital ASAT weapons. However,
from the military program had not been el third stage.94 Though compatible with reporting on the successful
reported until . A successful Iran’s mobile launcher, reports indicate launch and test launch
launch after multiple failures and using that the Zuljanah was launched from the brings Iran closer to possessing a future
new technology signals Iran’s intention fixed-structure launch pad in Iran’s Sem- direct-ascent kinetic ASAT capability.
to press the launch envelope, despite nan province.95 One report cited the seem- Iran must still overcome other techno-
logical hurdles before it can field a vi-
Tehran’s insistence that Iran will main- ingly unnecessarily large diameter of the
able direct-ascent kinetic ASAT weap-
tain its self-imposed range limit on mis- first stage motor, stating it had a thrust of
on. As in last year’s report, Iran could
siles.84 75 kilotons.96 This latest test again raises
threaten satellites by creating a debris
concerns over Iran’s ballistic missile aspira-
Third, the Noor-1, via the Qased SLV, hazard in orbit.98 By placing a small sat-
tions. At the time of this publication, there
was launched from a mobile launcher.85 ellite in orbit, Iran demonstrates that it
have been no open-source comments from
The Qased is the first not to be launched could be closer to developing a co-or-
the U.S. government or its allies about the
from Iran’s Imam Khomeini Spaceport, bital ASAT weapon. However, it is still
reportedly launching from a mobile February launch. An Iranian Defense Min- unlikely until there is evidence that Iran
transport-erector launcher at the IRGC istry Space Department spokesman noted possesses the more advanced technical
that the first launch of the new SLV was for means and expertise required to place
missile development and launch com-
suborbital testing and will be ready to put and maneuver a satellite in orbit to exe-
plex in Shahroud.86 A mobile launch ca-
operational satellites into orbit after the cute such a threat.
pability serves little purpose in a civil-
completion of research tests.97
ian satellite program, but it does for a Non-kinetic Physical
military program concerned about pre-
Current open-source information also
launch strikes.87 Coupled with Iran’s fail-
does not indicate with any certainty
ure to issue any Notice to Airmen (NO-
that Iran has made strides in non-kinet-
TAM) about the launch, the introduction
ic physical weapons in the past year.
of a mobile launcher lends weight to the
As with a direct-ascent ASAT capability,
claims of space launch being a means to Iran’s recent launch successes could lead
a ballistic missile end.88 to a greater threat if Iran is also success-
ful in nuclear weapons development.
U.S. defense officials downplayed the
success and overall value of the launch.89
Electronic
Chief of Space Operations General Ray-
The IRGC conducted two major exercis-
mond, at the time dual-hatted as the
es in 2020, which Iranian sources claim
commander of the U.S. Space Com-
included “space operations” using jam-
mand, tweeted his view of the satellite
ming drones and radar units from the
as a “tumbling webcam.”90 While in-
IRGC Aerospace Force.99 In February
dependent reporting concurs that the
2021, Aerospace Force Brigadier General
Noor-1 is much too small to be an effec-
Mehdi Hadian hailed Iranian electronic
tive military spy satellite, the advance- warfare capabilities in recent exercises,
ment in launch capabilities should with a focus on offensive and counter
concern policymakers with what Iran is electronic warfare against enemy air
planning to pursue next.91 power.100 In March and , there
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

IRAN
were reports of Iranian GPS circle spoof- pabilities in other domains. Additionally,
ing. GPS circle spoofing differs from in January of this year, Iran and Russia
THE INCREASE IN
other spoofing attacks in that it causes signed an information security agree-
transponders to show various erroneous
ment that signals closer interaction be-
FREQUENCY AND
positions forming odd ring-like patterns
tween the two in cybersecurity activi-
around a central location.101 Previously
SOPHISTICATION ties.109 That agreement could mean that
observed in China, the in-
Iran will benefit from Russian technolo-
cident involved a potential GPS spoofing OF RECENT
gy, expertise, and training to further its
device in operation at Iran’s Army Com-
mand and Staff College.102 The IRANIAN own cyberattack capabilities.
incident also involved the circling phe-
nomena with GPS-based reporting sys- CYBERATTACK
tems from vessels and fitness trackers
in Tehran.103 Iran has publicly claimed in CAMPAIGNS
the past to have the capability to spoof
SUGGESTS THAT
GPS receivers.104
Cyber CYBERATTACKS
Iran has demonstrated its cyber capabil- ON SPACE
ities most prominently this year through
its use of civilian cyberattacks against SYSTEMS
Israel.105 Past reports suggest that Iran
leverages contract hacking groups to COULD BE THE
conduct cyberattacks on its behalf.106 In
PREFERRED
line with this assertion, the Iran-linked
Pay2Key hacking group claimed that it
COURSE OF
hacked a database of Israel Aerospace
Industries’ subsidiary Elta Systems in
ACTION
. While Pay2Key is not
officially linked to the Iranian govern-
ment, it is based in Iran and matches the
modus operandi of previous Iranian cy-
berattacks.107 That same month, the U.S.
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Securi-
ty Agency issued an Iranian hacker warn-
ing. The report stated that “Iranian cyber
threat actors have been continuously
improving their offensive capabilities.”
Noted threat activities included website
defacement, distributed denial of servic-
es, theft of personally identifiable infor-
mation, and use of destructive malware,
among other activities.108
While there is no recent open-source in-
formation of Iranian cyberattacks specif-
ically against space assets, the increase
in frequency and sophistication of recent
Iranian cyberattack campaigns suggests
that cyberattacks on space systems
could be the preferred course of action
to compensate for the imbalance of ca-
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

NORTH KOREA
NORTH
KOREA
THE PAST YEAR PROVED TO BE A QUIET ONE for North Korea’s
counterspace pursuits. It remains unlikely that North Korea is ca-
pable or actively pursuing direct-ascent or co-orbital ASAT weap-
ons, and there is little indication that North Korea has made any
advancement in its non-kinetic physical capabilities, though some sources
insist that a North Korean EMP threat exists. North Korea has demonstrat-
ed the ability to conduct electronic warfare through jamming capabilities,
and its cyberattack threat is active and viable. It is these latter two capabil-
ities that have the greatest potential for counterspace applications. Recent
claims that North Korea and Iran have resumed cooperation on missile and
launch vehicle technology could suggest that advancement by one nation
may eventually be transferable to the other.110
SPACE ORGANIZATION
North Korea continues its claims of peaceful intentions in space, despite a
UN Security Council report labelling North Korea’s space program a threat
to international peace.111 In , North Korean state television aired a
segment on the National Aerospace Development Administration (NADA) to
promote the nation’s space program.112 Pyongyang’s propaganda service,
Naenara, stated that the purpose of North Korea’s space program is to “ad-
here to the interests of the state and to use science and technology to solve
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

NORTH KOREA
scientific and technological problems technology to pursue a complementary
essential to economic construction and direct-ascent ASAT capability. However,
IT IS WIDELY
people’s lives.”113 However, much like in lacking the means to guide the warhead
the case of Iran, it is widely suspected that to directly strike a satellite, the best North
SUSPECTED
North Korea’s space intentions are closely Korea could hope to achieve is a broad
THAT NORTH tied to its ballistic missile aspirations. area weapon meant to create a danger-
ous debris hazard for orbiting satellites.119
KOREA’S SPACE
Likewise, North Korea does not appear
SPACE LAUNCH
to be pursuing a co-orbital ASAT weap-
INTENTIONS
CAPABILITIES on. To date, North Korea has not demon-
ARE CLOSELY strated the means and expertise to con-
duct RPOs or active guidance measures
North Korea maintains two established
TIED TO ITS required for a viable co-orbital ASAT ca-
launching areas for space capabilities: the
pability.120 With only a handful of North
BALLISTIC Tonghae Satellite Launching Ground and Korean objects currently in space, and
the Sohae Satellite Launching Ground.
minimal activity at its two launch facil-
MISSILE No open-source information emerged in
ities, it is unlikely that North Korea is
the past year regarding use of the Tong-
actively pursuing either direct-ascent or
ASPIRATIONS. hae site. The website 38 North published
co-orbital ASAT capabilities.
imagery and analysis three times since
 reporting normal mainte- Non-kinetic Physical
nance, snow clearing, and routine activi-
No recent open-source information indi-
ty, but nothing to indicate the preparation
cates that North Korea has made any ad-
for or execution of a launch in the past
vancements in non-kinetic physical ASAT
year.114 North Korea also has a General
weapons. Some reports highlight the po-
Satellite Control Building (GSCB) intend-
tential for North Korea to place a nuclear
ed to track and monitor its own satellite
weapon on a long-range missile, giving
launches and orbiting satellites.115 Re-
it the capability to create a high-altitude
ports indicate the ongoing construction
EMP effect.121 However, there has been no
of what is believed to be new scientific
reported activity in the past year to indi-
testing facilities next to the GSCB, though
cate that North Korea is actively pursuing
it is unclear what the exact purpose of
that capability.
those facilities will be.116
Electronic
North Korea continues to exercise its
COUNTERSPACE
downlink jamming capabilities. In April
WEAPONS
2020, North Korea announced that it was
preparing to deploy a new “GPS jamming
device” for use against South Korea.122
Kinetic Physical
There have been multiple reports in the
No recent open-source information indi- past year, as recent as ,
cates that North Korea has or is attempt- that North Korea continues to conduct
ing to develop a dedicated direct-ascent jamming operations along the peninsu-
ASAT program apart from its ongoing la. Many open-source reports in the past
ballistic missile programs.117 North Ko- year highlight jamming focused on com-
rean leader Kim Jong Un proclaimed in mercial radio broadcast frequencies and
 that North Korea will build civilian GPS signals rather than military
a solid-fuel intercontinental ballistic mis- targets.123 The U.S. Army published a new
sile.118 It is conceivable that if North Ko- manual titled North Korean Tactics in July
rea achieved this it could leverage that 2020 which details North Korea’s elec-
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

NORTH KOREA
tronic warfare organizations, capabilities,
North Korean Cyber
techniques, and tactics.124 It highlights
the Electronic Warfare Jamming Regi- Profiteering
ment focused on electronic jamming and
THE U.S. JUSTICE DEPARTMENT CHARGED
signals reconnaissance.125
three North Korean computer program-
Cyber mers, identified by prosecutors as mem-
bers of a North Korean military intelligence
According to government officials, the
agency, with carrying out a broad range of
greatest North Korean counterspace threat
global hacks at the behest of the North
to the United States is a cyberattack. North
Korean government.129 According to the
Korean Tactics calls out North Korea’s
report, it is believed that the defendants
elite cyber warfare unit, the Cyber War-
executed a number of cyberattacks from
fare Guidance Unit, which is also known as locations in Russia and China.130 The hacks
Bureau 121. The Army manual claims that were primarily profit-driven, believed to
Bureau 121 consists of more than 6,000 be intended to offset sanctions against
members, with many operating outside North Korea. This aligns with a report to
of North Korea in countries such as China, the UN Security Council detailing North
Russia, India, Malaysia, and Belarus.126 Korean-linked cyber actors conducting
operations against financial institutions
Former secretary of state Mike Pompeo
and virtual currency exchange houses to
claimed in that North
“generate money to support its weapons
Korea posed a greater threat to U.S. cy-
of mass destruction and ballistic missile
bersecurity than Russia.127 This sentiment
programs.”131 The report contended that
was echoed by the current administration
North Korea’s “total theft of virtual assets
in , as State Department
from 2019 to is valued at
spokesman Ned Price noted that North
approximately $316.4 million.”132
Korea’s malicious cyber activities threat-
ening the United States and its allies will
inform an ongoing review of U.S. policy
toward North Korea.128
North Korea is also suspected of conduct-
ing cyberattacks targeted at cybersecu-
rity researchers.133 The attacks, reported
by Google researchers in ,
involved sophisticated social media de-
ception and phishing techniques to en-
tice researchers to click links containing
malicious code designed to give hackers
full access to the victim’s computer.134
While North Korea’s cyberattacks have
not been specifically targeted at space
systems, they demonstrate North Korea’s
continued focus on developing more so-
phisticated and viable cyber capabilities.
As North Korean hackers acquire more
advanced technology, likely through illicit
means, and gain experience and expertise,
threats to U.S. space systems and ground
stations will become more credible.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

INDIA
INDIA
SINCE LAUNCHING ITS FIRST SATELLITE IN 1980, India has shown
progressive growth in its space capabilities. With a successful ASAT
test in 2019, India became only the fourth country to demonstrate
a kinetic counterspace capability. India is also advancing its civil
space program, which is currently working on its third mission to the Moon.
SPACE ORGANIZATION
India’s space activities are bifurcated into civil and military space organi-
zations. All civil space developments fall under the Indian Space Research
Organisation (ISRO), which operates under the Department of Space.135 The
agency celebrated its 51st launch in , its only launch of 2020,
due to the Covid-19 pandemic.136 India’s first orbital launch of 2021 was on
February 28, when the country successfully delivered a total of 19 satellites
into orbit, including a Brazilian Earth observation satellite.137
In 2019, India created the Defence Space Research Organisation (DSRO),
which is charged with the research and development of national secu-
rity space systems and operates under the Defence Space Agency in the
Ministry of Defence. These new agencies are part of India’s larger goals
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

INDIA
of advancements in strategic space op- range aerial targets, most likely drones.
erations. At its creation, the DSRO was One system is trailer-mounted, the other
THESE NEW
tasked with developing “space warfare is tripod-mounted, and both are capable
systems” and technology.138 Many Indian AGENCIES of jamming command and control links
counterspace capabilities are developed to close-range aerial targets.142 The DRDO
to respond to security threats posed by ARE PART OF has a subsection called the Laser Science
China and Pakistan.139
and Technology Centre, the website for
INDIA’S LARGER
India has also been working with private which specifies work on developing “high
companies to provide SDA data to “de- power laser sources and related technol-
GOALS OF
tect, identify, and track enemy assets.” ogies for directed energy applications” as
According to a request for information, well as “laser countermeasure systems.”143
ADVANCEMENTS
the Defence Space Agency is hoping that, Though there are no indications of ful-
once developed, the system can play both IN STRATEGIC ly functional counterspace systems yet,
defensive and offensive roles.140 these reports indicate that high-powered
SPACE
lasers and directed energy technologies
with potential counterspace applications
OPERATIONS.
COUNTERSPACE
are in development.
WEAPONS
Electronic
The DRDO provides electronic warfare
Kinetic Physical
capabilities for the Indian military. One of
After a successful direct-ascent ASAT test India’s most used systems is the fully mo-
in , India has not conducted bile Samyukta electronic warfare system,
additional public demonstrations of any which is used for surveillance, intercep-
kinetic physical counterspace weapons. tion, position fixing, and jamming of com-
Satheesh Reddy, head of DRDO, stated munications and radar signals in a wide
that while the 2019 direct-ascent ASAT range of wavelengths.144 Another fully de-
test was at a low altitude to prevent large veloped electronic warfare system is the
amounts of space debris, the missile ground vehicle-based Himshakti, report-
would be capable of reaching most sat- edly the most powerful electronic warfare
ellites in LEO. A second kinetic test does
system in India’s arsenal. It is designed to
not seem likely for the country, but Reddy
be used as an offensive and defensive sys-
announced that the team was working on
tem and can jam frequencies over an area
technologies related to EMP capabilities
as large as 10,000 square kilometers.145 It
and co-orbital weapons.141
is reported that India was able to jam Pa-
Non-kinetic Physical kistani radars and communication dur-
ing a 2019 airstrike, though it is not clear
There have not been any publicly report-
which system was used.146
ed developments of India’s non-kinetic
physical capabilities, though there is rea- Cyber
son to believe they are being developed.
India has continued to develop its Defense
In late 2020, Reddy announced a program
Cyber Agency, which responds to threats
to begin development of directed energy
in the cyber domain.147 As the country’s
weapons, specifically high-energy lasers
and high-powered microwaves which cyber capabilities grow, its most frequent
could in theory be adapted as counter- targets are the governments of Pakistan
space weapons. Though most of these and China.148 Based on open-source in-
weapons are in the early stages of de- formation, it does not appear that India
velopment, there are two systems which has tested or used its cyber capabilities
have lasers capable of striking short- against space systems.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

OTHERS
OTHERS
WHILE CHINA, RUSSIA, IRAN, NORTH KOREA, AND INDIA
have the most public advancements in counterspace weap-
ons, other states are developing counterspace capabilities as
well. This chapter examines the counterspace applications
“. . . There’s that other countries possess, including U.S. allies and partners, and include
public remarks and changes in doctrine.
a realization
amongst nations
that access
FRANCE
to space is no
longer a given.
After issuing a new Space Defense Strategy in 2019, France has had a contin-
We’ve got to
ued focus on military space. In March of 2021, the French Space Command
make sure that
began a simulated “stress test” of existing systems, in what the French com-
we stay ahead mander, Major General Michel Friedling, denoted as a “first for the French
of this growing army and even a first in Europe.” These simulations reportedly included
threat.” “monitoring of a potentially dangerous space object, as well as a threat to a
satellite.” The drills lasted five days and included participation from the U.S.
– GENERAL JOHN RAY- Space Force and German space agencies.150
MOND, CHIEF OF SPACE
OPERATIONS, U.S. SPACE
FORCE149
ISRAEL
As reported last year, Israel has continued development of a laser defense
system called the Iron Beam, which can intercept lower-tier rockets and
missiles. Israel’s Ministry of Defense has announced land, sea, and air sys-
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

OTHERS
tems to compliment the laser.151 Israel has that “Japan’s security space activities are
also developed a smaller laser defense premised on cooperation with the United
weapon, Light Blade, that can target bal- States.”156 CONTINUED
loons or kites up to two kilometers in the
While Japan has not demonstrated any
DEVELOPMENTS
distance.152 Continued developments and
direct-ascent ASAT systems, the country
investments in laser technology used on
has U.S.-made SM-3 missile defense in-
AND
Earth are a step closer to counterspace la-
terceptors that have a latent ability to at-
ser technology; however, there are many
tack space assets in LEO. Because military INVESTMENTS
additional technical challenges for lasing
developments in space are relatively new
a satellite from Earth that Israel has not to the country, most public remarks have IN LASER
yet demonstrated. been about the possibility of capabilities
that the country is interested in pursuing, TECHNOLOGY
such as co-orbital ASAT and jamming ca-
USED ON EARTH
JAPAN pabilities. In 2020, then-prime minister
Shinzo Abe declared that the country
ARE A STEP
will “drastically bolster capability and
Japan continues to advance its civil and
systems in order to secure superiority,”
military space operations. Prior to the CLOSER TO
though no specific programs have been
passage of the 2008 Basic Space Law, Ja-
made public.157 COUNTERSPACE
pan had a national policy that prohibited
the use of space for national defense.153
LASER
The 2008 law permitted the country to
SOUTH KOREA
begin military developments in space,
TECHNOLOGY.
and government officials have begun to
speak out about the development of de- In an blog post, the govern-
fensive counterspace capabilities.154 The ment of South Korea discussed its need
timing of this law and the ramping up of to reinforce satellite navigation with ter-
many counterspace developments are restrial systems to combat jamming and
in response to actions by China in space, spoofing. The country cited its past trou-
such as the 2007 Chinese debris-produc- bles with spoofing from North Korea, spe-
ing ASAT test. cifically from 2010 to 2016, as a driving
force to augment GPS use with terrestrial
This year, Japan authorized a bill to set
systems.158 The Ministry of Science also
up its proposed Space Domain Mission
released a statement detailing plans to
Unit within the Japan Air Self-Defense
upgrade space capabilities, including the
Force. The squadron is slated to be fully
launch of the first locally built rocket that
operational by 2023, with plans to launch
will carry satellites and orbiter probes to
the first satellite for monitoring the space
the Moon, with aims for a more powerful
environment by 2026.155 The Space Oper-
rocket by 2029.159
ations Squadron was established in 2020
as the first space domain mission unit
with the official mission to protect Jap-
UNITED KINGDOM
anese satellites from damage, including
armed attacks, and to monitor the space
environment, including space debris, as- The United Kingdom continues to inte-
teroids, and other satellites. The Space grate space into its military structure. In announced in , and the
Operations Squadron will cooperate with 2021, the country announced its largest command is scheduled to be operational
U.S. Space Command and Japan’s civil defense budget since the Cold War, a and capable of launching its first rock-
agency, the Japan Aerospace Exploration portion of which will go toward build- et by 2022.160 Space Command will work
Agency. Yasuhito Fukushima, a senior ing the Royal Air Force Space Command alongside the Ministry of Defence’s re-
research fellow at the Japanese Nation- in Scotland. The first commander of the cently formed Space Directorate as a joint
al Institute for Defense Studies, added United Kingdom’s Space Command was command structure.161
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

WHAT TO WATCH
WHAT TO
WATCH
THE COMING YEAR MAY BE MARKED MORE BY THE CONTINUITY
of current trends rather than any disruptive changes. While China
continues to make progress in developing counterspace weapons,
its focus appears to be shifting to integrating these capabilities into
its forces and operational plans. A key issue to watch over the coming year is
China’s overall investment in space-related research and development and
the development of potentially dual-use space capabilities, such as its ten-
tacle space debris cleanup robot. From an operational perspective, a key
development to track is the progress China makes integrating its electronic
counterspace capabilities, such as jamming and spoofing, into its irregular
warfare forces and tactics. In terms of norms of behavior in space, a key
indicator to watch is the behavior of China’s SJ-17 GEO inspector satellite.
While SJ-17 appears to have focused on inspecting other Chinese satellites
so far, using this satellite to inspect another nation’s satellites in GEO would
mark an important shift in its use that could have broader repercussions.
Russia is perhaps the most likely nation to conduct additional counter-
space testing and deployment over the coming year. Given the tests of its
direct ascent and co-orbital ASAT weapons conducted in 2020, a key issue
to watch is whether these tests continue and if new capabilities are demon-
strated. Other areas to watch for Russia include tests of new direct ascent
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

or co-orbital ASAT capabilities, laser programs. As the new U.S. administra-
ASAT systems on additional airborne and tion develops and refines its overall na-
ground-based platforms, electronic war- tional security strategy, one of the key 2020 WAS A
fare systems for the protection of critical areas to watch will be how it addresses
platforms, and emboldened cyberattacks space policy issues in general and the SLOW YEAR FOR
against civilian infrastructure and govern- proliferation of counterspace weap-
COUNTERSPACE
ment institutions. ons. Calls within the United States and
Both Iran and North Korea continue to abroad for more clearly defined norms ACTIVITIES,
have relatively immature space capa- of behavior in space are growing.162 An
bilities, but their electronic and cyber early indication that the Biden admin- WITH A FEW
counterspace capabilities pose a seri- istration intends to make progress to-
ous threat. Over the coming year, Iran ward building norms in space would be NOTABLE
will likely continue its space launch ac- an agreement among DoD and the intel-
EXCEPTIONS.
tivities under the IGRC and North Korea ligence community for which norms the
may look to restart testing of its space U.S. government is willing to support
launch capabilities after a year of rela- and abide by. Without an interagency
tive dormancy. A key development to agreement within the U.S. government,
watch is any additional indication that it will be difficult to start a meaningful
Iran and North Korea are cooperating conversion with other governments.
in space or ballistic missile technolo-
gy, which could mean progress in one
country is likely to be transferred to
the other. Additional issues to watch
include continued Iranian GPS spoofing
in the Persian Gulf and North Korean
GPS jamming into South Korea. An in-
creased frequency and sophistication
of cyberattacks by either country in oth-
er domains could also indicate a higher
level of cyber threats to space systems.
India does not appear to be poised to
conduct another test of its direct as-
cent ASAT missile in the near future. It is
more likely to continue development of
high-powered lasers and other non-ki-
netic ASAT capabilities. Key indicators
for India in space include how its new
military and research and development
space agencies continue to develop, the
level of funding provided for space and
counterspace activities, and signs that
it is adapting or testing its electronic
warfare systems for use against space
systems.
Overall, 2020 was a slow year for coun-
terspace activities, with a few notable
exceptions detailed in this year’s report.
The coming year may prove more active
overall as nations reemerge from lock-
down and return to their prior plans and
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
TODD HARRISON is the director of Defense Budget Analysis and director of the Aer-
ospace Security Project at CSIS. As a senior fellow in the International Security Pro-
gram, he leads the Center’s efforts to provide in-depth, nonpartisan research and
analysis of defense funding, space security, and air power issues. He has authored
publications on trends in the defense budget, military space systems, threats to
space systems, civil space exploration, defense acquisitions, military compensation
and readiness, and military force structure, among other topics. He teaches classes
on military space systems and the defense budget at the Johns Hopkins School of
Advanced International Studies.
Mr. Harrison joined CSIS from the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments,
where he was a senior fellow for defense budget studies. He previously worked at Booz
Allen Hamilton, where he consulted for the U.S. Air Force on satellite communications
systems and supported a variety of other clients evaluating the performance of acqui-
sition programs. Prior to Booz Allen, he worked for AeroAstro Inc. developing advanced
space technologies and as a management consultant at Diamond Cluster Internation-
al. Mr. Harrison served as a captain in the U.S. Air Force Reserves. He is a graduate of
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with both a BS and an MS in aeronautics and
astronautics.
KAITLYN JOHNSON is deputy director and fellow of the Aerospace Security Project at
CSIS. Ms. Johnson manages the team’s strategic planning and research agenda. Her re-
search specializes in topics such as space security, military space systems, commercial
space policy, and U.S. air dominance. Previously, Ms. Johnson has written on national
security space reorganization, threats against space assets, the commercialization of
space, escalation and deterrence dynamics, and defense acquisition trends. Ms. John-
son holds an MA from American University in U.S. foreign policy and national security
studies, with a concentration in defense and space security, and a BS from the Georgia
Institute of Technology in international affairs.
LIEUTENANT COLONEL JOE MOYE is an active-duty Marine Corps officer with near-
ly 22 years of service. He graduated from Appalachian State University in 1998 with a
bachelor’s degree in criminal justice and commissioned in 1999. He holds a master’s
degree in international public policy from the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced Inter-
national Studies, with a strategic studies concentration. His operational assignments
include a marine expeditionary unit afloat and six deployments to the Middle East, the
African Continent, and European Theater. His most recent operational assignment was
battalion command in Camp Lejeune, North Carolina. His Marine Corps staff positions
include Marine Corps Forces Special Operations Command and Headquarters, Marine
Corps. His joint assignments include United States Special Operations Command, Spe-
cial Operations Joint Task Force/NATO Special Operations Component Command - Af-
ghanistan, and Transregional Threats Coordination Cell, Joint Staff J5 Directorate.
MAKENA YOUNG is a research associate with the Aerospace Security Project at CSIS.
Her research interests include international collaboration, space security, and orbital
debris. Prior to joining CSIS, Ms. Young worked for the Federal Aviation Administration
as an aerospace engineer, focusing on automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast
certification and integration in small aircraft. She holds a BS in aeronautical and astro-
nautical engineering from Purdue University with minors in international relations and
environmental engineering.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

ENDNOTES
INTRODUCTION
1 “UCS Satellite Database,” Union of Concerned Scientists, accessed February 26, 2021, 
base.
2 Makena Young, “How Does Space Policy Directive-5 Change Cybersecurity Principles for Space Systems?,” Aerospace Security, September
14, 2020, 
3 “Memorandum on the National Strategy for Space Nuclear Power and Propulsion (Space Policy Directive-6),” White House, December
16, 2020, 
sion-space-policy-directive-6/; and “Memorandum on Space Policy Directive 7,” White House, January 15, 2021, 
archives.gov/presidential-actions/memorandum-space-policy-directive-7/.
4 “NASA Administrator Signs Statement of Intent with Brazil on Artemis Cooperation,” NASA, December 14, 2020, 
feature/nasa-administrator-signs-statement-of-intent-with-brazil-on-artemis-cooperation.
5 Todd Harrison and Seamus P. Daniels, Analysis of the FY 2021 Defense Budget (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 45-49, 
fense360.csis.org/analysis-of-the-fy-2021-defense-budget/.
6 U.S. Space Force, Spacepower: Doctrine for Space Forces (Washington, DC: ), 
Capstone%20Publication_10%20Aug%202020.pdf.
7 U.S. Space Command, Commander’s Strategic Vision (Washington, DC: ), 
sion/usspacecom-strategic-vision-22feb21.pdf?ver=xW4jfruY-cHS0HfWf6KN9A%3d%3d.
TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
8 U.S. Space Force, Spacepower, 43.
9 “Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space, and Under Water,” Department of State, 
gov/t/avc/trty/199116.htm#signatory.
10 Brian Garino and Jane Gibson, “Space System Threats,” in AU-18 Space Primer (Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: Air University Press, ), 277, 
11 Richard B. Langley et al., “Innovation: GNSS Spoofing Detection,” GPS World, June 1, 2013, -spoof-
ing-detection-correlating-carrier-phase-with-rapid-antenna-motion/.
CHINA
12 “Counterspace Weapons Timeline,” Aerospace Security, accessed March 25, 2021, 
13 Leonard David, “China’s Chang’e 5 moon samples are headed to the lab,” Space.com, December 18, 2020, 
chang-e-5-moon-samples-lab.
14 “China’s Chang’e-4 probe resumes work for 27th lunar day,” Xinhua, February 2, 2021, 
lish/2021-02/07/c_139727894.htm.
15 Stephan Clark, “China to begin construction of space station this year,” Spaceflight Now, January 10, 2021, 
com/2021/01/10/china-to-begin-construction-of-space-station-this-year/.
16 Leonard David, “China’s Tianwen-1 Mars mission adjusts orbit to prepare for a Red Planet landing,” Space.com, February 17, 2021, https://

17 Joseph Trevithick and Tyler Rogoway, “China’s Secret Spacecraft Looks To Have Landed At This Remote Base With A Massive Runway,” The
Drive, September 8, 2020, 
chinas-secretive-spacecraft-landed.
18 Geoff Brumel, “New Chinese Space Plane Landed At Mysterious Air Base, Evidence Suggests,” NPR, September 9, 2020, 
org/2020/09/09/911113352/new-chinese-space-plane-landed-at-mysterious-air-base-evidence-suggests.
19 Andrew Jones, “China’s CASIC reveals five-year plan for reusable spaceplane, commercial space projects,” SpaceNews, October 19, 2020,

20 “China puts final satellite into orbit to try to rival GPS network,” Reuters, June 22, 2020, 
31 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

tion-china-satellite/china-puts-final-satellite-into-orbit-to-try-to-rival-gps-network-idUSKBN23U08P.
21 “Beidou Global Navigation Satellite System,” Glonass, accessed February 26, 2021, 
22 Andrew Jones, “China successfully launches new Long March 7A on second attempt,” SpaceNews, March 11, 2021, 
china-successfully-launches-new-long-march-7a-on-second-attempt/.
23 John Costello and Joe McReynolds, China’s Strategic Support Force: A Force for a New Era (Washington, DC: Institute for National Strategic
Studies, ), 10-12, 15, 16, 
24 Alexander Bowe, “China’s Pursuit of Space Power Status and Implications for the United States,” U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, April 11, 2019, 
25 “Counterspace Weapons Timeline,” Aerospace Security, accessed March 25, 2021, 
26 This approximation was derived from the formula: distance(km) = 2 * orbital radius * SIN (0.5*angular separation).
27 Thomas G. Roberts, “Unusual behavior in GEO: SJ-17,” Aerospace Security, March 30, 2020, 
ior-in-geo-sj-17/.
28 “China develops new tentacle-like robot to clear space debris,” Xinhua, February 4, 2021, 
lish/2021-02/04/c_139721266.htm.
29 Brian G. Chow and Henry Sokolski, “U.S. Satellites Increasingly Vulnerable to China’s Ground Based Lasers,” SpaceNews, July 10, 2020,

30 Shishir Gupta, “China builds new structures near LAC, relocates troops. India reads a message,” Hindustan Times, October 24, 2020, https://

6zUzawUyTwEBrakZ45K.html.
RUSSIA
31 “Aerospace Defence Forces,” Space Forces: Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, 
htm; and Matthew Bodner, “As Trump Pushes for Separate Space Force, Russia Move Fast the Other Way,” Defense News, June 22, 2018,
https:// 
32 “Russia to Launch 29 Space Rockets in 2021, Says Roscosmos Chief,” TASS, February 20, 2021, 
33 “Russian Space Agency Publishes Declassified Documents on World’s 1st Lunar Soft Landing,” TASS, February 12, 2021, 
science/1255965.
34 “Roscosmos Continues Discussing Joint Moon Base with China,” TASS, January 25, 2021, 
35 Andrew Jones, “Russia, China to Sign Agreement on International Lunar Research Station,” SpaceNews, February 17, 2021, 
news.com/russia-china-to-sign-agreement-on-international-lunar-research-station/.
36 Jessie Yeung, “China and Russia agree to build joint lunar space station,” CNN, March 10, 2021, 
sia-china-lunar-station-intl-hnk-scli-scn/index.html.
37 Anatoly Zak, “The Angara Family of Launch Vehicles,” Russianspaceweb.com, 
38 “Roscosmos Reaches Agreements to Build Satellites for Several Countries,” TASS, January 28, 2021, 
39 , “Russia Seeks to Counter Space Threats,” Chinadaily.com.cn, June 4, 2020, 
代艳
d85870a310a8b24115ac9c.html.
40 “Russia Tests Direct-Ascent Anti-Satellite Missile,” United States Space Command, April 15, 2020, 
NEWS-ARTICLES/Article/2151611/russia-tests-direct-ascent-anti-satellite-missile/.
41 Kyle Mizokami, “Meet Russia’s Imposing New Satellite-Destroying Missile,” Popular Mechanics, April 16, 2020, 
ics.com/military/weapons/a32173824/nudol-missile-anti-satellite/.
42 Sandra Erwin, “Space Force Official: Russian Missile Tests Expose Vulnerability of Low-Orbiting Satellites,” SpaceNews, December 17, 2020,

43 Pavel Podvig, “Nudol ASAT System Tested from Plesetsk,” Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces, December 16, 2020, 
blog/2020/12/nudol_asat_system_tested_from.shtml.
44 “Russia Conducts Space-Based Anti-Satellite Weapons Test,” United States Space Command, July 23, 2020, 
MEDIA/NEWS-ARTICLES/Article/2285098/russia-conducts-space-based-anti-satellite-weapons-test/.
45 “Kosmos 2519 / Kosmos 2521 / Kosmos 2523,” Gunter’s Space Page, 
46 Beyza Unal, “Russia’s Behaviour Risks Weaponizing Outer Space,” Chatham House, July 31, 2020, 
32 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

russias-behaviour-risks-weaponizing-outer-space.
47 “Russia Committed to Full Demilitarization of Outer Space, Kremlin Says,” TASS, July 24, 2020, 
48 Jonathan McDowell, Twitter Post, June 15, 2020, 12:30 pm,
49 Anatoly Zak, “Soyuz-2-1v Launches Four Classified Payloads,” Russianspaceweb.com, 
mos-2535-2536-2537-2538.html.
50 Peter Suciu, “S-500: Russia’s F-35 Killer Coming Next Year,” National Interest, November 30, 2020, 
500-russias-f-35-killer-coming-next-year-173514.
51 “Russia Touts S-500’s Ability to Destroy Hypersonic Weapons in Space,” Moscow Times, March 5, 2021, 
com/2020/07/03/russia-touts-s-500s-ability-to-destroy-hypersonic-weapons-in-space-a70767.
52 “Is the S-500 Russia’s Answer to America’s Space Corps? Hypersonic Missile System Designed to Intercept Attacks from Space,” Military
Watch Magazine, July 8, 2019, 
personic-missile-system-designed-to-intercept-attacks-from-space.
53 Joseph Trevithick, “Here’s Our Best Look Yet at Russia’s Secretive Space Cannon, The Only Gun Ever Fired in Space,” The Drive, February 16,
2021, 
in-space.
54 Bart Hendrickx, “Peresvet: a Russian Mobile Laser System to Dazzle Enemy Satellites,” The Space Review, June 15, 2020, 
thespacereview.com/article/3967/1.
55 John Pike, “A-60 Ladoga 1A Airborne Laser,” 
56 Hendrickx, “Peresvet.”
57 Bart Hendrickx, “Russia Gears up for Electronic Warfare in Space (Part 1),” The Space Review, October 26, 2020, 
view.com/article/4056/1.
58 Ibid.
59 Ibid.
60 Ibid.
61 Anatoly Zak, “Lotos-S spacecraft for the Liana system,” Russianspaceweb.com, and “Liana
Electronic Intelligence Program,” Spaceflight101, 
62 “Liana - Lotus C and Pion-NCC,” GlobalSecurity.org, 
63 Bart Hendrickx, “Russia Gears up for Electronic Warfare in Space (Part 2),” The Space Review, November 2, 2020, 
view.com/article/4060/1.
64 Ibid.
65 Terry Thompson, “The SolarWinds Hack Was All but Inevitable – Why National Cyber Defense Is a ‘Wicked’ Problem and What Can Be Done
about It,” The Conversation, February 9, 2021, 
ber-defense-is-a-wicked-problem-and-what-can-be-done-about-it-153084.
66 Jason Murdock, “Who Has Been Affected by the Huge SolarWinds Cyberattack so Far?,” Newsweek, December 18, 2020, 
newsweek.com/solarwinds-orion-software-cyberattack-hack-victims-targets-list-1555840; and David E. Sanger, Nicole Perlroth, and
Julian E. Barnes, “As Understanding of Russian Hacking Grows, So Does Alarm,” New York Times, January 2, 2021, 
com/2021/01/02/us/politics/russian-hacking-government.html.
67 Ibid.
68 Andy Greenberg, “The Untold Story of NotPetya, the Most Devastating Cyberattack in History,” Wired, August 22, 2018, 
com/story/notpetya-cyberattack-ukraine-russia-code-crashed-the-world/; and “Global Ransomware Attack Causes Turmoil,” BBC News,
June 28, 2017, 
IRAN
69 Samuel Hickey, “Iran’s military satellite launch: What just happened?,” Center for Arms Control and Non-Proliferation, May 4, 2020, https://
armscontrolcenter.org/irans-military-satellite-launch-what-just-happened/; “Iran Lying About Peacefulness of Space Program, Pompeo
Says,” Radio Farda, April 25, 2020, 
html; “US Calls On Europe, Others To Take Action Against Iran After Satellite Launch,” Radio Farda, April 26, 2020, 
com/a/us-calls-on-europe-others-to-take-action-against-iran-/30577148.html; and “UK Says Iran’s ballistic missile launch is of significant
concern,” Reuters, April 24, 2020, 
nificant-concern-idUSKCN2261JA.
33 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

70 Andrew Hanna, “Iran’s Ambitious Space Program,” The Iran Primer, Updated February 1, 2021, 
jun/23/iran%E2%80%99s-ambitious-space-program; and Shaul Shay, “Iran and the Middle East space race,” Israel Hayom, May 4, 2020,

71 “نامزاس ییاضف ناریا,”Iranian Space Agency, July 9, 2016, and“Space Industry Development Requires
National Willpower: Minister,”Tehran Times, May 26, 2018, 
quires-national-willpower-minister.
72 Fabian Hinz, “Have Iran’s space ambitions taken a worrisome turn?,” European Leadership Network, April 24, 2020, 
leadershipnetwork.org/commentary/have-irans-space-ambitions-taken-a-worrisome-new-turn/.
73 Anthony Cordesman, Iran and the Changing Military Balance in the Gulf (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 
s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/200326_Iran_Gulf_Net_Assesment.Third_Phase.Reduced.GH6%281%29.pdf.
74 “Iran Unveils Military Space Command, New Details on Satellite Launch,” SpaceWatch.Global, April 27, 2020, 
al/2020/04/iran-unveils-military-space-command-new-details-on-satellite-launch/.
75 Marcia Smith, “Iran Launches First Military Satellite From New Launch Site,” Space Policy Online, April 23, 2020, 
com/news/iran-launches-first-military-satellite-from-new-launch-site/; Fabian Hinz, “Have Iran’s space ambitions taken a worrisome
turn?,” European Leadership Network, April 24, 2020, 
bitions-taken-a-worrisome-new-turn/; and Samuel Hickey, “Iran’s military satellite launch: What just happened?,” Center for Arms Control
and Non-Proliferation, May 4, 2020, 
76 Peter Pry, “Iran’s Satellite is No ‘Tumbling Webcam’,” Newsmax, May 5, 2020, 
space/2020/05/05/id/966149/.
77 Marcia Smith, “Iran Launches First Military Satellite From New Launch Site,” Space Policy Online, April 23, 2020, 
com/news/iran-launches-first-military-satellite-from-new-launch-site/.
78 Ibid.
79 “Guards Commander Says Iran’s Eye in the Sky Makes it a ‘A World Power’,” Radio Farda, April 22, 2020, 
commander-says-iran-s-eye-in-sky-makes-it-a-world-power-/30570301.html.
80 Jeremy Binnie, “US SPACECOM Commander Dismisses Iranian ‘Webcam’ Satellite,” Janes, April 30, 2020, 
fence-news/news-detail/us-spacecom-commander-dismisses-iranian-webcam-satellite; and Pry, “Iran’s Satellite is No ‘Tumbling Web-
cam.’”
81 Smith, “Iran Launches First Military Satellite From New Launch Site.”
82 Fabian Hinz, “Perspectives on Iran’s Satellite Launch: Fabian Hinz on the Qased Satellite Launch Vehicle,” SpaceWatch.Global, May
13, 2020, 
lite-launch-vehicle/; and Hickey, “Iran’s military satellite launch.”
83 Ibid.
84 Hinz, “Perspectives on Iran’s Satellite Launch.”
85 Hickey, “Iran’s military satellite launch.”
86 Fabian Hinz, “Have Iran’s space ambitions taken a worrisome turn?,” European Leadership Network, April 24, 2020, 
leadershipnetwork.org/commentary/have-irans-space-ambitions-taken-a-worrisome-new-turn/.
87 Hickey, “Iran’s military satellite launch.”
88 Smith, “Iran Launches First Military Satellite From New Launch Site.”
89 “Pentagon Official Says Iran Satellite Launch Vehicle Traveled ‘Long Way’,” Radio Farda, April 23, 2020, 
gon-official-says-iran-satellite-launch-vehicle-traveled-long-way-/30571984.html.
90 Jay Raymond, Twitter Post, April 25, 2020, 2:19 PM, 
91 Pry, “Iran’s Satellite is No ‘Tumbling Webcam’”; Fabian Hinz, “Have Iran’s space ambitions taken a worrisome turn?”; and Hickey, “Iran’s
military satellite launch.”
92 Mihailo Zekic, “Iran Flexes its ‘Space Muscles’ With New Rocket Launch,” Watch Jerusalem, February 9, 2021, 
co.il/1162-iran-flexes-its-space-muscles-with-new-rocket-launch; Sune Engel Rasmussen, “Iran Launches New Rocket, Showing Advances
in Potential Missile Technology,” Wall Street Journal, February 1, 2021, 
ing-advances-in-potential-missile-technology-11612214948; David Axe, “Iran’s New Space Rocket Could Double as a Nuclear Missile,”
Forbes, February 1, 2021, 
2ec5da2d40; Batya Jerenberg, “Iran tests new ‘most powerful’ rocket capable of carrying nuclear warhead,” Janglo, February 4, 2021,
 and Elizabeth Howell, “Iran Tests new Rocket on sub-orbital test flight,” Space.com, February
17, 2021, 
34 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

93 Rasmussen, “Iran Launches New Rocket”; and Axe, “Iran’s New Space Rocket”; and Batya Jerenberg, “Iran tests new ‘most powerful’ rock-
et”; and Howell, “Iran Tests new Rocket on sub-orbital test flight.”
94 Axe, “Iran’s New Space Rocket”; Jerenberg, “Iran tests new ‘most powerful’ rocket”; and Howell, “Iran Tests new Rocket.”
95 Rasanah, “Iran’s Space Dreams are Clear and Dangerous,” International Institute for Iranian Studies, February 16, 2021, 
org/english/monitoring-and-translation/reports/¬irans-space-dreams-are-clear-and-dangerous/.
96 Rasmussen, “Iran Launches New Rocket.”
97 “Iran test launches new domestically manufactured satellite launch vehicle,” Pars Today, February 2, 2021, 
news/iran-i133504-iran_test_launches_new_domestically_manufactured_satellite_launch_vehicle; and Howell, “Iran Tests new Rocket.”
98 Todd Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2020 (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 
loads/2020/03/Harrison_SpaceThreatAssessment20_WEB_FINAL-min.pdf.
99 “IRGC launches final stage of joint military exercise in southern Iran,” Iranian Students’ News Agency, July 28, 2020, 
news/99050705060/IRGC-launches-final-stage-of-joint-military-exercise-in-southern; “Iran Air Defense forces perform large-scale electron-
ic warfare drills,” Iran Project, October 21, 2020, 
electronic-warfare-drills/; “Iran launches large-scale electronic aerial drills,” Tehran Times, October 21, 2020, 
com/news/453826/Iran-launches-large-scale-electronic-aerial-drills; “Second day of ‘Velayat-99’ maneuvers performed by Army, IRGC,”
Iranian Students’ News Agency, October 22, 2020, 
by-Army-IRGC; and “Massive war games light up Iran’s skies,” Al Monitor, October 21, 2020, 
nals/2020/10/iran-war-games-air-defense-exercise-regional-tensions.html.
100 “IRIAF capable of giving ‘prompt’ response to any threat,” Mehr News Agency, February 9, 2021, 
IRIAF-capable-of-giving-prompt-response-to-any-threat.
101 Joseph Trevithick, “New Type of GPS Spoofing Attack in China Creates “Crop Circles” of False Location Data,” The Drive, November 18,
2019, 
ta.
102 Dana Goward, “GPS circle spoofing discovered in Iran,” GPS World, April 21, 2020, 
ered-in-iran/.
103 Dana Goward, “New GPS ‘circle spoofing’ moves ship locations thousands of miles,” GPS World, May 26, 2020, 
new-gps-circle-spoofing-moves-ship-locations-thousands-of-miles/.
104 Scott Peterson and Payam Faramarzi,“Exclusive: Iran hijacked U.S. drone, says Iranian engineer,”Christian Science Monitor, December 15,
2011, 
105 Gil Baram and Kevin Lim, “Israel and Iran Just Showed Us the Future of Cyberwar with Their Unusual Attacks,” Foreign Policy, June 5, 2020,

106 Collin Anderson and Karim Sadjadpour, Iran’s Cyber Threat: Espionage, Sabotage, and Revenge (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace, 2018), United Against Nuclear Iran, The Iranian
Cyber Threat (New York: ), 
Threat_1220_JMB_CLEAN.pdf; and Miriam Baksh, “CISA Warns of Iran’s Offensive Cyber Capabilities,” Nextgov, December 4, 2020, https://

107 “Iran-Linked Group Says it Hacked Israeli Aerospace Industries,” Yeshiva World, December 21, 2020, 
news/headlines-breaking-stories/1930427/iran-linked-group-says-it-hacked-israeli-aerospace-industries.html; and Yossi Mekelberg, “Cy-
berspace: the new frontier in the Israeli-Iranian battleground,” Arab News, December 26, 2020, 
108 Baksh, “CISA Warns of Iran’s Offensive Cyber Capabilities.”
109 John Hardie and Annie Fixler, “Russia-Iran cooperation poses challenges for US cyber strategy, global norms,” C4ISRNET, February 8,
2021, 
al-norms/; “Iran, Russia sign information security cooperation pact,” Iranian Students’ News Agency, January 26, 2021, 
news/99110705109/Iran-Russia-sign-information-security-cooperation-pact; and “Iran, Russia Ink Cybersecurity Cooperation Pact,” Tasnim
News Agency, January 26, 2021, 
tion-pact.
NORTH KOREA
110 David Wainer, “Iran and North Korea Resumed Cooperation on Missiles, UN Says,” Bloomberg, February 8, 2021, 
com/news/articles/2021-02-08/iran-and-north-korea-resumed-cooperation-on-missiles-un-says; “UN Report Says Iran and North Korea
Resumed Missile Cooperation,” Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, February 9, 2021, 
north-korea-resumed-missile-cooperation/31093315.html; and “North Korea-Iran missile cooperation is reason for ambitious diplomacy,”
35 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

The Survival Editor’s Blog, February 15, 2021, 
111 “North Korea hits back at the UNSC for calling its space program threatening,” Business Insider India, November 20, 2020, https://

show/79319410.cms.
112 Yonhap, “NK pushing for five-year space development program purely for peaceful purposes: state media,” Korean Herald, April 2, 2020,
 and Colin Zwirko, “North Korean TV airs new segment promoting national
space program,” NK News, May 29, 2020, 
program/.
113 Elizabeth Shim, “North Korea highlights space program in state media,” UPI, April 2, 2020, 
News/2020/04/02/North-Korea-highlights-space-program-in-state-media/8821585835441/.
114 “Sohae Satellite Launching Station: Service Roads Regraded,” 38 North, March 31, 2020, 
Peter Makowsky and Jack Liu, “Sohae Satellite Launching Station: Signs of Daily Life,” 38 North, December 4, 2020, 
org/2020/12/sohae201204/; and Peter Makowsky and Jack Liu, “Sohae Satellite Launching Station: Snow Removal Underway,” 38 North,
February 5, 2021, 
115 “North Korean Direct Ascent Anti-Satellite Weapons,” Weapons and Warfare, October 16, 2020, 
com/2020/10/16/north-korean-direct-ascent-anti-satellite-weapons/.
116 Colin Zwirko, “North Korean TV airs new segment promoting national space program,” NK News, May 29, 2020, 
org/2020/05/north-korean-tv-airs-new-segment-promoting-national-space-program/.
117 “North Korean Direct Ascent Anti-Satellite Weapons,” Weapons and Warfare.
118 David Axe, “ Kim Jong Un Throws Down a Nuclear Gauntlet – His Regime will Build a Solid-Fuel ICBM,” Forbes, January 14, 2021, https://

m/?sh=29f6544b75b4.
119 “No Dong 1,” Missile Threat, CSIS, June 15, 2018, and David Wright, Laura Grego, and
Lisbeth Gronlund, The Physics of Space Security: A Reference Manual (Cambridge, MA: American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 2005), 77,

120 “North Korean Direct Ascent Anti-Satellite Weapons,” Weapons and Warfare, October 16, 2020, 
com/2020/10/16/north-korean-direct-ascent-anti-satellite-weapons/.
121 Peter Pry, “North Korea’s Satellites Could Unleash Electromagnetic Pulse Attack,” Center for Security Policy, March 11, 2019, 
centerforsecuritypolicy.org/2019/03/11/north-koreas-satellites-could-unleash-electromagnetic-pulse-attack/; Rajesh Uppal, “China,
North Korea, and Others Developing Super-EMP and Other Electromagnetic Weapons, Posing Serious Threat to Civil Society,” International
Defense Security & Technology, August 31, 2020, 
mass-electrical-destruction-pose-threat-to-civil-society/; and Peter Pry, “EMP ignorance is bliss,” Secure the Grid, August 5, 2020, https://
securethegrid.com/2020/08/05/emp-ignorance-is-bliss/.
122 Jeong Tae Joo, “N Korea readies deployment of new GPS jamming device,” Daily NK, April 27, 2020, 
north-korea-readies-deployment-new-gps-jamming-device/; and “North Korea is Enhancing its Electronic Warfare Capabilities,” iHLS, May
1, 2020, 
123 Steven Silver, “Is North Korea Jamming Radio Signals?,” National Interest, January 7, 2021, 
north-korea-jamming-radio-signals-175977; Mun Dong Hui, “North Korea appears to be jamming Unification Media Group radio broad-
casts,” Daily NK, January 7, 2021, 
casts/; and “North Korean Direct Ascent Anti-Satellite Weapons,” Weapons and Warfare, October 16, 2020, 
com/2020/10/16/north-korean-direct-ascent-anti-satellite-weapons/.
124 Department of the Army, North Korean Tactics, Army Technical Publication 7-100.2 (Washington, DC: ), 
army/atp7-100-2.pdf.
125 Eduard Kovacs, “U.S. Army Report Describes North Korea’s Cyber Warfare Capabilities,” Security Week, August 18, 2020, 
rityweek.com/us-army-report-describes-north-koreas-cyber-warfare-capabilities; and Department of the Army, North Korean Tactics.
126 Kovacs, “U.S. Army Report Describes North Korea’s Cyber Warfare Capabilities”; and Department of the Army, North Korean Tactics.
127 Yonhap, “Pompeo says N. Korea a greater threat than Russia in cyber security,” Korea Herald, December 15, 2020, 
com/view.php?ud=20201215000110&np=13&mp=2.
128 “U.S. says threat posed by North Korea cyber activity part of policy review,” Reuters, February 17, 2021, 
idUSKBN2AH2PA.
129 Eric Tucker, “US charges North Korean computer programmers in global hacks,” Associated Press, February 17, 2021, 
article/us-charges-north-korea-global-hacks-3c8145431462830e8f80e1576f731577.
36 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

130 Ibid.
131 Edith Lederer, “UN experts: North Korea using cyberattacks to update nukes,” Associated Press, February 9, 2021, 
cle/technology-global-trade-nuclear-weapons-north-korea-coronavirus-pandemic-19f536cac4a84780f54a3279ef707b33.
132 Ibid.
INDIA
133 Paulo Shakarian, “North Korea targeted cybersecurity researchers with hacking, espionage,” UPI, February 5, 2021, 
Top_News/Voices/2021/02/05/North-Korea-targeted-cybersecurity-researchers-with-hacking-espionage/8221612529846/.
134 Ibid.
135 “About ISRO,” ISRO, 
136 Hanneke Weitering, “India’s Space Agency Breaks Dry Spell with Its 1st Rocket Launch of 2020,” Space.com, November 10, 2020, https://

137 Andrew Jones, “Indian PSLV rocket launches Brazilian Amazonia-1 satellite,” SpaceNews, February 28, 2021, 
an-pslv-rocket-launches-brazilian-amazonia-1-satellite/.
138 Vivek Raghuvanshi, “India to Launch a Defense-Based Space Research Agency,” Defense News, June 12, 2019, 
com/space/2019/06/12/india-to-launch-a-defense-based-space-research-agency/.
139 John Sheldon, “Indian Space Wars: India’s DRDO Head Outlines Counterspace Capability Ambitions,” SpaceWatch.Global, April 15, 2019,

140 Aakriti Sharma, “India’s Defense Space Agency Hunting for New Technology That Can Track Enemy Assets,” EurAsian Times, February 24,
2021, 
141 Rajat Pandit “ASAT Missile: Satellite-Killer Not a One-off, India Working on Star Wars Armoury,” Times of India, April 7, 2019, 
sofindia.indiatimes.com/india/satellite-killer-not-a-one-off-india-working-on-star-wars-armoury/articleshow/68758674.cms.
142 “DRDO Accelerates Work on ‘Laser Weapons’; But Where Does India Stand Against China, Russia, and The US?,” EurAsian Times, September
28, 2020, 
143 “Technologies,” Defence Research and Development Organisation - DRDO, Ministry of Defence, Government of India, 
gov.in/labs-establishment/technologies/laser-science-technology-centre-lastec.
144 “Electronic Warfare – Denying Electromagnetic Advantage to Enemy,” SP’s Land Forces - Defence, 
ry/?id=698.
145 “Himshakti EW:- India Indigenous Electronic Warfare System,” Indian Defence News, May 4, 2019, 
ti-ew-india-indigenous-electronic-warfare-system/.
146 Ibid.; and IANS, “Pakistan’s Radars Were Jammed by IAF during Airstrike at Balakot,” Business Standard, February 26, 2019, 
business-standard.com/article/news-ians/pakistan-s-radars-were-jammed-by-iaf-during-airstrike-at-balakot-119022601215_1.html.
147 “(Formerly NM Urban) Homesteader - Blog,” 
merlynmurbanhomesteader_links_master__version_1_autosaved_.xlsx.
148 John Leyden, “Indian Cyber-Espionage Activity Rising amid Growing Rivalry with China, Pakistan,” Daily Swig, February 25, 2021, https://
portswigger.net/daily-swig/indian-cyber-espionage-activity-rising-amid-growing-rivalry-with-china-pakistan.
OTHERS
149 Jim Garamone, “Chief of Space Operations Discusses Need for Outreach to Partners, State of Space Force,” U.S. Department of Defense,
November 25, 2020, 
reach-to-partners-state-of-spac/.
150 AFP Staff Writers, “France conducts first military drills in space,” Spacewar, March 9, 2021, 
ducts_first_military_drills_in_space_999.html.
151 SPIE Europe Ltd, “Israeli Ministry of Defense Claims Laser Weapon Breakthrough,” Optics.org, accessed March 5, 2021, 
news/11/1/25.
152 “Israel’s Space-Age Laser Weapon Targets Explosive Balloons from Gaza,” VOA, accessed March 5, 2021, 
sode/israels-space-age-laser-weapon-targets-explosive-balloons-gaza-4407646.
153 Joanne Wheeler ed., The Space Law Review, 2nd ed. (London: ), 
37 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021

154 Doug Messier, “An Overview of Japan’s Counterspace Strategy,” Parabolic Arc, April 26, 2020, http://
parabolicarc.com/2020/04/26/an-overview-of-japans-counterspace-strategy/.
155 Mari Yamaguchi, “Japan Launches New Unit to Boost Defense in Space,” Defense News, May 18, 2020,

defense-in-space/; “Japan’s New Space Domain Mission Unit and Security in the Indo-Pacific Region,”
International Institute for Security Studies, accessed March 5, 2021, 
tary-balance/2020/05/japan-space-domain-mission-unit-security; and Suzuki Kazuto, “Space: A New
Battleground for Japan,” Nippon, December 5, 2018, 
156 Sam Wilson, “Japan’s Gradual Shift Toward Space Security,” The Diplomat, May 6, 2020, 
lomat.com/2020/05/japans-gradual-shift-toward-space-security/; Yamaguchi, “Japan Launches New
Unit to Boost Defense in Space
ima.html.
157 Doug Messier, “An Overview of Japan’s Counterspace Strategy,” Parabolic Arc, April 26, 2020, http://
parabolicarc.com/2020/04/26/an-overview-of-japans-counterspace-strategy/.
158 Dana A. Goward et al., “South Korea Discusses Decision to Combine GPS and ELoran,” Geospatial
World, November 17, 2020, 
to-combine-gps-and-eloran/.
159 , “Upcoming Military Exercise with U.S. Should Be Postponed or Halted: Expert,” Yonhap News
이원주
Agency, February 25, 2021, 
160 “Air Commodore Paul Godfrey announced as Commander United Kingdom Space Command,” Royal
Air Force, February 1, 2021, 
nounced-as-commander-united-kingdom-space-command/.
161 Steve Shaw, “Britain Gears Up To Join the Space Arms Race,” Byline Times, December 3, 2020, https://
bylinetimes.com/2020/12/03/britain-gears-up-to-join-the-space-arms-race/.
WHAT TO WATCH
162 Chad J. R. Ohlandt, Bruce McClintock, and Stephen J. Flanagan, “Navigating Norms for the New Space
Era,” National Interest, February 8, 2021, 
space-era-177592.
38 SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2021