CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 1
CSIS
BRIEFS
Space Force or Space Corps?
Competing Visions for a New Military Service
By Kaitlyn Johnson
THE ISSUE
In 2018, President Trump requested that the U.S. military restructure its space offices and personnel to create a U.S. Space Force.
Since then three competing visions for how the Department of Defense (DoD) should be restructured to better support its national
security space enterprise have been crafted: one from the DoD itself and two from either chamber of Congress. This brief compares
these three legislative proposals to create a new military service for space.
While not a new concept, the creation of a separate military language: the actual declaration of a new service being
service for space has gained significant momentum over the created. The SASC markup never explicitly declares the
past few months. On February 28, 2019, the Department establishment of a new service of the U.S. military, although
of Defense (DoD) submitted to Congress a legislative it is clearly implied. The current language solely renames
proposal to create a new military service for space within the existing Air Force Space Command — the primary
the Department of the Air Force called the United States organization that houses space personnel and capabilities
Space Force. Initially Congress was lukewarm on the idea, within the Air Force — to the U.S. Space Force.
but the relevant committees took up the issue and held
The HASC language creating a new military service for space
public hearings and private meetings with officials, military
did not make it into the chairman’s mark of the NDAA, but
professionals, and outside experts to discuss the concept.
it was added as an amendment to the legislation during the
In May and , the Senate and the House Armed full committee markup. The bipartisan amendment came
Services Committees (SASC and HASC, respectively) passed from congressmen, Jim Cooper (D-TN) and Mike Rogers (R-
military space reorganization language in their versions of AL), who proposed a Space Corps in 2017. Unsurprisingly,
the fiscal year (FY) 2020 National Defense Authorization Act the amendment looks very similar to the 2017 language
(NDAA). Both committees address the issue in similar ways, that passed the full House but was later taken out in
yet with a few key differences. conference. The HASC version places strong emphasis on
both career-building within the Space Corps and budget
Principally, the SASC markup is much more detailed on
reporting requirements.
the requirements for the new Space Force. Arguably, the
legislative proposal from DoD could be construed as a “blank The most obvious difference between the SASC and HASC
check,” causing the committee to add several reporting legislation is the name of the new service. SASC supports
requirements and clear structural language. However, there the name championed by President Donald Trump, the
is a key missing item despite SASC’s detailed structural U.S. Space Force, while the HASC calls it the U.S. Space
CENTER FOR STRATEGIC & middle east
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES program

Corps. However, both envision the organization as a corps- but requiring the Secretary of Defense to later report to
like structure within the Department of the Air Force and Congress “plans for the transfer or reassignment of military
a co-equal service to the U.S. Air Force. Neither supports personnel from the space elements of the Armed Forces to
elevating the organization to an independent military the Space Corps.”4 SASC’s proposal outrightly states that only
department, which is what President Trump originally personnel and operations currently belonging to the Air Force
suggested in .1 will be included in their version of the U.S. Space Force.
Unlike the DoD proposal, both SASC and HASC did not Markedly different in the SASC proposal is the elevation of
include a new top civilian position within the Air Force for the current principal assistant to the secretary of the Air
space. This is in line with how the Marine Corps is currently Force for space to a principal assistant for space acquisition
structured—with the Commandant of the Marine Corps and integration. This new position will coordinate space
reporting directly to the secretary of the Navy. Both the acquisition efforts by overseeing the Space and Missile
SASC and HASC legislation propose a similar structure. Systems Center (SMC), the Space Rapid Capabilities Office
Also similar to the Marine Corps, both the SASC and HASC (Space RCO), and the new Space Development Agency
propose that the new space service be led by a four-star (SDA). The apparent intent is to coordinate across all
military leader, although the names of this new position space acquisitions and speed decision making processes.
differ. The administration proposal called the head of In addition, the SASC legislation creates a Space Force
the Space Force a chief of staff, while the SASC calls it a Acquisition Council comprised of:
commander and the HASC calls it a commandant. The SASC
• The Under Secretary of the Air Force;
markup also creates a four-star vice commander position,
• The Principal Assistant to the Secretary of the Air Force
replicating the Marine Corps’ model, while the HASC makes
for Space Acquisition and Integration;
no mention of a vice commandant position.
• The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space Policy;
All three legislative proposals add the four-star in charge
of the new military service to the Joint Chiefs of Staff • The Director of the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO);
(JCS). Both DoD’s and HASC’s language immediately adds
• The Commander of the United States Space Command;
the head of the space service as a representative to the
and
JCS. The SASC markup language, however, defers the new
• The Commander of the United States Space Force.
commander to an invite-only role for the first year. The
language states “upon the request of the Chairman of The purpose of the council is to oversee and coordinate
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Commander of the United space acquisitions amongst all aspects of the national
States Space Force may participate in any meeting… security space enterprise.
of an issue in connection with a duty or responsibility
While there is much to deliberate in conference, the two
of the Commander.”2 After the first year, however, the
Congressional proposals are structurally similar, and it
commander would become a full member of the JCS.
is likely that military space reorganization will be placed
The relationship between the Space Force and U.S. Space in the final version of the FY 2020 NDAA. Below is a
Command (SPACECOM) also stands out in the SASC table visually comparing the similarities and differences
legislation by requiring the commander of SPACECOM, described above.
likely to be Gen. John Raymond, to also act as the
commander of the Space Force for the first year. After a
year’s time, it requires that the positions be separated.3
Kaitlyn Johnson is associate fellow and associate director of
All three proposals (DoD, SASC, and HASC) make clear the Aerospace Security Project at the Center for Strategic and
that the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) will not International Studies (CSIS) in Washington, D.C.
be included in the new military service. While the fate of
the NRO is unanimous, the fate of Army and Navy space This brief is made possible by general support to CSIS.
operations are not. DoD’s proposal included space-related No direct sponsorship contributed to this brief.
personnel and operations from both the Army and Navy,
although it deferred specifying which specific organizations
would transfer. The HASC amendment walked that back
slightly by not including the Army and Navy at the outset,
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 2

DoD Legislative Proposal SASC FY20 NDAA Markup HASC FY20 NDAA Amendment
Creates a new
No No No
military department
Creates a new service
Yes Yes* Yes
within the Air Force
Creates a new
Yes, Under Secretary of the Air
civilian space position No No
Force for Space
in the Air Force
Elevates Deputy Assistant
Senior OSD Secretary of Defense (DASD) for
No No
civilian position Space to be Assistant Secretary of
Defense (ASD) for Space Policy
Chief of Staff, four-star Commander, four-star**
Military leadership Commandant, four-star
Vice Chief of Staff, four-star Vice Commander, four-star
Representation on
Yes Yes Yes
the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Yes and gives greater flexibility
New civil
for recruiting, hiring, and pay No, transfers existing billets No, transfers existing billets
service positions
for civilians in the Space Force
Yes, allows the Secretary of
Defense to authorize new
New military positions No, transfers existing billets No, transfers existing billets
military positions for the
Space Force
Includes NRO and other
No No No
intelligence agencies
Not immediately but requires DoD
Includes Army and Navy
Yes No to submit a report to Congress
space components
advising necessity
Includes National
Includes associated reservists,
Guard and Reserve Yes Unclear
but left out the National Guard
Components
Mentions SPACECOM Yes Yes Yes
SPACECOM LEADERSHIP Commander, four-star Commander, four-star** Not addressed
Mentions the SDA No Yes Yes
Gives DoD authority to Requires a report on the estimated
transfer funds and establish funding requirements to establish
Estimated Budget Intended to be budget neutral
a headquarters for the Space and operate the Space Corps through
Force the FYDP (2021-2025)
New Service
5 years from enactment Not addressed December 30, 2023
Transition Timeline
* Unlike DoD’s legislative proposal or the HASC amendment, the SASC NDAA markup does not overtly state that a new service is being established within the Department of the Air Force.
** For the first year, the commander of U.S. Space Command will also serve as the commander of the U.S. Space Force.
CSIS BRIEFS are produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a private, tax-exempt institution
focusing on international public policy issues. Its research is nonpartisan and nonproprietary. CSIS does not take specific
policy positions. Accordingly, all views, positions, and conclusions expressed in this publication should be understood to be
solely those of the author(s). © 2019 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
Cover Photo: Adobe Stock
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 3

ENDNOTES
1. Katie Rogers, “Trump Orders Establishment of Space Force as Sixth
Military Branch,” New York Times, June 18, 2018, 
com/2018/06/18/us/politics/trump-space-force-sixth-military-branch.html.
2. U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee, “National Defense Authorization
Act for Fiscal Year 2020,” 116th Cong., 1st sess., 2019, S. 1790, 630, https://
aerospace.csis.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/FY20_SASC_SpaceForce.pdf.
3. U.S. Congress, Senate, Armed Services Committee, Nominations -- Scolese,
- Raymond, 116th Cong., 1st sess., (June 4, 2019), 
vices.senate.gov/hearings/19-06-04-nominations_--scolese---raymond.
4. U.S. House of Representatives Armed Services Committee, “National
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020: Amendment to H.R. 2500,”
116th Cong., 1st sess., 2019, H.R. 2500, 9, 
spacecorps_cooper-amendment/.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 4