November 8, 2024
Cover Photo: NASA
Why Did South Korea Create a New Space
Agency?
BY Jacob Bradley
On May 27, 2024, South Korean President Yoon Suk Yeol Q1: How did Korea get here?
announced the creation of the Korea AeroSpace
Administration (KASA), which replaced the Korea A1: In 1989, South Korea established KARI, its first
Aerospace Research Institute (KARI) as the lead aeronautics and space agency, with the goal to invest in
government organization for Korea’s space program and grow its domestic aerospace industry. KARI’s
and research activities.1 KASA was created to reorganize mission is to promote the development of the Korean
disparate Korean agencies to foster greater efficiency economy and enhance everyday life by new exploration
and space innovation. Under KASA, Korea aims to
Jacob Bradley is a research intern with the Aerospace
become a spacefaring juggernaut, not reliant on other
Security Project (ASP) at the Center for Strategic and
nations’ infrastructure, and an independent producer of
International Studies in Washington, D.C. This piece
space technology. KASA aims to grow South Korea into was researched, analyzed, and written by a next
one of the top five space-faring nations while also generation scholar. ASP supports the next generation
of space professionals through its internship program.
developing the peninsula’s aerospace sector into a main
For more, see 
national industry.2
AEROSPACE.CSIS.ORG | 1

testing technology for use in urban air mobility vehicles
designed to safely navigate city airspace.7 Since 2020,
KARI completed test flights and successfully launched
its own three-stage launch vehicle, Korean Space
Launch Vehicle (KSLV)-II, or as it is more commonly
known, Nuri.8 With this achievement, it is one of six
nations (and the European Space Agency) that can
independently launch into high orbits.9 In 2022, KARI
successfully launched the lunar satellite Danuri into
orbit around the Moon.10 The lunar orbiter is tasked with
surveying lunar resource deposits as well as testing
“space internet.” While enroute to the Moon, Danuri
Korean Peninsula / NASA
successfully transmitted a number of images and videos
back to Earth, including Korean boyband BTS’s music
and technological advancements, development, and
video, “Dynamite.”11
dissemination in the field of aerospace science and
technology.3
KASA is not only absorbing KARI,
but also the astronomy focused
Just four years later, KARI
KASA aims to grow South Korea Astronomy and Space
launched its first rocket, the
Science Institute or KASI in an
Korean Sounding Rocket, or Korea into a top five space-
effort to accelerate space
KSR-I.4 KSR-I was a small
faring nation in the world technological advancements in
research rocket designed to
Korea. KASI was established in
while also developing the
measure ozone levels in the
1974 as the Korean National
stratosphere. In ,
aerospace sector on the
Astronomy Observatory (KNAO)
Korea successfully launched its
peninsula into a main under the government’s Ministry
first satellite, Arirang 1, whose
of Science and Technology.12
mission was to observe and national industry.
KNAO opened an optical
photograph the Korean
observatory and radio
Peninsula and the surrounding
observatory in 1978 and 1985
seas with its electro-optical and ocean observation
before it was reorganized into the Institute of Space
cameras.5 Nine years later, in 2008, Yi So-yeon became
Science and Astronomy in 1986; it was later renamed
the first Korean astronaut to fly in space after launching
Korea Astronomy Observatory in 1991.
onboard the Soyuz TMA-12, a Russian passenger
Throughout the 1990s, KNAO increased its observation
transport craft. While in orbit for 10 days, Yi conducted
capabilities, including the installation of a GPS
nearly twenty experiments about biology in
observatory in Daejeon, establishment of a new optical
microgravity on board the ISS.6
observation facility, construction of a solar flare
telescope, and launch of an X-ray detector on the KSR-II
Throughout the 2010s, KARI continued to design and
rocket.13 In 2003, KNAO launched its first space
launch more satellites into orbit. It also developed a
telescope, the Far-ultraviolet Imaging Spectrograph.
fleet of vertical takeoff and landing UAVs intended for
KNAO was renamed in 2005 to KASI. Since its renaming,
2 | Bradley | Why Did South Korea Create a New Space Agency?

the institute has achieved a period of large-scale
observational facility development commissioning and
developed many land- and space-based astronomical
observation equipment. Looking toward its future under
KASA, KASI’s vision is to become the world’s leading
national astronomy & space science research institute.
Q2: What is KASA and why was it created?
A2: In accordance with South Korea's Fourth Space
Development Promotion Basic Plan, released in March Falcon-9 launch of Korea Pathfinder Lunar Orbiter /
DVIDS
2023, President Yoon created KASA to unite scattered
Korean space programs under one organization and to president, Dr Lee Sang-Ryool, KASA will lead Korean
better foster private space industry development.14 aerospace policy, research and development, and
President Yoon wants to create a stronger space international and private business cooperation.17
program in Korea as a boost to economic growth on the In addition to centralizing Korean space policy, KASA
peninsula. According to the Ministry of Science and ICT also looks to grow the South Korean aerospace industry.
(MSIT), the creation of KASA will help “foster more than “So far, space development has been focused on
2,000 space-related companies and create about government-led technology development, resulting in a
500,000 new jobs.”15 very weak structure in terms of the space industry. If
KASA becomes the main body and promotes the
KASA will continue the goals of its predecessor, KARI, development of the space industry, the related industry
while also accelerating Korea’s space development into will also be able to invest actively,” Lee elaborates.18
the future. Existing agencies, including KARI and KASI,
will become research institutes under KASA. KASA will Q3: What are KASA’s goals for space exploration?
take over KARI’s role in Korean space exploration. It will
be responsible for developing new technologies, A3: With the formation of KASA, MSIT looks to capture
formulating national strategies for space, and evolving ten percent of the global spaceflight market by 2045.19
plans and missions into corporal national projects. With This is an ambitious vision, and members of the Korean
the creation of KASA, government spending toward space community are excited by the potential for
space programs is projected to double to ₩1.5 trillion (or scientific advancement. Cho Kyung-Suk, a solar
about $1.1 billion) from 2022 to 2027.16 physicist at KARI, is eager to use Korean data in his
research rather than U.S., European, or Japanese data.20
Seoul wants to use KASA to increase the growth of the Cho said he, “has always hoped that Korea would
aerospace economy on the peninsula, creating more undertake space missions capable of producing world-
jobs within the industry for Korean citizens. “Space class scientific achievements.” With this institutional
development has now become a key element for change, Korea is positioning itself to grow into a global
defense and diplomacy, industry and major social leader for spaceflight and innovation.
infrastructure. It is necessary to have a dedicated
agency to holistically coordinate the space-related
issues of the various ministries” according to KARI.
| 3

KASA has many space exploration goals for the next In relation to satellite improvements, KASA also plans to
couple decades. It plans to land on the Moon by 2032, continue developing high resolution imaging satellites.
and to establish a lunar base by the 2040s. It also aims According to Gold Rush: The 2024 Commercial Remote
to send an orbiter to Mars by 2035 and land on the Sensing Global Rankings, a CSIS independent analysis,
planet by 2045.21 KASA plans to launch a spacecraft to KARI’s KOMPSAT-3A has the highest resolution Mid-
explore the Apophis asteroid when it passes close to the Wave IR (MWIR) commercial space-based remote
Earth in 2029.22 KASA also plans to partner with other sensing capabilities in the world. Despite being
nations to launch a solar observation probe to rest at launched nearly ten years ago in 2015, the KOMPSAT-3A
Sun-Earth Lagrange point L4.23 With the recent continues to offer the best commercial MWIR product on
investments in reusable launch vehicle technology, the international market.29 As Seoul continues to
Korea looks to advance its own launch capabilities by strengthen its investment in space technologies, KASA
developing its own reusable rocket.24 Finally, KASA aims to continue the groundbreaking satellite
intends to continue the successful Nuri program with innovation initiated by its predecessor.
annual launches planned for next several years.25
In a world with more and more space-faring nations,
At the present, Korea is dependent on U.S. and where each nation’s private sector aims to increase its
international satellites for Global Navigation Satellite market share, KASA hopes to act as a banner
System (GNSS) services in the country, outside of a organization for the Korean Peninsula’s developing
newly certified satellite-based augmentation system industries to rally around. With heavy material
(SBAS) used by aircraft to improve navigation signals.26 investment in space exploration, a restructuring of
KASA, and KARI before it, plans to launch a Korean space bureaucracy, and new partnerships with private
owned and operated positioning, navigation, and timing enterprises, Korea has the ability to meet its lofty goals
(PNT) satellite constellation. By 2035, KASA plans to for the next twenty years. If Korea develops into a top
build, “a precise, reliable satellite navigation system five space nation, the rest of humanity will reap the
that can provide centimeter-level location information benefits.
to the Korean Peninsula and surrounding areas as Japan
and India do.”27 Currently un-augmented GPS has up to Acknowledgments
a 10-meter error radius in South Korea; this is too large The author would like to thank Kari Bingen, Clayton
of a threshold to run self-driving cars, UAV drones, and Swope, Madeleine Chang, Yanni Nikas, Che and Angela
other kinds of up-and-coming positioning reliant Bradley, Lillian Fortin, and Emily Ezratty for their
technology, but the establishment of a local GNSS support and insights.
system and the continued adoption of its new SBAS
signal will reduce this error radius to just centimeters.28
4 | Bradley | Why Did South Korea Create a New Space Agency?

About CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research organization
dedicated to advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding former U.S. Senator Sam
Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president and chief executive officer
since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of values—nonpartisanship,
independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity and professionalism, and talent
development. CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research, analysis, and
recommendations. We organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media appearances that aim to increase the
knowledge, awareness, and salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decision making of key policymakers and the thinking of key
influencers. We work toward a vision of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be understood to be solely
those of the author(s).
| 5

Notes
1 Dennis Normile, “South Korea Launches Its Own NASA,”
Science.org, May 27, 2024, 15 Na-young Kim, “S. Korea Aims to Launch Full-Fledged Space
 Agency in May,” Yonhap News Agency, January 11, 2024,
launches-its-own-nasa. 
2 “Vision & Goals,” KASA, 2024, 16 Dennis Normile, “South Korea Launches Its Own NASA.”
 17 Byung-yeul Baek, “Kari Plays Pivotal Role in Korea’s Space
3 “Major Functions,” KARI, 2023, Development,” The Korea Times, January 15, 2024,
 
4 Mark Wade, “KSR-I,” Astronautix, 2019, 8.html.
 18 Byung-yeul Baek, “Kari Plays Pivotal Role in Korea’s Space
5 “History,” KARI, 2023, Development.”
 19 Na-young Kim, “S. Korea Aims to Launch Full-Fledged Space
6 APPEL News Staff, “International Brief: Dr. Soyeon Yi,” NASA, Agency in May.”
December 5, 2019, 20 Normile, “South Korea Launches Its Own NASA.”
5_dr_soyeon_yi-html/. 21 Jack Kim, “South Korea Plans Mars Landing in 2045 as It
7 “Unmanned Vehicle,” KARI, 2023, Launches First Space Agency,” Reuters, May 30, 2024,
 
8 Mike Wall, “South Korea’s Homegrown Nuri Rocket Launches landing-2045-it-launches-first-space-agency-2024-05-30/.
8 Satellites on 3rd-Ever Mission (Photo),” Space.com, May 26, 22 “Space Science / Exploration,” KASA, 2024,
2023, 
launch-may-2023. 23 “Space Science / Exploration,” KASA.
9 Robert S Wilson and Nicholas J Wood, “South Korea,” 24 “Space Transportation,” KASA, 2024,
Aerospace Center for Space Policy and Strategy, August 15, 
2023, 25 “Space Transportation,” KASA
08/Wilson-Wood_SouthKorea_20230802.pdf. 26 Jesse Khalil, “Korea’s Kass Now Certified and Operational,”
10 “Korea’s First Step toward Lunar Exploration,” KARI, 2023, GPS World, February 12, 2024,
 
11 Jin-Won Kim, “S.Korean Lunar Orbiter Sends ‘dynamite’ BTS system-now-certified-and-operational/.
Video to Earth,” KED Global, November 7, 2022, 27 “KPS,” KARI, 2023,
 
defense/newsView/ked202211070010. 28 Si-soo Park, “South Korea’s GNSS Project to Take off with
12 “History,” KASI, 2024, $3.3 Billion Budget,” SpaceNews, January 23, 2023,
 
13 “History,” KASI. off-with-3-3-billion-budget/.
14 Jun-Su Jang, “‘2045 우주경제 강국 실현’ 미래 우주경제 로드맵 29 Kari Bingen, David Gauthier, and Madeleine Chang, Gold
이행을 위한 제4차 우주개발진흥기본계획,” Ministry of Science and Rush The 2024 Commercial Remote Sensing Global Rankings,
IST, February 6, 2023, October 1, 2024, 
 prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/2024-
?key=48d8cced0a674bfa8214a60b1eeedba5&convType=html 09/241001_Bingen_Gold_Rush.pdf?VersionId=FtAy0I3xBa6EH
&convLocale=ko_KR&contextPath=%2FSynapDocViewServer M.DQJFHxJtZo3W0U1IE.
%2F.
6 | Bradley | Why Did South Korea Create a New Space Agency?