A Report of the CSIS Aerospace Security Project
FOREWORD | Doug Loverro AUTHORS | Todd Harrison, Kaitlyn Johnson, Makena Young
DDEEFFEENNSSEE
AAGGAAIINNSSTT
TTHHEE DDAARRKK
AARRTTSS IINN
SSPPAACCEE
Protecting Space Systems from Counterspace Weapons

DDEEFFEENNSSEE AAGGAAIINNSSTT
TTHHEE DDAARRKK AARRTTSS
IINN SSPPAACCEE
Protecting Space Systems from Counterspace Weapons
FOREWORD | Doug Loverro
AUTHORS | Todd Harrison, Kaitlyn Johnson, Makena Young
A Report of the CSIS Aerospace Security Project
Lanham · Boulder · New York · London

ABOUT CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit
policy research organization dedicated to advancing practical ideas to address the
world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, suc-
ceeding former U.S. senator Sam Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John
J. Hamre, who has served as president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a dis-
tinct set of values—nonpartisanship, independent thought, innovative thinking,
cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity and professionalism, and talent develop-
ment. CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their
research, analysis, and recommendations. We organize conferences, publish, lec-
ture, and make media appearances that aim to increase the knowledge, awareness,
and salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key poli-
cymakers and the thinking of key influencers. We work toward a vision of a safer and
more prosperous world.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein
should be understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2021 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
ISBN: 978-1-5381-4031-4 (pb); 978-1-5381-4032-1 (ebook)
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
202-887-0200 | 
Rowman & Littlefield
4501 Forbes Boulevard
Lanham, MD 20706
301-459-3366 | 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The team would like to extend our thanks to several key individuals who made
this report possible. First, to Doug Loverro for his expertise, support with building
the workshop scenarios, and writing of the foreword for this report. Second, to
Emily Tiemeyer for her outstanding work on our Harry Potter-inspired layout,
graphics, and charts. Third, to Jeeah Lee and Phillip Meylan for their expert eyes
and copyedits. We would also like to thank our friend and colleague, Thomas Rob-
erts, for his insight, contributions, and edits. Finally, the team would like to thank
the space and national security experts who participated in the workshops that
informed this study, which are discussed in Chapter 5 of this report.
This study was made possible by the generous support of the Smith Richardson
Foundation and general support to CSIS.
The Aerospace Security Project would also like to recognize J.K. Rowling’s Harry
Potter series, which has greatly inspired our overall design concept, including the
incorporation of its iconography and quotes.
While this report borrows the story and imagery of Harry Potter, we do not share
the author’s discriminatory views. The Aerospace Security Project team and CSIS
support equality and representation for all, including the trans community, and
we strive to create an environment where people of all backgrounds are heard
and included. With the Harry Potter theme, we want to reaffirm some of the values
the characters and stories taught us: friendship, courage, selflessness, and being
true to oneself.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Foreword .........................................................................................................................................vi
CHAPTER 1: Space Is No Sanctuary ............................................................................................1
The State of Space Today ......................................................................................................2
Militarization versus Weaponization of Space ...................................................................2
Space Organizations ..............................................................................................................4
The Need for Space Defenses ...............................................................................................5
Report Organization and Methodology .................................................................................5
CHAPTER 2: The Dark Arts in Space ............................................................................................7
Kinetic Physical ......................................................................................................................7
Non-Kinetic Physical ..............................................................................................................8
Electronic .................................................................................................................................8
Cyber .........................................................................................................................................9
CHAPTER 3: Space Defenses Defined .........................................................................................10
Defensive Counterspace Operations ...................................................................................10
Passive Defenses ...................................................................................................................11
Architectural Defenses .................................................................................................................11
Technical Defenses .......................................................................................................................13
Operational Defenses ....................................................................................................................16
Active Defenses ......................................................................................................................18
Space-Based Defenses .................................................................................................................18
Terrestrial-Based Defenses ..........................................................................................................20
CHAPTER 4: Space Defenses Applied .........................................................................................22
Objectives of the Attacker in Space ....................................................................................22
Objectives of the Defender in Space....................................................................................24
Matching Defenses to Threats .............................................................................................25
CHAPTER 5: Scenarios for Defensive Counterspace Operations ............................................27
Scenario 1: Russian Incursion into the Baltics ..................................................................27
Scenario 2: Possible Hijacked Satellite...............................................................................30
Scenario 3: Escalating Tensions in the South China Sea .................................................31
Scenario 4: Commercial Space System Protection ...........................................................34
Key Takeaways ........................................................................................................................35
CHAPTER 6: Conclusions and Recommendations .....................................................................37
About the Authors ..........................................................................................................................40
TABLE OF CONTENTS

both a crucial advantage of U.S. mili- fare. The “art of war” did not change,
“All armies prefer
tary strength and a critical chink in the but its application needed to be amend-
high ground to low, United States’ military armor. The re- ed. So too for space—the philosophical
emergence of antisatellite activities underpinnings are the same as they
and sunny places to
around the world, and more specifical- were 2,500 years ago—but applying
dark . . . With regard ly in Russia and China, was not due to those concepts to space conflict re-
sudden technological change but rath- quires the ability to see beyond the
to precipitous
er to the rising recognition of the grand concepts and into operational
heights, if you are
changing strategic calculus of “what is strategies and capabilities. That work
beforehand with your strong” and “what is weak.” More wor- has begun, but much more is required.
risome, the “weakness” of U.S. space
adversary, you should Into that fray comes this volume from
forces is not limited to what happens in
the folks at CSIS. Outlining the develop-
occupy the raised the heavens—losses there create new
ment and possible types of the weap-
vulnerabilities on the ground, which
and sunny spots, and
ons of space conflict and some of the
then develop new nexuses of “what is
there wait for him to early existing strategic ideas that have
weak” to attack.
been posited for how space conflict will
come up.”
The ideas in The Art of War are thought evolve, they then put those ideas to the
to be the compilation of generations of test. Through a series of thought exer-
SUN TZU, THE ART OF WAR
military learning from the experience cises, marked by far more realistic sce-
of battle and that Sun Tzu, who may or narios than are often used in such en-
may not have actually existed, com- deavors, they seek to enlighten that
FOREWORD piled them into his eponymous text. He which can only truly be learned in con-
had the advantage of those genera- flict. The results are simultaneously in-
It is hard to imagine that Sun Tzu ever tions of land conflict and the lessons formative and surprising. Conventional
from wars won and lost. Clausewitz wisdom about secrecy and the use of
conceived of as “precipitous” a
“height” or as “sunny” a “spot” as and Mahan were similarly able to draw in-space kinetic force to repel attacks
upon centuries of battle-tested plans gives way to more nuanced uses of in-
Earth orbit. But it is fascinating to won-
and experiences to derive their own formational methods (domain aware-
der, if he had, would it have changed his
theories of land and sea strategy and to ness), diplomatic approaches (norms of
perception of how battles would be
use those lessons to advance the state- behavior), cyber intrusion, and the need
fought and how wars could be won. Mil-
of-the-art of doctrine, weapons, and for greater, more thoughtful, and uni-
itary theorists (and science fiction
employment of armed force. Unfortu- versally known resilience methods as
screenwriters) have often resorted to
nately, we have no experience in space superior ways in which to resist attacks.
pronouncements taken from Sun Tzu to
warfare to rely upon—no grand lessons Also of note is that, while the predomi-
explain the basis of their decisions or to
of how force was applied nor even use- nance of discussion around space at-
justify the boldness of their approach.
ful exercises to extend into actual com- tack seems to focus on what would be
But perhaps the true import of Sun Tzu’s
bat. The slate is blank. traditionally termed Phase 2 and 3 hos-
words is to operational commanders on
tilities, the tools that might require
how to best disposition forces and, Certainly, the philosophical elements of
more thought are those that can be em-
more critically, how to identify the route war captured by Sun Tzu, Clausewitz,
ployed below the level and before the
to victory. If that is true, then clearly Mahan, and many others translate from
start of all-out conflict, in the more am-
Russian and Chinese space strategists domain to domain, but often that trans-
biguous and less acute situations that
learned from a different Sun Tzu ad- lation is fuzzy and subject to strategic are likely to be the rule rather than the
monishment: “So in war, the way is to surprise, especially when technology exception in space conflict.1
outpaces the application of derived
avoid what is strong and to strike at
concepts. The creation of the Maginot It is clear we are in the very early stages
what is weak.”
Line can be traced back to the writings of developing the correct application of
CLICK TO Since the turn of the century, the dou- of Sun Tzu on the superiority of the de- Sun Tzu’s tenets to space combat. And
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
ble-edged sword that space represents fense but was made technologically ir- since such conflict is unlikely to be a
for U.S. forces has been apparent—it is relevant by the introduction of air war- common occurrence in the foreseeable
FOREWORD vi HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

future, thought pieces and exercises
such as undertaken here will have an
outsized role in that development. Ad-
ditionally, the rate of technological
change in this area is accelerating, and
as mentioned earlier, that can turn
well-understood operational concepts
on their head if the underlying lessons
are lost in the process of focusing on
specific implementations.
In the interwar years between World “Harry wandered over to the
War I and World War II, forward-thinking Restricted Section . . .
naval officers theorized and war-gamed Unfortunately, you needed a
the use of carrier-based and subma-
specially signed note from one of
rine-based naval power in exercises
the teachers to look in any of the
called “Fleet Problems” despite the
restricted books, and he knew
dominant notion of the superiority of
he’d never get one. These were
the battleship. Those “problems,” prac-
ticed and played out under the title of the books containing powerful
War Plan Orange, became the furnace in Dark Magic never taught at
which operational experience could be Hogwarts, and only read by older
forged—put crucially to the test after
students studying advanced
. Space needs the same
Defense Against the Dark Arts.”
forward-looking, innovative approach
to examining strategic concepts—its HARRY POTTER AND THE SORCERER’S STONE
own set of furnaces to forge its future
strategy—before it has its own “space
Pearl Harbor.” This study is one of the
first—it won’t be the last.
Douglas L. Loverro, Colonel USAF (Ret)
Former Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Space Policy
CLICK TO
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
FOREWORD vii HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

DDEEFFEENNSSEE AAGGAAIINNSSTT TTHHEE CCHHAAPPTTEERR 11 DDAARRKKSS AARRTTSS IINN SSPPAACCEE
SPACE IS NO
SANCTUARY
The United States is increasingly ning of the space age, when early satel- that an attack on these space systems
dependent on space systems for lites began to provide nascent military would be regarded as a prelude to a
economic and military security. capabilities, nations started develop- nuclear attack. The foundation of de-
The expansion of government and ing ways to deny others the military terrence in space was nuclear deter-
commercial space capabilities has benefits of space. In 1959, just two rence on Earth.4
opened markets and made possible years after the launch of Sputnik, the
What is different today is that the abili-
whole new industries within the United United States tested the first anti-satel-
ty of the United States to deter attacks
States and around the world. Ride-shar- lite (ASAT) weapon—a Bold Orion mis-
in space is in doubt. National security
ing apps such as Uber and Lyft, the ul- sile launched from a B-47 bomber.2 The
space systems are not just used to sup-
tra-efficient supply chains of business- Soviets soon followed, beginning tests
port nuclear forces, and the U.S. mili-
es, and the grocery delivery services of a space-based co-orbital ASAT weap-
tary is increasingly dependent on
many depended on during the Covid-19 on system in 1963 and declaring the
space systems across the full spectrum
pandemic would not be possible with- system fully operational by 1973.3
of military operations. Counterterror-
out the U.S. military-operated Global Space was never really a sanctuary.
ism operations in the Middle East use
Positioning System (GPS). Moreover,
Although space was a contested do- drones enabled by GPS and satellite
the global economy depends not just
main from nearly the beginning, none communications (SATCOM) systems to
on the weather, communications, navi-
of the kinetic ASAT weapons developed track and strike high-value targets.
gation, timing, and remote sensing
by the United States and the Soviet Space-based imagery, signals intelli-
data from space systems but also on
Union were ever used in conflict. While gence, and other surveillance systems
the global reach and power projection
the threat of attack was ever present provide real-time global monitoring of
capabilities of U.S. and allied militaries
during the Cold War, a stable deter- adversary forces that otherwise would
that protect the global commons and
the free flow of global commerce. rence posture developed between the not be possible. And nuclear forces
two superpowers because both U.S. stand watch day and night using many
Space, however, is not a sanctuary. and Soviet national security space sys- of the same satellites to quickly detect
While this pronouncement has become tems were primarily used to support missile launches and ensure the na-
CLICK TO somewhat cliché among policy ana- nuclear forces. Multiple agreements tional command authority remains
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS lysts, the history behind this statement and treaties between the two nations connected before, during, and after a
is often overlooked. Since the begin- formalized a mutual understanding nuclear attack.
SPACE IS NO SANCTUARY 1 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

Space provides an nation states, such as space-based radar
“Indifference
and neglect economic and mili- TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE and radio frequency (RF) monitoring.
tary advantage to the SpaceX, for example, has disrupted the
often do much
United States that is launch market with its partially reusable
more damage
not easily replicated OOFF SSPPAACCEE Falcon 9 rocket and is now attempting to
than outright by other nations or by disrupt the communications market with
dislike.” capabilities in other its Starlink constellation of satellites. The
domains. In the three TTOODDAAYY Starlink constellation alone now has more
ALBUS DUMBLEDORE,
HARRY POTTER AND THE decades since the operational satellites in orbit than China.7
ORDER OF THE PHOENIX end of the Cold War,
These disruptions throw into sharp relief
adversaries have tak-
the increasingly disordered environment
en note of these advantages. Rather The current space environment is sig-
space has become. In many cases, nation-
than fight the U.S. military symmetri- nificantly different than it was during
al laws and regulatory frameworks do not
cally, they have invested heavily in the Cold War. Space systems can no
fully account for some of the new com-
counterspace weapons designed to longer hide behind the cloak of nuclear
mercial space missions being pursued.
degrade, disrupt, and destroy U.S. and deterrence, and the defenses needed for
And with few legally binding or enforce-
allied space systems. These counter- space systems must account for how the
able international treaties governing
space weapons can hold satellites at
space environment is changing. Space is
space, some nations and private entities
risk in a crisis and, in conflict, could
more diverse, disruptive, disordered, and
are pushing the limits on what others may
greatly increase the risks to U.S. forces
dangerous than in the past. Space is more
see as acceptable behavior in space.
and interests around the world. As
diverse because it is no longer dominated
Space is also becoming increasingly dan-
Chief of Space Operations General
by the United States and Soviet Union. gerous as more nations develop and pro-
John Raymond has made clear, “space
While 93 percent of all space launches liferate counterspace capabilities. Recent
is a vital national interest and freedom
during the Cold War were by the two su- reports by CSIS, the Secure World Foun-
of action must be preserved. No one
perpowers, the majority of launches to- dation, and the Defense Intelligence
wants a conflict in space and deter-
day are by other nations. Moreover, Agency provide an aggregation of publicly
rence is a top priority . . . however, if
roughly 90 percent of satellites launched available information on the develop-
deterrence fails, we must be prepared
in 2020 were commercial rather than gov- ment, testing, and use of counterspace
to fight and win.”5
ernment.6 Space is more disruptive be- weapons by other nations.8 These reports
With the growing U.S. dependence on cause many private companies are pursu- show that while Russia and China contin-
space and the proliferation of coun- ing new space missions, such as on-orbit ue to develop and test a wide range of
terspace capabilities, the natural servicing of satellites and in-space mining counterspace weapons, even some
question for strategists and policy- and manufacturing. Other private firms friendly countries, such as India and
makers is how can space assets be are venturing into space missions that France, are developing their own counter-
protected against such threats? This previously were the exclusive domain of space capabilities in response.
report provides an overview of the
range of protections that can be used
to defend space systems from differ-
MMIILLIITTAARRIIZZAATTIIOONN VVEERRSSUUSS
ent forms of attack and the impact
these defenses can have on deter-
rence and escalation dynamics. For
WWEEAAPPOONNIIZZAATTIIOONN OOFF SSPPAACCEE
space to remain a source of economic
and military advantage, the United
The increased development and prolifera-
States must be able to defend its criti-
“Always use the proper name for
tion of counterspace weapons has led to a
cal space infrastructure and have inte-
things. Fear of a name increases
greater focus on space policy issues, specif-
grated space strategy, doctrine, and
fear of the thing itself.”
CLICK TO operational concepts for how to use ically the militarization and weaponization of
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS these defenses across the full spec- space. The term “militarization of space” is gen- ALBUS DUMBLEDORE, HARRY POTTER AND THE
SORCERER’S STONE
trum of conflict. erally used to denote the passive use of space
SPACE IS NO SANCTUARY 2 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

systems to support military planning and
TABLE 1: FRAMEWORK FOR TYPES OF SPACE WEAPONS
operations on Earth. Space has been
used for military purposes since the be- KINETIC NON-KINETIC
ginning of the space age, and it remains
one of the main uses of space today. Mili-
taries around the world use space sys-
tems for intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance (ISR); communications;
position, navigation, and timing (PNT);
and other functions to allow terrestrial
forces to operate more effectively and ef-
ficiently. Space is already militarized and
will remain militarized for the foresee-
able future.
The weaponization of space, in contrast,
is generally defined as going a step be-
yond the mere passive use of space for
military purposes. In Space as a Strate-
gic Asset, Dr. Joan Johnson-Freese notes
that “force application is the overt wea-
ponization of space, as compared with
the de facto weaponization that has oc-
curred under the guise of space con-
trol.”9 In 2004, U.S. Air Force doctrine
defined space force application as
“those forces that deliver kinetic effects
to, from, or through space,” though this
definition was removed from the De-
partment of Defense’s (DoD) dictionary
in 2018.10 The U.S. military defines space
control to include both offensive and
defensive operations that “ensure free-
dom of action in space for the US and its
allies and, when directed, to deny an
adversary freedom of action in space.”11
A variety of other nations and interna-
tional organizations have attempted
to define what constitutes a space
weapon, without much success in
reaching a broad consensus. It is use-
ful, however, to have a framework for
understanding the types of systems
that could potentially be considered
space weapons. A prior CSIS report
proposed such a framework for weap-
ons that are either based in space or
CLICK TO are designed to have effects in space.12
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
This framework, shown in
Table 1, includes six cate-
SPACE IS NO SANCTUARY 3 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG
ECAPS-OT-HTRAE
EXAMPLE EXAMPLES
Direct-Ascent ASAT Uplink Jammer, Laser Dazzler/Blinder,
Cyberattack
HOW DO THEY WORK?
A missile fires a warhead or projectile into HOW DO THEY WORK?
space to directly strike or detonate near Non-kinetic counterspace weapons can be
a target satellite. The warhead can be stationed on ground, maritime, or airborne
conventional or nuclear. platforms and used to affect the operation of
satellites or the sensors they carry, without
WHAT ARE THE EFFECTS?
making physical contact.
A kinetic Earth-to-space weapon produces
space debris that can affect the safe operation WHAT ARE THE EFFECTS?
of other satellites in affected orbits. Nuclear Non-kinetic weapons disrupt or degrade the
detonations in space increase the radiation ability of satellites to function properly. They
exposure of other satellites and can significantly can have temporary or permanent effects, but
shorten their lifespan. they do not generally produce orbital debris or
other collateral damage.
HAVE THEY BEEN DEMONSTRATED?
Earth-to-space kinetic weapons have been HAVE THEY BEEN DEMONSTRATED?
tested by the United States, Russia, China, and Multiple nations have demonstrated these
India. The United States and Soviet Union tested capabilities, including Russia, China, Iran, and
nuclear weapons in space in the 1960s. others.
ECAPS-OT-ECAPS
EXAMPLES EXAMPLES
Co-orbital ASAT, Space-Based Missile Defense Co-orbital Crosslink Jammer,
Interceptors Co-orbital High-Powered Microwave
HOW DO THEY WORK? HOW DO THEY WORK?
A satellite is placed into orbit and maneuvers A satellite is placed into orbit and uses
to intercept its target by striking it directly or non-kinetic means (such as a high-powered
detonating a conventional or nuclear warhead in microwave or jammer) to disrupt the operation
its vicinity. of another satellite.
WHAT ARE THEIR EFFECTS? WHAT ARE THEIR EFFECTS?
A kinetic space-to-space weapon would produce They can degrade, disrupt, or destroy a target
space debris that can affect the safe operation satellite without making physical contact,
of other satellites in similar orbits. A nuclear producing orbital debris or otherwise affecting
detonation in space would increase the radiation other satellites. The effects can be temporary
exposure of other satellites and significantly or permanent depending on the form of attack
shorten their lifespan. used and the protections on the target
satellite. HAVE THEY BEEN DEMONSTRATED?
The Soviet Union tested co-orbital kinetic ASAT HAVE THEY BEEN DEMONSTRATED?
weapons repeatedly during the Cold War. No open-source examples could be found of
such a system being demonstrated, although
such tests could look like remote proximity
operations to outside observers.
HTRAE-OT-ECAPS
EXAMPLE EXAMPLES
Space-Based Global Strike (e.g., “Rods from God”) Space-Based Downlink Jammer,
Space-Based High-Powered Laser
HOW DO THEY WORK?
Weapons are placed in orbit and, when HOW DO THEY WORK?
commanded, deorbit and reenter the atmosphere A satellite equipped with a non-kinetic weapon
to strike a target on the Earth. Damage can be could target forces on Earth, such as a laser
inflicted using the kinetic energy of the weapon used to intercept missiles or aircraft in-flight
itself, or a warhead can be deployed from the or a jammer used to interfere with radars or
reentry vehicle (either conventional or nuclear). satellite ground stations.
WHAT ARE THEIR EFFECTS? WHAT ARE THEIR EFFECTS?
The effects depend greatly on the type of When used, the effects would be localized
warhead used (conventional or nuclear) but to the target area, but such a system could
would be like terrestrial-based ballistic missiles theoretically strike anywhere without warning.
in terms of their ability to hit targets anywhere
HAVE THEY BEEN DEMONSTRATED?
on Earth with little warning. While the U.S. military has contemplated
HAVE THEY BEEN DEMONSTRATED? space-based lasers for boost-phase missile
While the idea of using space-based weapons defense, there are no open-source examples of
for prompt global strike has been contemplated such a system being tested.
by the U.S. military, there are no open-source
examples of such a system being tested.

gories of potential space weapons organized by the domain in which they origi- The Russian Aerospace Forces are a
nate and have effects (Earth-to-space, space-to-space, and space-to-Earth) and military branch within the Russian
the means by which these effects are achieved (kinetic and non-kinetic). As not- Armed Forces focused on the air and
ed in the table, other nations have already developed and tested three of the six space domains. A sub-branch within
the Russian Aerospace Forces is the
categories of space weapons in the framework. Thus, by nearly any definition,
Russian Space Force, which is tasked
space has already been weaponized.
with all military operations in the
space domain, “including launching
military satellites, maintaining space-
SSPPAACCEE OORRGGAANNIIZZAATTIIOONNSS based assets, monitoring space ob-
jects, and identifying potential attacks
against the Russian homeland from
The organization of national security space capabilities by nations provides
space.”18 Russian ASAT capabilities are
insight into how they view this domain from a security perspective. For ex-
scattered throughout the military, to
ample, the United States has long maintained a division between military
include housing direct-ascent ASAT
space missions conducted by DoD and national intelligence space missions con-
programs within the Russian missile
ducted mainly by the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). Within the U.S. mili-
forces and space-based co-orbital
tary, the organization of space forces recently changed with the re-establishment
ASAT systems within the Russian
of United States Space Command (USSPACECOM) as a separate unified combatant Space Force.19
command and the creation of the United States Space Force as a new military
service. Like the other military services, the U.S. Space Force is responsible for France has the world’s third-oldest
organizing, training, and equipping space forces for the U.S. military.13 And like space program and a long history in
the other combatant commands, USSPACECOM is charged with using these space space exploration. France’s national
forces to carry out joint space missions and operations and support operations in space agency, Centre National
other domains.14 This reorganization is itself a reflection of how the United States d’Études Spatiales (CNES), manages
has changed its perception of the space domain and the threats posed by other all national civil space programs, and
nations in space. France is a key member in the Europe-
an Space Agency (ESA). While CNES
Like the United States, countries such as China, Russia, France, Japan, and India focuses on civil space programs, the
have changed the way they organize their national security space capabilities. French military contains separate
China’s national security space organizations are part of the People’s Liberation space organizations for national secu-
Army (PLA). Two divisions within the PLA focus on space and counterspace capa- rity. France recently renamed the
bilities: the Strategic Support Force (SSF) and the PLA Rocket Force (PLARF). Cre- French Air Force to the French Air and
ated in 2015, the SSF is responsible for developing and employing China’s military Space Force and announced plans to
space systems as well as its cyber and electronic warfare systems. As one PLA offi- create a Space Command within this
cer noted, the SSF combines into one organization cyber forces for network attack newly renamed organization. France’s
and defense; space forces responsible for communications, reconnaissance, and recent Space Defense Strategy, re-
navigation satellites; and electronic warfare units used for countering adversary leased in 2019, calls for “renewed
radar and communications. This indicates that the PLA views the space domain as analysis of the space environment and
primarily an information domain and a key element of the PLA’s information war- its threats, risks and opportunities”
fare forces.15 and notes that threats in the space do-
main “force our country to revisit its
The primary space focus of China’s SSF appears to be the development, launch,
model in order to remain a leading
and operation of China’s space-based command and control, PNT, and ISR capa-
space power.”20
bilities. The SSF also appears to be leading the development and deployment of
many Chinese counterspace capabilities, but it is unclear if all counterspace capa- While Japan does not yet have signifi-
bilities have been transferred to this organization. It is possible that Chinese di- cant military space capabilities, it is be-
rect-ascent ASAT weapons remain under the control of the PLA Rocket Force, ginning to organize itself for military
CLICK TO which is also responsible for its missile programs.16 However, reports in 2019 indi- space operations. In 2019, Japan creat-
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
cated that the SSF began training with direct-ascent ASAT missiles capable of tar- ed its Space Domain Mission Unit, a mil-
geting satellites in low Earth orbit (LEO).17 itary organization dedicated to protect-
SPACE IS NO SANCTUARY 4 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

ing Japanese space assets. The Space In , shortly after conducting its
Domain Mission Unit will coordinate first successful ASAT test, India estab- RREEPPOORRTT OORRGGAANNIIZZAATTIIOONN
with Japan’s civil space agency, the Ja- lished its Defence Space Agency (DSA).
AANNDD MMEETTHHOODDOOLLOOGGYY
pan Aerospace Exploration Agency India’s existing national security-fo-
(JAXA), and its U.S. counterparts in cused space organizations—including
This report builds on pri-
“I solemnly
USSPACECOM and the U.S. Space Force. the Defence Imagery Processing and
or work of the CSIS
The Space Domain Mission Unit plans to Analysis Centre and the Defence Satel- swear that
Aerospace Security
be fully operational by 2022. Beyond lite Control Centre—will become a part I am up to
Project and expands into
space technology development and of the DSA. The DSA’s objective is to co- several new areas. Chapter 2 no good.”
planning, the unit will be responsible ordinate among the space assets of the
provides a summary of the
GEORGE
for operating the satellite ground sta- Indian Air Force, Army, and Navy. Addi-
threats to space systems and WEASLEY, HARRY
tions that are critical for Japan’s self-de- tionally, the DSA will be responsible for a taxonomy for discussing POTTER AND THE
PRISONER OF
fense missions. Reports also indicate developing national security space as-
different types of counter-
AZKABAN
that the Japanese government is con- sets and defending Indian space infra-
space weapons. Chapter 3
sidering investing in some combination structure through a new sub-organiza-
catalogs the range of active and pas-
of passive and active defenses to pro- tion entitled the Defense Space
sive defenses that are theoretically
tect its space assets.21 Research Organization.22
possible and discusses the advantages
and limitations of each. Chapter 4 ana-
lyzes how the defensive capabilities
described in Chapter 3 can be applied
TTHHEE NNEEEEDD FFOORR SSPPAACCEE DDEEFFEENNSSEESS
to the different types of counterspace
weapons discussed in Chapter 2. Chap-
The recent reorganization and elevation of national security space capabili-
ter 5 explores a range of plausible sce-
ties by each of the world’s major space powers is an indication of the increas-
narios in which defenses may be need-
ing importance these nations place on the use of space for military purposes.
ed, concepts for employing different
In many ways, the 2007 Chinese anti-satellite test served as a wake-up call for
types of defenses, and how defensive
policymakers by highlighting the vulnerabilities of space systems. But since that
actions in space may be perceived by
time, improvements in the defenses of U.S. space systems to the types of counter-
others. The final chapter summarizes
space weapons adversary nations are developing and operationally deploying
conclusions drawn from the analysis,
has been slow and uneven. While U.S. space capabilities remain far ahead of other
actionable recommendations for poli-
nations, some adversaries, namely China and Russia, are arguably making ad-
cymakers, and additional research top-
vances in counterspace weapons faster than the United States is making advances
ics to be explored in future work.
in protections against these threats.
Part of the methodology behind this
Since the 2007 Chinese ASAT test, a variety of studies, exercises, and events have
study is the use of workshops with
highlighted the vulnerabilities of space systems, the far-reaching effects of “a day
space and policy experts to test space
without space,” and the fact that space is a contested warfighting domain. Howev-
crisis scenarios and operational con-
er, the lack of public discourse about how to defend against space threats has led
cepts for space defenses. The CSIS study
some to conclude that space is not defendable and should not be relied upon by
team developed several candidate sce-
the military, with one scholar writing that, “space is an inherently vulnerable and
narios, which are documented in Chap-
offense-dominant domain . . . There simply aren’t many good options for space
ter 5, and presented them to a group of
hardening/defenses.” This scholar goes on to conclude that “the reality is that sat-
experts during two separate half-day
ellites are vulnerable to attack—through both kinetic and non-kinetic means from
online workshops in .
lasers, electronic warfare, and cyber—and there is no good way to fix this.”23
The workshop participants were asked
to explore the range of defensive space
The fact that space is contested does not mean that space is undefendable. Rath-
capabilities they would consider using
er, it means that the United States will have to fight to protect its ability to operate
given the situation described in each of
in this domain, just as it does in the air, land, and maritime domains. What is
CLICK TO the scenarios. The findings from these
FLY BACK TO needed are strategy, doctrine, operational concepts, and technical capabilities
THE CONTENTS
workshops were used to refine the sce-
that focus on protecting space systems, the services they provide, and the space
narios themselves as well as the frame-
environment itself.
SPACE IS NO SANCTUARY 5 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

work of defenses in Chapter 3 and the
concepts for employing defenses in
Chapter 4.
The ultimate objective of this study is to
facilitate debate among policymakers,
technical experts, and the overall na-
tional security community on how best
to defend space assets. This debate is
especially important at this junction be-
cause the U.S. military is in the process
of modernizing many of its key satellite
constellations. The decisions made now
about what types of space architectures
to field and which defenses to incorpo-
rate will have repercussions for the life
of these architectures. This report is in-
tended to serve as a reference guide for
understanding different forms of space
defenses and how these defenses can
be employed. While there is no easy or
one-size-fits-all solution to defending
U.S. space assets, the goal is to give de-
cisionmakers the tools and information
they need in an easily accessible format
to have an informed policy debate
about this complex and nuanced issue.
CLICK TO
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
SPACE IS NO SANCTUARY 6 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

DDEEFFEENNSSEE AAGGAAIINNSSTT TTHHEE CCHHAAPPTTEERR 22 DDAARRKKSS AARRTTSS IINN SSPPAACCEE
THE DARK “The Dark Arts are many, varied,
ever-changing and eternal.
Fighting them is like fighting a
many-headed monster, which,
each time a neck is severed,
ARTS IN sprouts a head even fiercer and
cleverer than before. You are
fighting that which is unfixed,
mutating, indestructible.”
SEVERUS SNAPE, HARRY POTTER AND THE HALF-
BLOOD PRINCE
SPACE
attack are direct-ascent ASAT weap-
ons, co-orbital ASAT weapons, and
ground station attacks. Direct-ascent
ASAT weapons are launched on a
sub-orbital trajectory to strike a satel-
lite in orbit, while co-orbital ASAT
weapons are first placed into orbit
and then later maneuvered into their
intended target. Attacks on ground
A prerequisite to understanding stations are targeted at the terrestrial
space defenses is understanding sites responsible for command and
what they are intended to de- control of satellites or the relay of sat-
fend against. This chapter provides an ellite mission data to users.
overview and taxonomy for counter-
Kinetic physical attacks tend to cause
space weapons. The high stakes at
irreversible damage to the systems af-
play in the space domain have incen-
fected and demonstrate a strong show
tivized nations to build arsenals of
of force that would likely be attribut-
counterspace weapons to disrupt, de-
able and publicly visible. A successful
grade, or destroy space systems.
kinetic physical attack in space will
Counterspace weapons vary signifi-
produce orbital debris, which can in-
cantly in the types of effects they cre-
discriminately affect other satellites in
ate, how they are deployed, how easy
similar orbits. These types of attacks
they are to detect and attribute, and
are one of the only counterspace ac-
the level of technology and resources tions that carries the potential for the
needed to develop and field them. Kinetic physical counterspace loss of human life if targeted at crewed
They can be categorized into four weapons attempt to strike direct- ground stations or at satellites in or-
CLICK TO broad groups of capabilities: kinetic ly or detonate a warhead near a bits where humans are present, such
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS physical, non-kinetic physical, elec- satellite or ground station. The three as the International Space Station in
tronic, and cyber. main types of kinetic physical forms of LEO. To date, no country has conduct-
THE DARK ARTS IN SPACE 7 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

ed a kinetic physical attack against the atmosphere), and advanced point- known damage.27 For its part, Russia
another country’s satellite, but four ing control to steer the laser beam has continued to develop its non-kinet-
countries—the United States, Russia, precisely—technology that is costly ic ASAT capabilities in recent years, in-
China, and India—have successfully and requires a high degree of sophisti- cluding by conducting research on na-
tested kinetic physical counterspace cation. An HPM weapon can be used to no-sized aerosol obscurants that can
disrupt a satellite’s electronics, cor-
weapons. be used in space to block RF or optical
rupt data stored in memory, cause
transmissions and placing satellite las-
processors to restart, and, at higher
ing systems on aircraft and ground ve-
power levels, cause permanent dam-
hicles.28
age to electrical circuits and proces-
sors. A laser can be effective against a
sensor on a satellite if it is within the
field of view of the sensor, making it
possible to attribute the attack to its
approximate geographical origin. HPM
attacks can be more difficult to attri-
bute because the attack can come
from a variety of angles, including
from other satellites passing by in or-
bit. For both laser and HPM weapons,
the attacker may have limited ability
to know if the attack was successful
because it is not likely to produce visi-
ble indicators.25
Non-kinetic physical counter-
space weapons have physical ef- The use of a nuclear weapon in space
fects on satellites or ground sys- would have large-scale, indiscrimi-
Electronic counterspace weapons
tems without making physical contact. nate effects that would be attributable
target the electromagnetic spec-
Lasers can be used to temporarily daz- and publicly visible. A nuclear detona-
trum through which space sys-
zle or permanently blind the sensors tion in space would immediately af-
tems transmit and receive data. Jam-
on satellites, and higher-powered la- fect satellites within range of its elec-
ming devices interfere with the
sers can cause components to over- tromagnetic pulse, and it would also
communications to or from satellites
heat. High-powered microwave (HPM) create a high radiation environment
by generating noise in the same radio
weapons can disrupt a satellite’s elec- that would accelerate the degradation
frequency band. An uplink jammer in-
tronics or cause permanent damage of satellite components over the long
terferes with the signal going from
to electrical circuits and processors in term for unshielded satellites in the
Earth to a satellite, such as the com-
a satellite. A nuclear device detonated affected orbital regime. The detona-
mand-and-control uplink. Downlink
in space can create a high radiation tion of nuclear weapons in space is
jammers target the signal from a satel-
environment that has indiscriminate banned under the Partial Test Ban
lite as it propagates down to users on
effects on satellites in all affected or- Treaty of 1963, which has more than
the Earth. Spoofing is a form of elec-
bits. These attacks operate at the 100 signatories, although China and
tronic attack where the attacker tricks
speed of light and, in some cases, can North Korea are not included.26
a receiver into believing a fake signal,
be less visible to third-party observers
Among U.S. competitors, China and produced by the attacker, is the real
and more difficult to attribute.24
Russia appear to have the most devel- signal it is trying to receive. A spoofer
Satellites can be targeted with lasers oped non-kinetic physical ASAT capa- can be used to inject false information
and HPM weapons from ground- or bilities. For example, China has been into a data stream or, in extremis, to is-
ship-based sites, airborne platforms, working on a satellite lasing system sue false commands to a satellite to
CLICK TO or other satellites. A satellite lasing since at least 2006 when it illuminated disrupt its operations. User terminals
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS system requires high beam quality, a U.S. government satellite flying over with omnidirectional antennas, such
adaptive optics (if being used through Chinese territory without causing any as many GPS receivers and satellite
THE DARK ARTS IN SPACE 8 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

phones, have a wider field of view and issuing commands that would damage
thus are susceptible to downlink jam- its electronics and sensors. Accurate
ming and spoofing from a wider range and timely attribution of a cyberattack
of angles on the ground.29 can be difficult because attackers can
use a variety of methods to conceal their
Electronic forms of attack can be diffi-
identity, such as using hijacked servers
cult to detect or distinguish from acci-
to launch an attack.
dental interference, making attribution
and awareness more difficult. Both China has been implicated or suspected
jamming and spoofing are reversible in several cyberattacks against U.S. sat-
forms of attack because once they are ellites. In and again in July
turned off, communications can return 2008, China is suspected of attacking a
to normal. Through a type of spoofing remote sensing satellite operated by the
called “meaconing,” even encrypted U.S. Geological Survey called Landsat-7,
military GPS signals can be spoofed. causing more than 12 minutes of inter-
Meaconing does not require cracking ference with ground station control
the GPS encryption because it merely each time.33 In June and ,
While electronic forms of attack
rebroadcasts a time-delayed copy of hackers also believed to be from China
attempt to interfere with the
the original signal without decrypting attacked NASA’s Earth observation sat-
transmission of RF signals, cy-
it or altering the data.30 The technology ellite, Terra, and this time they “achieved
berattacks target the data itself and the
needed to jam and spoof many types of all steps required to command the sat-
systems that use, transmit, and control
satellite signals is commercially avail- ellite but did not issue commands.”34
the flow of data. Cyberattacks on satel-
able and inexpensive, making them And in , Chinese hack-
lites can be used to monitor data traffic
relatively easy to proliferate among ers attacked the National Oceanograph-
patterns, intercept data, or insert false
state and non-state actors. ic and Atmospheric Administration’s
or corrupted data in a system. These
(NOAA) satellite information and weath-
While Russia and China have advanced attacks can target ground stations, er systems, forcing NOAA to take down
electronic counterspace capabilities, end-user equipment, or the satellites the system and stop transmitting satel-
nations such as Iran and North Korea themselves. While cyberattacks require lite images to the National Weather Ser-
are also developing and using jam- a high degree of understanding of the vice for two days.35
ming and spoofing systems. North Ko- systems being targeted, they do not
rea likely acquired much of its elec- necessarily require significant resourc-
tronic counterspace systems from es to conduct. The barrier to entry is
Russia, and it appears to be gaining relatively low, and cyberattacks can be
operational experience using these contracted out to private groups or in-
dividuals. Even if a state or non-state
systems in peacetime. For example, it
actor lacks internal cyber capabilities,
frequently uses GPS jamming to inter-
it may still pose a cyber threat.
fere with U.S.-South Korean military
exercises and disrupt air and maritime
A cyberattack on space systems can re-
traffic along the border with South Ko-
sult in the loss of data or services being
rea.31 Likewise, the U.S. Department of
provided by a satellite, which could
Transportation issued a warning in
have widespread systemic effects if
2019 about Iranian GPS jamming and
used against a system such as GPS. Cy-
communications spoofing in the Strait
berattacks could have permanent ef-
of Hormuz. Iran is believed to have
fects if, for example, an adversary seizes
placed GPS jammers on an island near
control of a satellite through its com-
the entrance to the strait to interfere
mand-and-control system. An attacker
with civilian aircraft and ships so that
could shut down all communications
CLICK TO they might mistakenly navigate into
FLY BACK TO and permanently damage the satellite
THE CONTENTS
Iranian waters or airspace and could
by expending its propellant supply or
be seized.32
THE DARK ARTS IN SPACE 9 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

DDEEFFEENNSSEE AAGGAAIINNSSTT TTHHEE CCHHAAPPTTEERR 33 DDAARRKKSS AARRTTSS IINN SSPPAACCEE
SPACE “Your defences must therefore be
as flexible and inventive as the
arts you seek to undo.”
SEVERUS SNAPE, HARRY POTTER AND THE HALF-
BLOOD PRINCE
military systems that the United States
DEFENSES or its allies rely upon. In contrast, the
objective of offensive counterspace op-
erations is to prevent an adversary’s
use of space capabilities and counter-
space weapons to threaten friendly
forces or support its own forces on
DEFINED
Earth.38 These operations can include
reversible or irreversible attacks
against an adversary’s satellites,
ground control systems, communica-
tion links, or the space services provid-
ed by third parties.
In general, defensive counterspace
terrestrial forces, the focus now includes
operations aim to protect friendly
DDEEFFEENNSSIIVVEE the equally demanding and more com-
space systems, while offensive coun-
plex task of assuring and defending our
terspace operations aim to disrupt,
space capabilities against the aggres-
CCOOUUNNTTEERRSSPPAACCEE degrade, or destroy adversary space
sive space activities of others.36 systems. A gray area that can be inter-
OOPPEERRAATTIIOONNSS preted as either defensive or offen-
While the inclusion of defensive space
sive, depending on one’s perspective,
operations in joint doctrine is an im-
is when one nation’s counterspace ca-
Given the wide range of threats and portant start, much work remains to be
pabilities are used to attack an adver-
the proliferation of counterspace done to develop the operational con-
sary’s counterspace capabilities.
capabilities outlined in the previ- cepts and technical capabilities neces-
French minister of armed forces Flor-
ous chapter, the United States and oth-
sary to make defensive counterspace
ence Parly provided an example of
ers are necessarily placing a greater fo-
operations credible and effective. Ex-
this in a speech announcing the na-
cus on the ability to identify threats and
isting space doctrine and planning
tion’s new Space Defense Strategy in
defend space systems from attack. In
guidance state that the objective of de-
2019: “If our satellites are threatened,
2018, the Joint Chiefs of Staff published
fensive counterspace operations is to we will consider dazzling those of our
an update to its space operations doc-
protect friendly space systems from opponents. We reserve the time and
trine, the first update since 2013, which
“attack, interference, and unintention- means of the response: this may in-
noted that:
al hazards” and that these operations volve the use of high-power lasers de-
CLICK TO Whereas earlier space operations inte- can occur “before, during, or after an ployed from our satellites or from our
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS gration efforts focused primarily on pro- attack.”37 Friendly space systems can patrol nano-satellites.” She went on to
viding capability from space to support include civil, commercial, and foreign make the case that this use of coun-
SPACE DEFENSES DEFINED 10 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

terspace operations is not offensive, and the strengths and weaknesses of possible, examples are used to high-
noting that “active defence is not an each. Importantly, many of the defens- light existing space systems that em-
offensive strategy, what it is about is es discussed can be used in parallel ploy these defenses, although in
self-defence. It is, when a hostile act with one another to enhance overall some cases examples may not exist or
has been detected, characterized and protection of space systems. Where may not be publicly disclosed.
attributed, able to respond in an ap-
propriate and proportionate manner,
in accordance with the principles of
international law.”39 Moreover, U.S. PPAASSSSIIVVEE DDEEFFEENNSSEESS
military joint doctrine on space opera-
tions states that “active measures to
deceive, degrade, or destroy targeting Passive counterspace defenses are measures that can be used to minimize the
systems are examples of defensive op- effectiveness of attacks on friendly space systems by making them harder to
erations.”40 But to neutral third-party target or better capable of withstanding attacks. The passive defenses dis-
observers that do not have access to cussed in this section are divided into three rough categories—architectural, techni-
the same intelligence as the nations in cal, and operational—although it should be noted that some passive defenses could
conflict, a defensive counterspace at- arguably belong in more than one category. Architectural defenses are those that
tack may be indistinguishable from an rely primarily on satellite constellation and ground station architectures that are
offensive counterspace attack. This is more difficult for an adversary to attack. Technical defenses rely primarily on tech-
especially true in a pre-conflict envi- nologies that can be incorporated into satellites, ground stations, and user equip-
ronment where one nation may feel ment that makes the system more difficult to attack. Operational defenses rely pri-
compelled to act preemptively or be- marily on changes in the way satellites are operated to make them more difficult to
fore evidence of an attack has been target, more resistant to attacks, or easier to restore after an attack.
disclosed.
ARCHITECTURAL DEFENSES
Due to the unique physics of this oper-
ating environment and that space re- Disaggregated Constellations
mains an asymmetric advantage for
Disaggregation is the separation of distinct missions onto different platforms or
the United States, actions that are like-
payloads, effectively breaking up multi-mission satellites into separate mission-spe-
ly to result in orbital debris or trigger
cific satellites that operate in parallel.41 For example, the U.S. Space Force currently
an adversary response that would re-
plans to separate the strategic and tactical protected SATCOM missions into two
sult in orbital debris can dispropor-
separate next-generation systems. The Evolved Strategic SATCOM (ESS) system will
tionately and adversely affect the Unit-
support strategic users for missions such as nuclear command and control, whereas
ed States, its allies and partners, and
the Protected Tactical Service (PTS) system will support tactical SATCOM users that
their collective long-term economic
need a high level of jam resistance.42 This could reduce the potential for uninten-
and security interests in space. The
United States and its allies and part- tional escalation by forcing an adversary to be explicit about the capabilities it is
ners therefore have an incentive to targeting in an attack.43
avoid using kinetic defensive counter-
In a conventional conflict, if an adversary targets a dual-use (strategic and tactical)
space capabilities that are likely to pro-
aggregated space system such as the current Advanced EHF system, it may not be
duce orbital debris if possible.
clear whether the strategic or tactical missions (or both) are the intended target.
This chapter provides an overview of This could lead to miscalculations and unintentional escalation. If the strategic and
options available to protect space sys- tactical payloads are disaggregated into separate space systems, an adversary
tems from attacks, including each of could target the tactical system only and leave the strategic system unharmed if it
the four categories of counterspace does not want to risk nuclear escalation. However, an adversary may not be able to
weapons discussed in the previous distinguish between satellites that are intended for different missions, and even if
chapter. While the following is not an such differences are disclosed, an adversary may not trust this distinction and at-
CLICK TO exhaustive list of defensive capabili- tack both anyway. Moreover, disaggregation of strategic and tactical missions may
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
ties, it is intended to provide an over- make attacking the tactical system in a conventional conflict more attractive if the
view of the range of options available risk of strategic escalation is reduced.
SPACE DEFENSES DEFINED 11 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

Disaggregation can reduce space sys- complex because they do not have to to achieve the same effects as targeting
tem complexity and potentially speed provide an entire capability on one plat- a smaller number of satellites in a
acquisition timelines by decoupling re- form. They can also use hosted pay- less-proliferated architecture.
quirements.44 However, disaggregated loads on other types of satellites, which
systems can cost more in total because can have the benefit of further compli- Diversified Architectures
separate space systems must be devel- cating targeting for an adversary by
In a diversified architecture, multiple sys-
oped and launched, resulting in some forcing it to attack multiple satellites,
tems contribute to the same mission us-
redundancies in development, testing, potentially from multiple countries and
ing platforms and payloads that may be
production, and launch costs. commercial firms, rather than a single
operating in different orbits or in different
nation’s military satellite. However,
domains.52 For example, wideband com-
Distributed Constellations hosted payloads can also result in more
munications to fixed and mobile users can
aggregated architectures since the host
A distributed system uses “a number of
be provided by the military’s WGS system,
satellite may be supporting multiple
nodes, working together, to perform the
commercial SATCOM systems, airborne
payloads and missions.
same mission or functions as a single
communication nodes, or terrestrial net-
node.”45 In a distributed constellation,
Proliferated Constellations works. The Chinese BeiDou system for po-
the end user is not dependent on any sin-
sitioning, navigation, and timing uses a
gle satellite but rather uses multiple sat- Proliferated satellite con-
diverse set of orbits, with satellites in geo-
ellites to derive a capabili- stellations deploy a larger
stationary orbit (GEO), highly inclined
“We are only ty. A distributed number of the same types of
GEO, and medium Earth orbit (MEO).53 Di-
as strong as constellation can compli- satellites to similar orbits to
versification reduces the incentive for an
we are cate an adversary’s coun- perform the same missions.
adversary to attack any one of these sys-
united, as terspace planning by pre- While distribution relies on placing
tems because the impact on the overall
senting a larger number of more satellites or payloads on orbit that
weak as we
mission will be muted since systems in
targets that must be suc- work together to provide a complete ca-
are divided.” other orbits or domains can be used to
cessfully attacked to pability, proliferation is simply building
ALBUS DUMBLEDORE, achieve the same effects as more systems (or maintaining more compensate for losses. Moreover, attack-
HARRY POTTER AND targeting just one or two on-orbit spares) to increase the constel- ing space systems in diversified orbits
THE GOBLET OF FIRE
satellites in a less-distribut- lation size and overall capacity.48 Prolif- may require different capabilities for each
ed architecture.46 GPS is an example of a eration can be an expensive option if orbital regime, and the collateral damage
the systems being proliferated are indi- from such attacks, such as orbital debris,
distributed constellation because the
vidually expensive, although highly pro- could have a much broader impact politi-
functioning of the system is not depen-
dent on any single satellite or ground sta- liferated systems may reduce unit costs cally and economically.
in production from the learning curve
tion; a user can use any four satellites
effect and economies of scale.49 The Redundant, Mobile, or
within view to get a time and position fix.
SpaceX’s Starlink constellation is a com- U.S. military’s Wideband Global SAT- Hardened Ground Stations
COM (WGS) system is an example of a
mercial example of a distributed archi-
Ground stations used for command
proliferated system, with a constella-
tecture because it uses more than 1,000
and control of a satellite or for the op-
tion that has grown from three “gapfill-
satellites circling in LEO to provide con-
eration of the payloads on a satellite
er” satellites initially to a planned con-
tinuous coverage over large parts of the
are also at risk of attack. Having redun-
stellation of 11 satellites.50 The Space
Earth, with users of the system automat-
dant or rapidly deployable mobile
Development Agency is planning to
ically being transferred between satel-
ground stations provides a measure of
develop highly proliferated constella-
lites as they pass in and out of range. Dis-
protection in the event of attack or nat-
tions for data transport, missile warn-
tributed constellations tend to degrade
ing, missile tracking, and alternative ural disaster, making the space system
gracefully as satellites are removed from
position, navigation, and timing that less dependent on any single ground
the system, gradually reducing the accu-
would use hundreds of satellites in station or location.54 Ground stations
racy, coverage, and time availability of
LEO.51 Proliferated systems can provide can also be hardened to withstand ki-
the service.47
CLICK TO a greater degree of protection because netic and non-kinetic attacks on the
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
Distributed constellations can use dedi- they increase the number of satellites facilities themselves and the local in-
cated satellites that are smaller and less an adversary must successfully attack frastructure on which they depend.
SPACE DEFENSES DEFINED 12 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

Government
Space-Based
Tracking
Space Object
U.S. Space Force
Space Surveillance
Network (multiple
distributed sites)
Missile
Warning Radars
Joint Space
International
Operations
Partner Data
Commercial Center
Optical Tracking
Commercial
RF Tracking
Orbit Outlook
Example Space Domain Awareness (SDA) Network.
through technical means,” and operated. More-
TECHNICAL DEFENSES “The truth . . .
and the military needs capa- over, if one’s SDA capa-
it is a beautiful
Exquisite Space Domain bilities that allow it to “make bilities can be commu-
and terrible
Awareness a more confident call in a nicated publicly and some of
thing, and
faster manner.”56 the data can be released
The credibility and effectiveness of should therefore
when necessary, the mere ex-
many other types of defenses are en- Improved SDA can cut
be treated with istence of these capabilities
abled or enhanced by the ability to through the “fog of war” by
great caution.” can be a deterrent in some
quickly detect, characterize, and attri- providing an information and
situations by providing great-
bute attacks against space systems. decisionmaking advantage ALBUS DUMBLEDORE,
er attribution and public visi-
HARRY POTTER AND THE
Space domain awareness (SDA) in- over adversaries. For exam-
SORCERER’S STONE bility into adversary space
cludes identifying and tracking space ple, being able to track, iden-
activities.
objects, predicting where objects will be tify, and characterize objects in space is
in the future, monitoring the space envi- critical to identifying that an attack is in SDA systems include terrestrial-based
ronment and space weather, and char- progress and mounting an effective de- optical, infrared, and radar systems as
acterizing the capabilities of space ob- fense against threats such as co-orbital well as space-based sensors, such as
jects and how they are being used.55 kinetic ASAT weapons and space-based the U.S. military’s Geosynchronous
Exquisite SDA—information that is more electronic attack. Artificial intelligence Space Situational Awareness Program
timely, precise, and comprehensive (AI) can further enhance SDA capabili- (GSSAP) inspector satellites.57 Many na-
than what is publicly available—can ties by tracking patterns of life in space tions have SDA systems with various
help distinguish between accidental to better identify abnormal or nefarious levels of capability, and an increasing
and intentional actions in space. As U.S. behaviors that human analysts may number of private companies (and ama-
Space Force Major General Leah Lauder- miss. AI can also potentially be used to teur space trackers) are developing
CLICK TO back noted in public comments, “it’s better understand satellite capabilities, their own space surveillance systems,
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
difficult trying to characterize what hap- including covert capabilities, based on making the space environment more
pens thousands of miles away, all how these satellites are maneuvered transparent to all users.58
SPACE DEFENSES DEFINED 13 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

Radio frequency mapping of the Galapagos Islands in 2020.
hawkeye360
the cause was “almost always self-jam- liberate attacks from HPM and
Space-Based Radio
ming.”59 Commercial firms can play a electromagnetic pulse weapons. The
Frequency Mapping
role in RF mapping and determining the effects can include data corruption on
Space-based RF mapping is the ability
sources of interference. For example, memory chips, processor resets, and
to monitor and analyze the RF environ-
the private firm HawkEye360 is launch-
short circuits that permanently dam-
ment that affects space systems both in
ing a constellation of satellites that can
age components. One of the first in-
space and on Earth. Similar to exquisite
detect and geolocate RF transmis-
stances of an on-orbit failure due to
SDA, space-based RF mapping provides
sions.60 A key aspect of RF mapping is
these effects was the Telstar-1 satellite
space operators with a more complete
timeliness—the faster a threat can be
in 1962, which succumbed to the inten-
picture of the space environment, the
detected, identified, and characterized,
sified radiation environment in space
ability to quickly distinguish between
the more valuable this information be-
intentional and unintentional interfer- created by a U.S. high-altitude nuclear
comes as an enabler for other defensive
ence, and the ability to detect and geo- test.61 Surrounding the electronics and
capabilities. And like exquisite SDA data,
locate electronic attacks. RF mapping cables within a satellite with shielding
the ability to release information pub-
can allow operators to better character- and adding surge protection devices
licly or privately on the sources, loca-
ize jamming and spoofing attacks from tions, and nature of jamming incidents throughout the RF and electrical sys-
Earth or from other satellites so that can act as a deterrent to adversaries tem can protect against the effects of
other defenses can be more effectively
that would prefer to operate covertly or radiation, high-powered microwave at-
employed.
in a more ambiguous or less attribut- tacks, and electromagnetic pulse
able manner. weapons. However, these protections
Without timely data, it can be difficult to
add weight and complexity to satel-
distinguish between accidental and in-
Electromagnetic Shielding
tentional RF interference. For example, lites, and the effectiveness of shielding
CLICK TO the U.S. military experienced an aver- Satellite components can be vulnera- depends on precise manufacturing
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS age of 23 satellite communications jam- ble to the effects of background radia- processes that must be carefully and
ming incidents per month in 2015, and tion in the space environment and de- laboriously tested and validated.
SPACE DEFENSES DEFINED 14 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

data packet than the error correction
Filtering and Shuttering
algorithm can accommodate, the data
Filters and shutters can be
packet becomes corrupted. Interleaving
used on remote sensing satellites to pro- reduces this risk by shuffling the order
tect sensors from laser dazzling and of the data before it is transmitted and
blinding. Filters can protect sensors by then reassembling it in proper order
only allowing light of certain wave- when it is received but before the error
correction algorithm is applied. This re-
duces the chance that a burst of inter-
ference will create multiple errors with-
in a single data packet.65
While these techniques can make com-
munications more difficult to jam, they
do not make them completely jam-
proof. For example, a high-powered
wideband jammer can interfere with
signals across a larger portion of the
Shuttering against lasing attack.
spectrum used for frequency hopping,
which increases the odds that some of
lengths to reach the sensors. Filters are it difficult for a jammer to match the fre- the frequencies in the hopping pattern
not very effective against lasers operat- quency of transmission. By spreading will be jammed, especially if the jam-
ing at the same wavelengths of light the the signal across a larger piece of spec- mer is near the receiver. Interleaving
sensors are designed to detect because a trum, the signal also has “processing also adds latency in communications
filter that blocks these wavelengths gain” that allows it to effectively boost because it takes longer for the shuffled
would also block the sensor from its in- the signal-to-noise ratio and better with- data to be reassembled into the original
tended mission. A shutter acts by quickly stand jamming.64 The power level of a data packets on the receiving end.
blocking or diverting all light to a sensor spread spectrum signal can also be low-
Antenna Nulling and
once an anomaly is detected or a thresh- er, making it harder for an adversary to
old is reached, which can limit damage detect or intercept without knowing the Adaptive Filtering
but also temporarily interrupts the col- precise hopping pattern.
Satellites can be designed
lection of data.62 Filters and shutters add
with antennas that “null”
Interleaving is the process of dividing
weight and complexity to satellite de-
or minimize signals from a particular
and mixing the bits of data being trans-
signs and may require a detailed under-
geographic region on the surface of the
mitted in a noncontiguous manner. Be-
standing of the technical capabilities of Earth or locations in space where jam-
cause RF interference tends to occur in
adversary counterspace weapons. ming is detected.66 Nulling is useful
bursts, errors often occur in ad-
when jamming is from a limited number
Jam-Resistant Waveforms jacent bits of data in transmis-
of detectable locations, but one of the
sion. If more bit errors occur in a
The way data is encoded for transmis- downsides is that it can also block trans-
sion on a radio wave (i.e., the waveform)
ORIGINAL MESSAGE:
is a key factor in how difficult that trans-
A A A A B B B B C C C C D DD D E E E E F F F F G GG G
mission is to jam or spoof. Different types
of waveforms can be used to improve the INTERLEAVED MESSAGE:
resistance of communications systems
A B C D E F G A B CD E F G A B C D E F G A B C D E F G
to jamming and spoofing, such as using
INTERLEAVED MESSAGE WITH BURST ERROR:
frequency hopping spread spectrum
(FHSS) and interleaving.63 FHSS involves A B C D E F G A B CD E F G A B C D E F G A B C D E F G
CLICK TO rapidly changing the transmission fre-
FLY BACK TO RECIEVED MESSAGE AFTER DEINTERLEAVING:
THE CONTENTS
quency using a pseudorandom pattern.
A B C D E F G A B CD E F G A B C D E F G A B C D E F G
This protects against jamming by making
SPACE DEFENSES DEFINED 15 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

missions from friendly users that fall A risk with encryption is that the encryp- orbit; and the weather and other poten-
within the nulled area. If a jammer is tion keys could be compromised through tial range safety hazards that can delay
sufficiently close to friendly forces, the the loss of sensitive hardware or soft- launch plans. Air-launched systems can
nulling antenna may not be able to ware. The systems therefore need to be help broaden the range of launch win-
block the jammer without also blocking capable of being rapidly and securely re- dows available and potentially fly
legitimate users. keyed. An additional risk is that a previ- around weather or other range obstruc-
ously unknown flaw in the encryption tions, but the time required to integrate
Adaptive filtering, in contrast, is used to
algorithm could be exploited by an ad- a satellite with a launch vehicle and pre-
block specific frequency bands regard-
versary. Quantum computing, for exam- pare the vehicle for launch are likely to
less of where these transmissions origi-
ple, could pose a risk to many existing remain limiting factors. Moreover, satel-
nate. Adaptive filtering is useful when
encryption methods because the higher lites and ground station components
jamming is consistently within a particu-
processing speed of these systems could procured for rapid deployment will be-
lar range of frequencies because these
allow for a brute-force attack that cracks come technologically obsolete over
frequencies can be filtered out of the sig-
the encryption key, leading researchers time and will need to be replaced peri-
nal received on the satellite while trans-
to push for the development of quan- odically even if they are never used.
missions can continue around them.
tum-proof encryption.67
However, a wideband jammer could in-
Reconstitution
terfere with a large enough portion of the
OPERATIONAL
Reconstitution can be used to quickly
spectrum being used that filtering out
DEFENSES replace existing space capabilities by
the jammed frequencies would degrade
launching more satellites or bringing
overall system performance.
Rapid Deployment
online more ground stations “to restore
Encryption and Air-Gapped Rapid deployment is a form of protec- functionality to an acceptable level for a
Systems tion that involves the speedy launch of particular mission, operation, or contin-
a new or expanded space capability gency after severe degradation.”68 Re-
While the encryption of
when needed. Keeping a capability on placement satellites either of a different
data transmissions for the
the ground until needed can protect design or copies of the operational sat-
command and control of
the system from pre-emptive attack ellites on orbit can be built in advance
national security space sys-
and limit an adversary’s knowledge of and stored on the ground in a clean
tems is standard practice, this is not
the system and ability to factor it into room or other controlled environment
always the case for commercial opera-
strategic planning. Such a system to be ready for launch when needed.
tors and international partners. The RF
would need to be developed, tested, Similarly, mobile ground stations can be
transmissions to and from satellites
and procured well in advance of need deployed or existing ground stations
are inherently exposed and need
so that the satellites and necessary can be brought online or repurposed to
strong encryption as well as some of
ground systems are ready for launch replace sites that have been damaged
the jam resistance techniques dis-
and initial operations. Space operators or destroyed. These actions would al-
cussed previously. The ground systems
would also need sufficient training and low the military to reconstitute space
used to process and disseminate data
simulations to understand how to op- capabilities that have been degraded or
on other networks can also be a vector
erate the system and take advantage of destroyed, and it is one of the approach-
for cyberattacks. Air-gapped systems
the capabilities it provides. es to space defense specifically
that are physically separated from the
“Time will mentioned in the 2018 National
public internet can make attempts to The speed at which a new satel-
not slow Defense Strategy.69
infiltrate a system much more difficult lite can be launched is limited
down when
for an adversary without insider help. by several factors, including the Many of the limitations for how
something
However, it is not always possible to availability of a suitable launch quickly a satellite can be
completely air-gap some space sys- vehicle; the time required to in- unpleasant launched discussed in the rapid
tems because the data they produce tegrate the satellite with the lies ahead.” deployment option would ap-
may be intended for public consump- launch vehicle; the time needed ply to reconstitution as well,
HARRY POTTER,
CLICK TO tion, such as data from weather satel- to prepare the vehicle for namely the availability and in-
FLY BACK TO HARRY POTTER
THE CONTENTS
lites or satellites that are intended for launch; the availability of a AND THE GOBLET tegration with a suitable launch
OF FIRE
commercial use. launch window to the desired vehicle and the weather, range,
SPACE DEFENSES DEFINED 16 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

and launch window constraints of the head so that it cannot easily find a satel- reflected radar, optical, and infrared en-
launch. However, speed may not be a lite once it has maneuvered. ergy to make themselves more difficult
major factor in reconstitution because to detect and track. For example, aca-
Maneuvering a satellite quickly comes
an adversary could attack the replace- demic research has shown that routine
at the price of disrupting its current op-
ment satellites or ground stations as spacecraft maneuvers can be optimized
erations and using propellant reserves
long as it retains its counterspace capa- to avoid detection by known sensors.73
to maneuver out of position and then
bilities. This could force the military to Adding stealthy characteristics to satel-
back into a useful orbit. The amount of
delay launching reconstitution satel- lites requires design trade-offs in terms
propellant required for a maneuver in-
lites until it is confident that an adver- of size, weight, and power, and it impos-
creases significantly with the mass of
sary’s counterspace capabilities have es some operational limitations on how
the satellite and the speed of maneuver
been sufficiently degraded, which may the satellite can be used. And like stealthy
required. Maneuver can only be done a
not be until near the end of major com- platforms in other domains, no satellite
limited number of times, depending on
bat operations. Reconstitution systems can be perfectly stealthy all of the time,
the propellant available, and could ulti-
would need to be tested and refreshed in all parts of the spectrum, and from all
mately reduce the useful lifetime of the
periodically as they age and become angles. It can also be difficult to know if a
satellite if the propellant needed for
technologically obsolete regardless of satellite has been discovered if others are
routine station keeping is expended
whether they are launched. using passive sensors to track the satel-
prematurely.71 Guided ASAT warheads
lite, such as optical telescopes.
have a significant maneuver advantage
Maneuver
because they are smaller, can accelerate Deception and Decoys
Satellite maneuver is an operational
faster using less propellant, and can af-
tactic that can be used by satellites fit- Deception can be used to con-
ford to expend all their propellant since
ted with chemical thrusters to avoid ki- ceal or mislead others on the
they are by definition expendable.72
netic and some directed energy ASAT “location, capability, opera-
weapons. For unguided projectiles, a Stealth tional status, mission type, and/or ro-
satellite can be commanded to move bustness” of a satellite.74 Public mes-
Space systems can be oper-
out of their trajectory to avoid impact. If saging, such as launch announcements,
ated and designed in ways
the threat is a guided projectile, like can limit information or actively spread
that make them difficult to
most direct-ascent ASAT and co-orbital disinformation about the capabilities of
ASAT weapons, maneuver becomes detect and track. Similar to platforms in a satellite, and satellites can be operat-
more difficult and is only likely to be ef- other domains, stealthy satellites can ed in ways that conceal some of their
fective if the satellite can move beyond use a smaller size, radar-absorbing coat- capabilities. Another form of deception
the view of the onboard sensors on the ings, radar-deflecting shapes, radar jam- could be changing the capabilities or
guided warhead.70 Maneuver also de- ming and spoofing, unexpected or opti- payloads on satellites while in orbit.
mized maneuvers, and careful control of Satellites with swappable payload mod-
pends on having near-real-time and
ules could have on-orbit servicing vehi-
continuous tracking data for incoming
cles that periodically move payloads
warheads. Thus, maneuver is best em-
from one satellite to another, further
ployed in combination with oth-
complicating the targeting calculus for
er active defenses that target the
an adversary because they may not be
sensors guiding an ASAT war-
sure which type of payload is currently
on which satellite.
ASAT Warhead
Satellites can also use tactical decoys
to confuse the sensors on ASAT weap-
ons and SDA systems. A satellite decoy
can consist of an inflatable device de-
signed to mimic the size and radar sig-
CLICK TO nature of a satellite, and multiple de-
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
coys can be stored on the satellite for
Satellite maneuvers out a warhead’s field of view.
deployment when needed. Electro-
17 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG
SPACE DEFENSES DEFINED

magnetic decoys can also be used in including the use of inflatable tanks quirements to satellites, com-
space that mimic the RF signature of a during the Cold War to make armored peting for resources with their
satellite, similar to aircraft that use air- units appear larger to an adversary.76 mission payloads. An off-
borne decoys, such as the ADM-160 Decoys can be more effective when board jamming and spoofing
Miniature Air-launched Decoy (MALD).75 used in combination with other defens- system could be placed on
dedicated protective satellites that orbit
Decoys have been an important com- es, such as stealth, maneuver, and
near a satellite, roam among satellites
ponent of operations in other domains, electronic attack.
as needed, or position themselves stra-
tegically to protect multiple satellites at
once. A challenge for off-board systems
AACCTTIIVVEE DDEEFFEENNSSEESS
is that they may not be within the field
of view of the sensors on an incoming
ASAT warhead when and where they are
While passive defenses seek to protect space systems from threats needed. For both onboard and off-
by making them harder to target or better capable of withstand- board systems, their effective operation
ing attacks, active defenses target the threats themselves. As U.S. depends to a certain extent on an accu-
Space Force doctrine notes, active defenses are intended to “destroy, nul- rate characterization and understand-
lify, or reduce the effectiveness of threats holding friendly space capabili- ing of the technical capabilities of the
ties at risk. Although this may entail reactive operations after an adversary has initiat- radar and communication systems on
ed an attack, active defense also includes proactive efforts to seize the initiative once threats before an attack commences.
an attack is imminent.”77 Active defenses can be divided into two broad categories
Laser Dazzling or Blinding
based on where these defensive systems are based. Space-based defenses include
onboard systems that are integrated into the satellites they protect and off-board sys- Laser systems can be used
tems that are hosted on separate satellites. Off-board defenses can be used to provide to dazzle or blind the opti-
“zone defense” of multiple satellites or to act as defensive patrols that roam within cal or infrared sensors on
orbital regimes in response to threats. Terrestrial defenses are cross-domain systems an incoming ASAT weapon
based on Earth that target counterspace systems and the systems that support them in the terminal phase of
either on Earth or in space.78 flight. This is similar to the laser infra-
SPACE-BASED DEFENSES
Jamming and Spoofing
A jammer or spoofer can be used to disrupt sensors on an incoming kinetic ASAT
weapon so that it cannot steer itself effectively in the terminal phase of flight. When
used in conjunction with maneuver, this
could allow a satellite to effectively
“dodge” a kinetic attack. Similar systems
could also be used to de-
ceive SDA sensors by altering
the reflected radar signal to change the
location, velocity, and number of satel-
lites detected, much like digital radio fre-
quency memory (DRFM) jammers used
on many military aircraft today. A space-
based jammer can also be used to dis-
rupt an adversary’s ability to communi-
cate with an ASAT weapon.
CLICK TO
FLY BACK TO Bodyguard satellites jam the sensors on an incoming warhead while the target satellite ma-
THE CONTENTS
An onboard jamming and spoofing sys-
neuvers to safety.
tem would add weight and power re-
SPACE DEFENSES DEFINED 18 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

red countermeasures used on aircraft back to using a shoot-back system, par- against a salvo attack grows much faster
to defeat heat-seeking missiles.79 ticularly kinetic shoot-back, is that if it than the number of missiles in the sal-
Blinding an ASAT weapon’s guidance successfully strikes an incoming ASAT vo, meaning that the attacker has a
system and then maneuvering to a new warhead, it could leave orbital debris cost-imposing advantage at scale.82
position (if necessary) could allow a that affects the safe operation of other
satellite to effectively “dodge” a kinetic satellites in similar orbits. Physical Seizure
attack. It could also be used to dazzle
A space vehicle capable
A shoot-back system can either be locat-
or blind the optical sensors on inspec-
of docking with, manipu-
ed on the satellite it is intended to de-
tor satellites to prevent them from im-
lating, or maneuvering
fend or on a protective satellite in a sim-
aging a satellite that wants to keep its
other satellites or pieces
ilar orbit. An off-board shoot-back
capabilities concealed or to frustrate
of debris can be used to thwart space-
system could potentially protect many
adversary SDA efforts.
based attacks or mitigate the effects af-
satellites in a distributed “zone defense”
ter an attack has occurred. Such a sys-
Onboard laser systems would add approach. A variation on this would be a
tem could be used to physically seize a
weight and power requirements to sat- co-orbital ASAT weapon that, instead of
threatening satellite that is being used
ellites, which would compete for re- firing a projectile or directed energy
to attack or endanger other satellites or
sources with mission payloads. An off- weapon, uses the satellite itself as a
to capture a satellite that has been dis-
board lasing system could be installed warhead to strike a threat. An off-board
abled or hijacked for nefarious purpos-
on dedicated protective satellites, pro- shoot-back or co-orbital system would
es. Such a system could also be used to
vided these satellites are maneuvered be similar in some ways to a space-
collect and dispose of harmful orbital
within the field of view of the sensors of
based missile interceptor constellation,
debris resulting from an attack. A key
an incoming ASAT weapon when and
and one constellation could in theory be
limitation of a physical seizure system is
where they are needed. Like space-
used for both missile defense and space
that each satellite would be time- and
based jamming and spoofing defenses,
defense. A potential weakness in this
propellant-limited depending on the or-
the effective operation of a space-based
approach is that an adversary could
bit in which it is stored. A system stored
laser defense system depends on an ac-
launch a salvo of ASAT weapons or de-
in GEO, for example, would not be well
curate characterization and under-
coys to saturate defenses in a local area,
positioned to capture an object in LEO
standing of the technical capabilities of
creating a hole in the protective layer
because of the amount of propellant re-
threats, such as the wavelengths of light
that could then be exploited by other
to which adversary sensors are sensi-
ASAT weapons.81 The constellation size
tive. France has publicly indicated that
for an interceptor system to defend
it intends to field a self-defense laser
system to dazzle adversary satellites if
one of its satellites is threatened.80
Shoot-Back
Satellites can be equipped with systems
that either fire a physical projectile at an
incoming ASAT weapon or use a
high-powered laser or microwave sys-
tem to have physically destructive ef-
fects, such as overheating or causing
short circuits, on an incoming ASAT
weapon. The number of shots would be
limited by the number of physical pro-
jectiles that could be stored on the sat-
ellite or the power capacity of the satel-
CLICK TO lite to generate the large amounts of
FLY BACK TO Bodyguard satellites fire projectiles at an incoming warhead while the target satellite ma-
THE CONTENTS
energy needed for successive high-pow-
neuvers to safety.
ered laser or microwave bursts. A draw-
SPACE DEFENSES DEFINED 19 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

quired to maneuver into position. Phys- advanced capabilities, such as a ro- adversary space or counterspace sys-
ical seizure satellites may need to be botic arm, harpoon, deployable net, tems. As with other types of cyberat-
stored on Earth and deployed once they or other device. Several countries and tacks, attribution can be difficult to de-
are needed to a specific orbit to counter private companies are currently de- termine with certainty, the effectiveness
a specific threat. veloping and testing active debris re- of cyber weapons may not be known
moval systems that could, in theory, until they are used, and the weaknesses
While several commercial companies
be adapted for military uses.84 a cyber weapon exploits may become
are developing capabilities for on-or-
known and mitigated once it is used.
bit servicing, a distinguishing feature
TERRESTRIAL-BASED
of a military defensive capability is the
Jamming and Spoofing
ability to conduct remote proximity DEFENSES
Terrestrial systems can also be used to
and docking operations with an unco-
Cyberattacks jam or spoof uplink communications to
operative or uncontrolled space ob-
counterspace weapons in space. If the
ject. For example, the Northrop Grum- Many forms of counterspace weapons
system is dependent on ground com-
man Mission Extension Vehicle (MEV) rely on terrestrial systems for command
mands for its operations, this could
on-orbit serving satellites can attach and control or for targeting information
prevent an adversary from sending
themselves to a cooperative host sat- derived from SDA networks. These ter-
commands to the weapon. However,
ellite. They use their propulsion sys- restrial systems and the data networks
for jamming or spoofing of the uplink
tems to maneuver the host satellite to that connect them can be targeted us-
to be effective, the jammer or spoofer
a new orbit and take over station ing cyberattacks to degrade adversary
needs to be within the field of view of
keeping—maintaining position in a space battle management systems. Cy-
the antenna on the space system that
desired orbit—for the remainder of berattacks on ground control systems
receives the uplink. This form of de-
the satellite’s life.83 Docking with an can include denial of service attacks;
fense may not be effective if the adver-
uncooperative satellite—either with- infiltration of systems for intelligence,
sary counterspace system can carry
out the operator’s consent or where data corruption, and sabotage; or sei-
out its mission autonomously or if it
control has been lost—is more diffi- zure of command and control. These
has alternative means of communica-
cult because the satellite could make attacks can be used to achieve effects
tions, such as using other satellites as
unexpected movements, may be tum- such as disrupting communications be-
communications relays.
bling out of control, or may react to tween counterspace forces and higher
the docking in unexpected ways if its echelons of command; preventing com-
Direct-Ascent ASAT
automatic control system remains en- mands from being sent to ASAT weap-
gaged. Docking with a satellite under ons in space; covertly degrading or cor- Direct-ascent ASAT weapons can be
these conditions may require more rupting SDA data; and taking control of used in a defensive counterspace role
MICROSAT-R
ASAT
at highest
altitiude
INDIA
BAY OF BENGAL
CLICK TO
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
Indian direct-ascent ASAT test in .
SPACE DEFENSES DEFINED 20 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

to neutralize threatening objects in
space. For example, if a satellite begins
maneuvering in a dangerous or erratic
manner or begins interfering with criti-
cal military space systems, a direct-as-
cent ASAT weapon could be used to
physically destroy the threatening sat-
ellite before, during, or after an attack.
However, this would cre-
ate orbital debris which
itself could pose a threat
to other space systems.
Moreover, this could be
viewed by others as an of-
fensive and escalatory act
if the information justifying this action
is not publicly available and credible.
Air-, Sea-, and Land-Based Kinetic
Attacks
Kinetic attacks can be launched against
adversary space and counterspace in-
frastructure in other domains to pre-
vent attacks in space and to disable the
terrestrial sites from which counter-
space attacks are controlled. Targets
for terrestrial kinetic attacks could in-
clude command and control facilities,
missile and rocket launch sites, jam-
ming and spoofing sites, and SDA facil-
ities. It could also include attacks
against key supporting infrastructure
that space ground segment facilities
depend upon, such as power systems,
communications lines, and the indus-
trial base that supports space and
counterspace operations.
CLICK TO
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
SPACE DEFENSES DEFINED 21 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

DDEEFFEENNSSEE AAGGAAIINNSSTT TTHHEE CCHHAAPPTTEERR 44 DDAARRKKSS AARRTTSS IINN SSPPAACCEE
SPACE actions and capabilities that are suitable
for a particular situation. While the first
two questions of if and which are mainly
questions of strategy, the question of
how is more a matter of technology and
tactics. How to apply space defenses
against counterspace weapons depends
on many factors, including the type of
counterspace weapons being used and
DEFENSES
the objectives of both the attacker and
the defender—what they hope to achieve
or deny the other side.
This chapter explores a range of objec-
tives the attacker and defender each may
APPLIED
have in a conflict that begins or extends
into space and the suitability of different
types of space defenses in pursuing or
foiling these objectives. The focus in this
discussion is on the space objectives in a
conflict, which are a subset of the overall
objectives each side may have. Impor-
tantly, both the attacker and defender
Three fundamental questions arise dependencies are more critical than oth-
may have multiple objectives in space,
when determining how to apply ers. Space defenses could be extended to
and these objectives may evolve over the
space defenses in a conflict. The first non-U.S. government systems to help
course of a conflict. As objectives change,
question is if defenses should be em- reassure allies and commercial firms in a
the desirability of different types of space
ployed at all. Using defenses can expose crisis and deter threats. However, it could
defenses will also shift. This chapter clos-
capabilities, tactics, and thresholds for also lead to the United States being
es with a summary table showing the po-
employment that an adversary can use to drawn in to intervene in a situation that it
tential application of the types of space
its advantage in further engagements. In otherwise might want to avoid.
defense capabilities discussed in Chap-
cases of minor threats or attacks that are
A third key question is how space sys- ter 3 to the types of counterspace threats
reversible and have low consequences,
tems should be defended in terms of the discussed in Chapter 2.
the best response may be no response.
On the other hand, a lack of response may
set precedent, lead to unfavorable norms
for what is acceptable behavior, and con-
OOBBJJEECCTTIIVVEESS OOFF TTHHEE AATTTTAACCKKEERR IINN SSPPAACCEE
strain future decisions about whether a
response is warranted.
For the foreseeable future, conflict in space will ultimately be
A second question is which systems about achieving economic and political effects on the ground—
should be defended and the relative pri- just as it is in the air and maritime domains.85 But nations may
orities among them. The U.S. military de- make the decision to begin or extend a conflict into space for many reasons. For
CLICK TO pends on many commercial and allied the purposes of this discussion, the attacker is the actor that initiates the part of a
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
space systems as well as U.S. govern- conflict that extends to space. The objectives of an attacker in initiating conflict in
ment space systems, and some of these space can include, but are not limited to: inflicting economic harm, signaling re-
SPACE DEFENSES APPLIED 22 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

solve, disrupting sensor-to-shooter kill the forces and time required, and it with limited terrestrial infrastructure.
chains, disabling adversary defenses in could be riskier in terms of personnel For these reasons, as nations seek to
other domains, and permanently shift- losses, platform losses, and collateral project power over longer distances,
ing the balance of power in space. damage if its space capabilities are de- they may become increasingly reliant
While many other objectives are possi- graded. For signaling and deterrence, on space-based remote sensing and
ble and an attacker can have multiple an attacker may prefer to use forms of communications to close the sen-
objectives simultaneously, these five attack that are reversible and have low sor-to-shooter kill chain. If the intent of
represent a broad range of objectives potential for collateral damage in the attacker is to disrupt an adversary’s
that are possible and serve to illustrate space, such as electronic attacks, to kill chains, it may prefer methods of at-
how different forms of attack may be give the other side an incentive and tack, such as kinetic physical counter-
preferred depending on the attacker’s ability to deescalate. The method of at- space weapons, where it can reliably
objectives. tack would also need to be attributable determine if the attack was effective
because if the opponent does not know and whether the effects will be sus-
Attacks in space can be used to inflict
who is attacking its space systems, it tained throughout the conflict.
economic harm or to disrupt com-
may not be deterred or understand
merce for strategic purposes by inter- Attacks in space can also be used as a
what the attack is intended to signal.
fering with the space systems that penetration aid for offensive strikes in
commerce depends upon, such as GPS, During or at the outset of a conflict, a other domains. For example, attacks
weather satellites, and commercial sat- against an opponent’s missile warning
nation may use attacks in space to dis-
ellite communications systems. For ex- or missile tracking satellites could be
rupt the sensor-to-shooter kill chain of
ample, an attacker could use jamming used to degrade its missile defense ca-
its opponent, making it more difficult
of the civilian GPS signals to disrupt fi- pabilities and improve the odds that a
for an opponent to conduct offensive
nancial transactions, transportation missile attack succeeds.87 For this type
operations in other domains. The sen-
systems, and the many other commer- of objective, the attacker may prefer to
sor-to-shooter kill chain is the battle
cial activities that depend on GPS navi- use kinetic physical attacks or cyberat-
network that transports intelligence,
gation and timing services. While ter- tacks so that it can quickly determine if
targeting, and battle damage assess-
restrial and airborne jammers can only its efforts were effective at disabling its
ment information from sensors in vari-
affect the local region in which they opponent’s defenses before it launch-
ous domains to nodes in the network
operate, a space-based GPS jammer es offensive attacks in other domains.
that can process and analyze this infor-
could affect much broader areas far be-
mation. This data is then used to make
In a more extreme scenario, an attack-
yond an attacker’s terrestrial reach. If
decisions and communicate those de-
er’s objectives may include perma-
the intent is to inflict broad economic
cisions to platforms and personnel that
nently altering the balance of power in
harm, the attacker may prefer to use
can direct fires accordingly.86 Modern
space in its favor. This objective differs
forms of attack where attribution is
battle networks are increasingly com- from the others previously described
more difficult to limit diplomatic back-
plex, and many nodes and communica- because the intent of the attacks is to
lash, such as cyberattacks against
tion links in the kill chain can run have permanent disabling effects on
space systems.
through or be dependent on space— the opponent’s space systems that ex-
A nation may also want to use attacks even if the sensor and shooter reside tend well beyond the current conflict.
in space—or the threat of attacks—to on the same platform. For example, the For example, this objective may in-
signal resolve and to deter an oppo- MQ-9 Reaper, a type of drone used ex- clude significantly degrading an oppo-
nent in a crisis. A limited and reversible tensively in the Iraq and Afghanistan nent’s space capabilities so that it can
attack in space or an ASAT test could be wars, uses GPS for navigation, satellite no longer support existing satellites or
used by an attacker to demonstrate communications for sending back vid- launch new satellites. It could include
that it is willing and able to extend con- eo and other intelligence collected in cyberattacks that cause permanent
flict into space. An attacker’s ability to real time, and control links through damage to satellites, large-scale kinet-
hold critical space systems at risk could satellites so that operators can issue ic physical attacks, or a nuclear deto-
affect the calculus of an opponent commands to the platform. Space is nation in space. The latter two exam-
CLICK TO about whether to intervene in a con- ideal for supporting kill chains that ples could leave some orbital regimes
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
flict on Earth. Intervention by an oppo- must extend over long distances, unusable for all nations—a “clear the
nent could be more costly in terms of across multiple regions, or into regions skies” approach.
SPACE DEFENSES APPLIED 23 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

fender may prefer space capabilities
that degrade gracefully, such as distrib-
OOBBJJEECCTTIIVVEESS OOFF TTHHEE
uted and diversified architectures, and
many types of passive technical defens-
es that make systems more resistant to
DDEEFFEENNDDEERR IINN SSPPAACCEE
attacks. The defender may want a re-
constitution capability to replace sys-
tems during a conflict even if the re-
The way one defends against an attack in space depends in part on
placements may also be lost. It may also
what the defender is trying to achieve or prevent. As in the case of
be desirable to have a rapid deployment
an attacker, a defender’s main concern in a conflict that begins or
capability to bring new capabilities on-
extends into space will likely remain rooted on the ground for the foreseeable fu-
line during the conflict that an adver-
ture. But a nation may have a variety of objectives when it comes to how it chooses
sary may not be expecting, to further
to defend its space capabilities. For the purposes of this discussion, the defender is
complicate its targeting calculus and
defined as the actor that is the target of a potential attack in space. The objectives
supplement systems that are being de-
of a defender can include but are not limited to: deterring conflict in space, buying
graded.
time for operations in other domains to succeed, defeating an attack and restoring
the status quo in space, and permanently degrading an adversary’s space and coun- The defender’s objective could also be
terspace capabilities. Many other variations or combinations of these objectives are to defeat an attack and quickly restore
possible, but these four represent a broad range of objectives that elucidate how space capabilities to full operations. For
different types of defenses may be preferred depending on what a defender hopes example, a defender could attempt to
to accomplish. seize the initiative once an attack ex-
tends into space by quickly degrading
One of the main objectives in building space defenses can be deterrence. An oppo-
the counterspace capabilities of the at-
nent may be deterred from extending a conflict into space if space systems are less
tacker to limit or halt any further at-
vulnerable and the opponent believes it is not likely to achieve its objectives through
tacks, potentially using offensive ac-
counterspace attacks. Improved defenses for some space systems could incentivize
tions for defensive purposes. In addition
an opponent to attack less protected systems in space or in other domains. An op-
to the defensive capabilities previously
ponent is likely to be deterred when the expected costs of a successful attack exceed
discussed that are preferred to buy time
the expected benefits. Space defenses can both raise the expected costs and reduce
in a conflict, a space counterattack
the expected benefits of beginning or extending conflict into space. But for space
could also require a mix of active de-
defenses to act as a deterrent, an opponent must believe that such defenses exist
fenses, such as non-kinetic space-based
and that they are effective—even if the opponent does not fully understand what
shoot-back systems and terrestrial ki-
they are or how effective they may be. Defenses that rely on secrecy and that cannot
netic attacks, to target an adversary’s
be revealed without compromising their operation, such as stealth or the rapid de-
counterspace weapons directly. Return-
ployment of previously undisclosed capabilities, are not likely to contribute effec- ing space systems to full operations
tively to deterrence. Some architectural defenses, such as distributed or proliferat- may also require a reconstitution capa-
ed constellations, raise the costs of attacking because many more satellites must be bility to replace systems that experi-
targeted, increasing the time and number of weapons required and the risks of col- enced permanent damage, but recon-
lateral damage and escalation. Diversified systems, many types of technical defens- stitution operations would likely not
es, demonstrated ability to reconstitute, and some active defenses can reduce an begin until the attacker’s counterspace
attacker’s expected benefits for different forms of attack by making their counter- capabilities are neutralized. Kinetic
space weapons less effective. space-based shoot-back systems may
not be desirable because orbital debris
Another objective for space defenses can be to buy time for operations in other do-
could make a return to the status quo in
mains to be effective in determining the outcome of a conflict. For this objective, the
space more difficult if not impossible.
defender will want to focus on limiting disruptions and degradation in space ser-
vices (i.e., space domain mission assurance) as long as possible and may be willing A more ambitious objective for a de-
CLICK TO to accept some losses if they occur gradually.88 The defender could use this time to fender is to permanently shift the bal-
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
mount offensive attacks in other domains, which could themselves be dependent ance of power in space, ensuring that
on space capabilities. If the objective is to buy time and weather an attack, the de- when a conflict subsides the aggressor
SPACE DEFENSES APPLIED 24 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

is no longer a threat. To do this, a de- threat on Earth or in space. For this ob-
fender would need to defeat an attack jective, the defender will likely place
once it has begun and then work to roll more emphasis on active defenses,
back and possibly eliminate the coun- technical defenses (e.g., exquisite SDA)
terspace capabilities of the attacker. that enable these defenses, and defens-
This objective may also include degrad- es that have permanent disabling ef-
ing the space capabilities of the attacker fects on an adversary’s counterspace
if these space capabilities could pose a capabilities.
MMAATTCCHHIINNGG DDEEFFEENNSSEESS TTOO TTHHRREEAATTSS
The best defense to use against an attack in space depends not just on the ob-
jectives of the attacker and defender but also on the specific types of weapons
being used. Jam-resistant waveforms, for example, can help protect against
electronic forms of attack but are of no value when defending against a direct-as-
cent ASAT weapon. Similarly, active defenses such as an on-orbit shoot-back system
can be effective against kinetic physical forms of attack but would not be useful
against an airborne lasing system.
Another complicating factor in space, which arises in the cyber domain and in the
use of remotely piloted aircraft, is that proportionality, including when certain de-
fensive measures are warranted, can be difficult to ascertain when human lives are
not directly at risk. Proportionality is highly dependent on the context of a situation,
and that context can be difficult to understand in a timely manner in a remote envi-
ronment such as space. At present, all military space systems are remotely operated
and an attack on a satellite does not risk the direct loss of human life, with few ex-
ceptions. But some of the defensive options available, particularly kinetic attacks
on terrestrial counterspace facilities, could put humans lives at risk. It is difficult to
weigh proportionality when the risks for one side involve loss of property or critical
infrastructure and the risks for the other side involve loss of life.
It can also be difficult to discern the intent of an attack in space from the effects
created. For example, a defender may not be able to tell if a lasing event that blind-
ed an imagery satellite was only intended to temporarily dazzle its sensors. And it
may not be clear if an attack against a satellite used for both nuclear and conven-
tional missions is a prelude to nuclear escalation. Policymakers therefore need a
range of defensive options available to provide decision space as a crisis evolves
rather than singular or formulaic solutions.
The following table is a crosswalk between the different types of defenses discussed
in Chapter 3 and the different categories of threats presented in Chapter 2. It pro-
vides a brief description of the desired effects from each type of defensive capability
(if it is used successfully) and indicates the categories of threats for which it is poten-
tially applicable. Importantly, a particular type of defense may only be applicable to
a subset of the threats possible within a given category. For example, filtering and
shuttering would help protect an imagery satellite against laser dazzling and
blinding, but it would not protect against other types of non-kinetic physical threats,
CLICK TO such as high-powered microwave weapons.
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
SPACE DEFENSES APPLIED 25 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

Kinetic Physical = / Non-Kinetic Physical = / Electronic = / Cyber =
TABLE 2: APPLICATION OF SPACE DEFENSES TO TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
POTENTIALLY
TYPES OF DEFENSES DESIRED EFFECTS
APPLICABLE TO:
CLICK TO
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
SPACE DEFENSES APPLIED 26 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG
SESNEFED
EVISSAP
LARUTCETIHCRA
Disaggregated
Dissuades attacks against certain space missions by separating them from other space missions.
Constellations
Increases the number of satellites that must be successfully attacked to achieve the same effects and
Distributed Constellations
makes the system less dependent on any one satellite.
Increases the number of satellites that must be successfully attacked to achieve the same effects and
Proliferated Constellations
provides extra capacity in case systems are degraded.
Reduces the incentive to attack space systems because missions are supported by systems in other orbital
Diversified Architectures
regimes/domains that can be used to compensate.
Redundant, Mobile, or
Makes space systems less vulnerable to attacks on any single ground site.
Hardened Ground Stations
LACINHCET
Exquisite Space Domain Improves the effectiveness of other defenses and potentially dissuades an adversary from attacking through
Awareness attribution and the potential for public disclosure.
Space-Based Radio Improves ability to detect, attribute, and respond to electronic and high-powered microwave attacks, poten-
Frequency Mapping tially dissuades an adversary from attacking through attribution and the potential for public disclosure.
Electromagnetic Shielding Hardens satellites against high-powered microwave and electromagnetic pulse weapons.
Filtering and Shuttering Protects against high-powered lasers that can blind or dazzle the sensors on satellites.
Jam-Resistant Waveforms Improves the resistance of radio frequency signals to jamming and spoofing.
Antenna Nulling and
Allows satellites to block jamming, spoofing, and other interference.
Adaptive Filtering
Encryption and Air-Gapped
Makes satellites and ground systems more resistant to cyberattacks and some forms of electronic spoofing.
Systems
LANOITAREPO
Protects a space system from pre-emptive attack by waiting to launch it until it is needed, limits an adver-
Rapid Deployment
sary’s knowledge and strategic planning.
Reconstitution Reduces the amount of time a system may be offline after an irreversible attack.
Maneuver Enables satellites to move out of the trajectory and sensor range of direct-ascent or co-orbital ASAT weapons.
Stealth Makes satellites difficult to detect and track for kinetic and non-kinetic forms of attack.
Deception and Decoys Conceals the location, capabilities, or status of satellites.
SESNEFED
EVITCA
DESAB-ECAPS
Disrupts the radar on an incoming ASAT weapon or on adversary SDA systems to prevent accurate targeting
Jamming and Spoofing
of space systems, can also disrupt downlink communications from adversary space systems.
Blinds the optical or infrared sensors on an incoming ASAT weapon or on SDA systems to prevent accurate
Laser Dazzling/Blinding
targeting of space systems.
Shoot-Back Fires a projectile or directed energy weapon to physically disable an incoming ASAT weapon.
Physical Seizure Physically grabs a threatening space object to disable or move it.
DESAB-LAIRTSERRET
Cyberattacks Targets the terrestrial systems and SDA networks that support counterspace weapons.
Jamming and Spoofing Disrupts adversary command and control of counterspace weapons.
Direct-Ascent ASAT Physically destroys a threatening space object.
Air, Sea, and Physically damages or destroys counterspace systems and support infrastructure on Earth.
Land Kinetic Attacks

DDEEFFEENNSSEE AAGGAAIINNSSTT TTHHEE CCHHAAPPTTEERR 55 DDAARRKKSS AARRTTSS IINN SSPPAACCEE
SCENARIOS FOR DEFENSIVE
COUNTERSPACE
OPERATIONS
The effectiveness of defenses in de- calate or deescalate the conflict given and nations involved are largely fictional
terring or defeating attacks in the scenario presented. and only intended to represent plausible
space depends on the context of scenarios in which conflict could begin or
The workshops were used to refine the
the situation and the operational con- extend to space.
description and framework of space de-
cepts used to employ them. To test the
fenses in Chapter 3, the concepts for em-
space defenses posited and gain further
ploying defenses in Chapter 4, and the
insight into how they could be applied
in crisis situations, the study team de-
scenarios themselves. The sections be- SSCCEENNAARRIIOO 11
low provide a description of the scenari-
veloped four hypothetical scenarios.
os, the questions asked of the partici-
The scenarios range from outright ag-
RRUUSSSSIIAANN IINNCCUURRSSIIOONN
pants, and some of the key findings from
gression in space to the perhaps more
the expert discussions that followed
likely yet uncertain scenarios with low IINNTTOO TTHHEE BBAALLTTIICCSS
each scenario. The scenarios are inten-
attribution or reversible effects.
tionally openended and designed to pro-
PART A:
The scenarios were presented to a voke discussion about how best to re-
group of space and national security ex- spond and whether certain defensive ESCALATING TENSIONS
perts in a series of workshops to under- capabilities would be useful as part of a
Amid renewed concerns about the
stand how policymakers might use response. They are set in the near future
North Atlantic Treaty Organiza-
space defenses in different situations. to allow for some changes in the world,
tion (NATO) moving to create per-
The workshops were conducted on a but not so far in the future as to allow
manent bases for the Enhanced For-
not-for-attribution basis. During the great leaps in technology. Scenarios 1
ward Presence (EFP) forces in the
workshops, participants were present- and 3 are divided into two parts, where
Baltics, Russian president Vladimir Pu-
ed with questions at the end of each the second part builds on the informa-
scenario or part of a scenario to assess tion provided in the first part. Otherwise, tin decides he must push back against
their interpretation of the events posit- the four scenarios are assumed to occur further NATO consolidation. Unlike in
CLICK TO ed and possible actions to defend independent of one another. While the the case of Crimea, Putin recognizes
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
against perceived attacks. Participants scenarios are designed to be realistic, the that the Baltic states are part of NATO
were also asked to assess options to es- specific events, locations, capabilities, and that all NATO states have a treaty
SCENARIOS FOR DEFENSIVE COUNTERSPACE OPERATIONS 27 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

obligation to defend them.
Yet Putin has been clear
about what is at stake if his efforts at
the “protection of Russian citizens” are
actively opposed by the West.
LATVIA
Russian cyber forces have engineered a
massive Facebook, Twitter, and Insta-
gram social media push to create an ac-
LITHUANIA
tive image of Russian citizens being per-
secuted and tortured in the southern
and eastern Baltics. Russian diplomats KALININGRAD
warn the Baltic states that these actions
must stop, or they will be forced to act.
Russian and Belarusian “citizen mili-
POLAND
tias” have begun to move into Baltic
towns in southern Lithuania and east-
ern Latvia. In response, Lithuania has =Areas of active Russian/Belarusian citizen militias
blocked Russian access to Kaliningrad,
something that is normally allowed un-
Map depicting hypothetical Lithuanian blockade by Russia and adversary citizen militias.
der Facilitated Transit Document (FTD)
provisions.
After claiming the Lithuanian blockade AEHF 5 and in a position where it inter- Questions for Participants:
is an act of aggression, Russia begins a mittently physically blocks the AEHF
cyberattack on the Lithuanian terrestri- crosslink to other satellites. This sig- • Is the Russian SATCOM jamming or
al telecommunications networks, effec- nificantly degrades the ability of AEHF 5 the positioning of the AM7 satellite to
tively bringing them down. Russia also to perform its missions because of the block AEHF crosslinks in this scenar-
jams all satellite communications (SAT- time it takes for the network ring io an act of aggression, a use of force,
COM) into the country, including all mil- among satellites to be reestablished or an armed attack?
itary and NATO communications other
each time it is disrupted. The impact to
• What are your diplomatic and informa-
than the protected Advanced Extremely
nuclear command and control is not
tional options (public and private), and
High Frequency (AEHF) SATCOM. The
publicly disclosed. U.S. DoD and intelli-
what are the pros and cons of each?
United States and NATO grow more
gence analysts conclude this was an
alarmed, and leaders call a formal meet-
intentional act, but the Russians claim • What are the pros and cons of differ-
ing of the North Atlantic Council.
they had no control of the satellite. ent responses in space?
As these discussions begin, the Russian ◊ Maneuver the AEHF 5 satellite un-
To respond, U.S. controllers could repo-
Federal Communications Agency
der the guise of using an “abun-
sition AEHF 5 away from the Russian sat-
(Rossvyaz) announces the movement
dance of caution” to protect
ellite so that the crosslinks to other sat-
of one of its civilian communications
against a possible in-space colli-
ellites are no longer blocked, but leaders
satellites in GEO, Ekspress AM7, from its
sion, though this will break the
are concerned that this would affirm for
slot at 40°E to a new slot at 53°E, re-
nuclear command and control
the Russians (and others) that the nu-
placing Ekspress AM6.89 During transit,
link for several additional days.
clear command and control network is
Rossvyaz announces that it has lost
control of the satellite, which is now being disrupted. U.S. leadership is con- ◊ Coordinate with the AM7 satellite
continuing its eastward drift directly cerned that the Russian action is an im- manufacturer to surreptitiously
into the path of the United States’ AEHF plicit warning that the United States has gain control of the satellite in a
CLICK TO 5 satellite at 54°E. Rossvyaz is finally much to lose in space and in other do- collaboration between USSPACE-
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
able to stop the satellite’s drift, but by mains if it actively opposes Russia’s COM and U.S. Cyber Command
that time it is dangerously close to moves in the Baltics. (USCYBERCOM).
SCENARIOS FOR DEFENSIVE COUNTERSPACE OPERATIONS 28 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

◊ Inform Russia that its satellite is inactive MEO satellites. The United GPS accuracy will be affected for
now a hazard to navigation and States protests to the United Nations, many weeks.
that, if it cannot regain control, but Russia claims it must have been
◊ Try to jam the communication up-
the United States will hire a com- an internal propellant tank explosion
link to the Russian mines.
mercial on-orbit servicing vehicle on the old GPS satellite. The Russians
◊ Rapidly purchase and launch a
to relocate the satellite to a grave- point out that no object was reported
series of active debris removal
yard orbit. near the old GPS satellite in the offi-
satellites from a commercial
cially published U.S. satellite catalog.
◊ Jam Russian SATCOM across the
company and use them to re-
The Russian spacecraft had been re-
region, and request support from
move the space mines.
cently spotted by the U.S. Space Force,
USCYBERCOM to attack Russian
but it had not yet been identified and ◊ Destroy a Russian GLONASS satel-
local terrestrial networks.
thus was not catalogued. lite with a kinetic attack.
◊ Other options?
◊ Issue a demarche to Russia de-
USSPACECOM begins an intensive SDA
• What additional capabilities do you claring that the loss of any addi-
clearing exercise for all GPS satellites
wish you had? tional GPS satellites will be viewed
and finds what are believed to be Rus-
as an armed attack that will force
◊ Ability to maneuver while main- sian space mines located near many
the United States to respond in
taining cross links. other active GPS satellites, meaning
other domains.
they were either previously missed or
◊ Pre-developed cyber capability
were positioned in the last several ◊ Other options?
for uncooperative commanding of
weeks. USSPACECOM cannot be sure
a wide variety of commercial geo-
• What additional capabilities do you
how many GPS satellites are threat-
synchronous satellites.
wish you had?
ened because the mines are small and
◊ On-orbit availability of DoD-owned
come in and out of view periodically. ◊ Enhanced SDA observational and
servicing and seizure satellites.
U.S. leaders want to strongly oppose analytical capabilities that could
◊ Satellites with onboard self-de- Russian actions but require assurance have warned of Russian mines po-
fense capabilities (kinetic or from USSPACECOM that the GPS con- sitioning in MEO well before they
non-kinetic). stellation can be kept safe to avoid the were in place.
potential economic impact of a GPS
◊ Internationally acknowledged ◊ Ability to maneuver while main-
degradation.
right to remove hazards to naviga- taining PNT services.
tion in space.
◊ Larger reserves of propellant for
Questions for Participants:
◊ Other capabilities? additional maneuver capability
• Is the Russian detonation of a mine on the GPS satellites.
PART B:
and destruction of a decommis-
◊ More robust GPS receivers that
CONTINUED ESCALATION sioned GPS satellite in this scenario can use other signals to blunt the
an act of aggression, a use of force, or
impact of GPS losses.
The standoff in the Baltics has contin-
an armed attack? Would the answer
ued for months while Russia has ◊ A U.S. ground-based navigation
be different if it was an operational
amassed active-duty troops along the system capability as a GPS back-
GPS satellite?
Lithuanian border. Putin warns the up located in the continental
United States of dire consequences if • What are your diplomatic and infor- United States.
it or NATO interferes in the Baltics. A mational options (public and pri-
◊ GPS satellites with onboard
previously undetected Russian space vate), and what are the pros and cons
self-defense capabilities (kinetic
mine maneuvers next to an older de- of each?
or non-kinetic).
commissioned GPS satellite and deto-
• What are the pros and cons of differ- ◊ More on-orbit spares for GPS (cur-
nates, destroying the satellite and
ent responses in space? rent GPS constellation is ~30 satel-
generating debris in MEO. Only the
lites, but only 24 are needed to
CLICK TO United States and Russia can detect ◊ Begin a coordinated maneuver of
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS function properly).
what happened, since no other na- all GPS satellites away from the
tions or private firms actively monitor space mines but recognize that ◊ Others?
SCENARIOS FOR DEFENSIVE COUNTERSPACE OPERATIONS 29 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

FINDINGS
This scenario reinforced how essential
SDA data is for understanding attacks
SBIRS GEO-1 SupremeSAT-2
in the space domain. Experts recom-
mended expanding SDA capabilities by
tapping into commercial or internation-
al partner capabilities and fielding ad-
ditional space-based SDA systems. SupremeSAT-2 moving toward SBIRS GEO-1 over the Laccadive Sea just south of Sri Lanka in
They lamented that the United States’ scenario.
SDA capabilities significantly hampered
decisionmaking in this scenario, noting
ing with hazards in space would have often cause interference with
that a better understanding of the
helped facilitate a better understand- nearby satellites as they drift by.
space environment would have allowed
ing of Russian actions. Some partici- The Chinese blame the failures,
for more options and better flexibility
pants commented that communicat- without evidence, on a U.S. cyber intru-
in decisions. With both space challeng-
ing in advance clear thresholds for sion in its industrial base.
es presented in this scenario—the
escalation and a range of defensive
blocking of AEHF satellite crosslinks in In early April, China is set to begin its an-
actions that would be triggered could
GEO and the space mines next to GPS nual strategic forces exercise that in-
have prevented certain actions, such
satellites in MEO—participants noted cludes the launch of multiple missiles
as the space mine attack. Experts as-
that improved attribution capabilities and other strategic military systems
sessed that the starting point should
would have allowed decisionmakers to over the course of a three-week period.
be to establish international norms
better assess the intent and credibility Just before the exercise starts, Sri Lanka
and rules of the road for acceptable
of perceived Russian threats. announces it has lost control of Su-
behavior in space. Established norms
premeSat-2, which is from the same Chi-
Participants also emphasized that could act as tripwires that, if crossed,
nese manufacturers as the two other
clearer norms and processes for deal- would signal malicious intent.
failed satellites.
SupremeSAT-2 is rapidly drifting to the
west out of control. The U.S. Combined
SSCCEENNAARRIIOO 22
Space Operations Center (CSpOC) cal-
culates that it will pass close to SBIRS
GEO-1, a U.S. military missile warning
satellite, although the likelihood of col-
PPOOSSSSIIBBLLEE HHIIJJAACCKKEEDD SSAATTEELLLLIITTEE lision is very low. However, the
high-powered Ka band payload on-
board SupremeSat-2 will begin to inter-
The United States and its allies are increasingly concerned that more nations,
fere with the SBIRS communications
especially those in Asia, are turning to China as their supplier of choice for
payload as it drifts closer. The likely con-
space systems. In many cases, the Chinese have provided a complete turn-key
sequence is that SBIRS GEO-1 will be un-
system along with financing that is extremely attractive to less affluent nations. As a
able to conduct its mission reliably for
result, some 10 percent of all GEO satellites in operation are now Chinese made. In
up to a week as SupremeSAT-2 passes.
line with these trends, Sri Lanka recently replaced its first satellite, SupremeSAT-1,
This week happens to fall near the peak
with the Chinese-built SupremeSAT-2, a very high-powered C, Ku, and Ka- band
of the planned Chinese military exercise
communication satellite located at 87.5°E longitude.
in the region covered by SBIRS GEO-1.
In the last six months, two different Chinese-built satellites experienced uncon- The annual Chinese strategic forces ex-
trolled commanding events. Despite their best efforts, the satellite operators have ercise involves the launch of multiple
CLICK TO not been able to regain control of these satellites. Both were communication satel- missiles and other strategic military sys-
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
lites launched in the last five years, and both are now drifting relatively harmlessly tems the SBIRS satellite would normally
around the GEO belt. The communications payloads on the satellites are active and observe.
SCENARIOS FOR DEFENSIVE COUNTERSPACE OPERATIONS 30 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

USSTRATCOM requests support from MEO or LEO overlays. could have made communication easier
USSPACECOM to help mitigate the criti- between the involved nations and the
◊ Additional on-orbit spares for mis-
cal loss of missile warning and technical sile warning. United Nations.
intelligence capabilities during the Chi-
◊ Satellites with onboard self-defense The potential effects this scenario posed
nese exercise. These capabilities are
capabilities (kinetic or non-kinetic).
needed to monitor Chinese activities to on such a critical U.S. national security
ensure it is not threatening one of its ◊ Pre-developed cyber capability for system caused great concern. Partici-
neighbors and provide valuable intelli- uncooperative commanding of a pants called for more SBIRS satellites
gence on Chinese military capabilities. wide variety of commercial geosyn- on-orbit as backups and better cross-
chronous satellites. links between satellites so that the one
Questions for Participants: ◊ Satellites that have onboard capa- affected could be taken offline until the
bilities to more easily attribute and situation resolved itself. Participants also
• Is the movement and interference
respond to hostile acts. noted that if the United States had a pro-
caused by SupremeSAT-2 in this sce-
liferated LEO constellation for missile
◊ Others?
nario an act of aggression, a use of
warning, the loss of one satellite would
force, or an armed attack?
FINDINGS matter much less and the mission could
• What are your diplomatic and informa- Like Scenario 1, many participants want- continue somewhat unaffected.
tional options (public and private), and ed better information about the satellite
The workshop participants also re-
what are the pros and cons of each? anomaly through exquisite SDA. Specifi-
marked that an on-orbit servicing satel-
cally, participants wanted more on-orbit
• What are some response options along lite would have been greatly helpful in
SDA capabilities so that an inspector sat-
with their pros and cons? this scenario. If the United States had an
ellite could maneuver nearby and take a
◊ Maneuver the SBIRS satellite into an closer look to verify Chinese and Sri on-orbit servicing capability in GEO at
eastward drift to minimize the over- Lankan statements on the condition of the time, it could have offered Sri Lanka
lap time between the two systems the satellite. Also like Scenario 1, partici- assistance in maneuvering its satellite to
and limit the outage. pants noted the advantage of having a less-disruptive orbit until the problem
◊ Request that the Chinese assist Sri pre-established norms of behavior that could be addressed.
Lanka in regaining control of its
satellite.
SSCCEENNAARRIIOO 33
◊ Maneuver two other SBIRS satel-
lites into new positions to “pinch”
the hole between them to recover
coverage of most of the area that
will be affected. EESSCCAALLAATTIINNGG TTEENNSSIIOONNSS IINN
◊ Do nothing so as not to admit that
the interference has harmed missile
TTHHEE SSOOUUTTHH CCHHIINNAA SSEEAA
warning capabilities.
◊ Other options?
PART A: ECONOMIC COERCION
• What additional capabilities do you
wish you had? Just years after China declared its BeiDou navigation system fully operational, Bei-
Dou has now been adopted by dozens of neighboring Asian nations as their pre-
◊ Laser crosslinks or other backup
ferred navigation system, due in no small part to Chinese Belt and Road Initiative
communications channels for mis-
incentives. After years of high-profile U.S. sanctions on Chinese technology companies
sile warning capabilities to provide
and the repeated refusal of the U.S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to ap-
diverse communications options.
prove BeiDou use in the United States, the Chinese have reached a breaking point.
CLICK TO ◊ More distributed and proliferated
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
missile warning capabilities such as China declares that GPS navigation products are tools of the U.S. military and can no
commercially hosted payloads and longer be used within Chinese territory, including its disputed maritime and air space
SCENARIOS FOR DEFENSIVE COUNTERSPACE OPERATIONS 31 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

claims in the South China Sea. China Pacific (RIMPAC) exercise among U.S. and ◊ Begin emergency deployment of
convinces many of its Belt and Road cli- partner nations in the region, and both M-Code receivers to the most criti-
ents to follow suit and restrict the use of civilian and military air and maritime us- cal U.S. and allied ships, whether
GPS in their territory as well. Further- ers begin to feel the impacts immediate- commercial or military, to restore
more, China states that this mandate will ly. The U.S. Intelligence Community, us- freedom of navigation in the area.
be enforced by selective intermittent ing government and commercial assets,
◊ Direct the National Reconnaissance
jamming of U.S. GPS frequencies and sig- begins to map the locations of the jam-
Office (NRO) and National Geospa-
nals “at the times and places of our mers. Several images of jamming loca-
tial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) to
choosing.” International air and mari- tions appear in published think tank re-
prioritize radar imaging in the In-
time carriers not currently using BeiDou ports that expose what the Chinese are
do-PACOM region and develop a
are given six months to transition.
doing. Fearing that the United States
means to responsively locate mo-
may try to target the jammers under the
China and its client states in the region
bile lasers to alert commercial and
cover of the ongoing exercise, the Chi-
begin to locate GPS jammers around
government satellite imagers where
nese announce that any U.S. satellites
their borders and on natural and artifi-
they should not point.
collecting intelligence over Chinese terri-
cial islands in the South China Sea. The
tory will face possible engagement by ◊ Blind Chinese imagery satellites
Chinese jammers are burst mode jam-
mobile ground-based lasers “intended over U.S. territory.
mers, which routinely emit bursts of
to prevent illegal spying.” As Chinese sat-
noise into both the L1 and L2 bands to ◊ Jam BeiDou signals in the South
ellite blinding activities begin, several
prevent GPS receivers from maintaining China Sea.
U.S. commercial imagery satellite opera-
a continuous lock on the signals within
◊ Other options?
a large zone. tors report permanent damage to their
systems. Some U.S. classified satellite
• What additional capabilities do you
The countries involved and their dis- imagery systems temporarily cease oper-
wish you had?
tributed island geography effectively
ation in the region for fear of damage.
create a no-GPS-usage zone for anyone ◊ Multi-GNSS receivers to allow U.S.
using the GPS civilian signal (C/A Code) Questions for Participants: forces to use BeiDou and other sys-
within broad parts of the South China tems when GPS is not available.
Sea. Traditional P(Y) code and Selec- • Are the GPS jamming and laser
◊ Greater fielding of anti-jam anten-
tive Availability Anti-spoofing Module blinding attacks in this scenario acts
nae on U.S. platforms.
(SAASM) receivers are also impacted of aggression, uses of force, or armed
for military users who have not upgrad- attacks? ◊ Capability for greater anti-jam pow-
ed to M-code receivers.90 er in the GPS system.
• What are your diplomatic and informa-
◊ Ability to field long-endurance,
The United States and its allies protest tional options (public and private), and
high-altitude aircraft or blimps to
the Chinese action to the International what are the pros and cons of each?
provide backup signals in affected
Telecommunication Union (ITU), but the
ITU notes that the question of landing • What are the pros and cons of differ- regions.
ent responses in space?
rights for GPS signals has never been tak- ◊ Laser protection technologies that
en up or requested by the United States. ◊ Jam all satellite communications could be shared with U.S. commer-
Therefore, the GPS signal is not protect- between Chinese island outposts cial imagery providers and mandat-
ed, and sovereign nations can refuse to and the mainland and enlist the ed as a condition of U.S. govern-
allow the GPS signals to be received and Navy to sever undersea cables to ment imagery contracts.
used within their territory, just as the the islands as well.
◊ Ability to transparently task allied
United States has barred non-GPS GNSS
◊ Use maximum flex power capabili-
signals from being used in its territory.91 satellite imagery systems as easily
ties within the GPS system to boost
The ITU does not address the issue of as U.S. government and commer-
C/A and P(Y) signals by robbing
Chinese sovereignty over disputed is- cial assets.
power from the M-code signal, rec-
lands in the South China Sea.
◊ Ability to rapidly reconstitute imag-
CLICK TO ognizing that there will be an im-
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS ery satellites if they are blinded.
The first Chinese jamming campaign oc- pact to those who have upgraded
curs on the eve of the biennial Rim of the to M-code receivers. ◊ Others?
SCENARIOS FOR DEFENSIVE COUNTERSPACE OPERATIONS 32 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

previously unknown objects that seem U.S. GEO satellites for rapid execu-
PART B:
to have originated from the Earth- tion once possible crossing points
ESCALATING TENSIONS Moon L2 Lagrange point (where a Chi- for the reentering lunar satellites
nese lunar relay satellite had been po- are determined.
ON THE ROAD TO
sitioned since 2018) now accelerating
◊ Identify and jam the communica-
ARMED CONFLICT
toward the Earth. The final trajectory
tion links to the reentering Chi-
The United States responds to the Chi- and timing are uncertain, but it is clear nese lunar satellites.
nese actions in multiple domains, in- they will cross the GEO belt within two
cluding sanctions on shipping, SAT- days. The National Space Defense Cen- • What additional capabilities do you
COM jamming, and cyberattacks on ter calculates that many GEO objects wish you had?
Chinese outposts in the South China could be at risk, but it cannot yet tell ◊ Greater access to tactically pro-
Sea. The Chinese respond by similarly which ones. tected AEHF satellite communica-
jamming U.S. SATCOM capabilities, tions for all U.S. forces.
Questions for Participants:
both commercial and military, from the
◊ Extensive LEO communication ca-
mainland. The U.S. military’s Mobile
• Was the U.S. response posited at the pabilities which cannot be easily
User Objective System (MUOS) ul-
beginning of Part B proportional to jammed over the horizon, espe-
tra-high frequency service is down, as
the actions that occurred in Part A, cially for small tactical users con-
is the commercial Ku band, normally
and was it allowable under the Law strained to MUOS.
used to support drone operations.
Jamming of the Wideband Global SAT- of Armed Conflict? ◊ Proliferated constellations in diver-
COM (WGS) system severely limits its sified orbits to complicate Chinese
• Are the Chinese SATCOM jamming
capacity. U.S. and allied naval forces in jamming and other forms of attack.
and the movement of its lunar assets
the South China Sea that do not have in this scenario acts of aggression, ◊ More extensive deep space sur-
AEHF radios installed are now without uses of force, or armed attacks? veillance to track and catalog ob-
reliable or robust communication ser-
jects beyond GEO.
vices, severely constraining their oper- • What are your diplomatic and infor-
◊ Existing Civil Reserve Air Fleet
ations. U.S. commercial shipping is es- mational options (public and pri-
(CRAF)-like arrangements with
sentially sailing blind without vate), and what are the pros and cons
U.S. commercial SATCOM provid-
communication or GPS, which causes of each?
ers to rapidly shore up communi-
trade in the region to grind to a halt.
• What are the pros and cons of differ- cation capabilities in a crisis.
The United States begins to maneuver ent responses in space? ◊ Others?
two WGS satellites into better positions
◊ Free up bandwidth on AEHF for
to restore some SATCOM capacity in FINDINGS
more tactical use by naval forces
the region and works with the CSpOC
(at the expense of strategic AEHF While participants did not consider
to quietly arrange alternative commu-
users). GPS jamming alone an act of war,
nication systems using non-U.S. com-
many considered it a clear use of force
mercial or allied military satellites. The ◊ Provide guarantees to U.S. and al-
and a potential act of aggression as it
United States also initiates a campaign lied commercial SATCOM provid-
was used in the scenario. Some noted
of Geosynchronous Space Situational ers that they will be reimbursed
that jamming and spoofing are two of
Awareness Program (GSSAP) close in- for loss of satellite lifetime and
the most frequently used counter-
spections on Chinese GEO assets to sig- revenues if they can more quickly
space weapons and that, to protect
nal U.S. resolve. The Chinese begin to reposition their satellites and free
against it, the United States should ac-
intercept and board U.S. commercial up bandwidth for use in the area.
celerate the fielding of M-code GPS re-
ships, which the Chinese assert have
◊ Request support from USCYBER-
ceivers to make them harder to jam.
sailed into Chinese-claimed waters
COM to disable both mainland
Experts also noted that multi-GNSS
and are violating its prohibition on the
Chinese jammers and space sur-
receivers, or the ability to use other
use of GPS.
veillance sites to prevent accurate
CLICK TO PNT signals from constellations such
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS tracking of U.S. GEO satellites.
As tensions further escalate, U.S. space as Galileo, BeiDou, and GLONASS,
surveillance systems detect several ◊ Prepare maneuver plans for all would have been useful in this situa-
SCENARIOS FOR DEFENSIVE COUNTERSPACE OPERATIONS 33 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

tion because it would have made Chi- blinding Chinese imagery satellites, us- sian sword), are responsible for space-
na’s GPS jamming ineffective. ing the Navy to forcibly restore free- based jamming of the broadcasts.
dom of navigation in the South China
Some participants considered using Months later, the two Shamshir satel-
Sea, and retaliating with economic
active defensive operations in this sce- lites undergo a high-impulse maneuver,
sanctions against China for the disrup-
nario, including jamming of BeiDou putting them into a westward drift in
tion of commercial shipping.
within the region. Several felt that es- GEO toward the United States. The jam-
calating to widespread BeiDou jam- Participants emphasized the need for ming of Radio Farda ceases, but U.S. in-
ming operations beyond the region reconstitution capabilities to replace telligence does not see an immediate
could be sufficient to deter further Chi- lost or degraded ISR capabilities threat to any DoD or IC assets because it
nese action. However, a global BeiDou quickly, including more imagery judges that these satellites are limited
jamming operation would require sup- satellites, pseudo-satellites, or other to civilian SATCOM frequencies.
port from allies and partners as well as high-altitude ISR systems. They also
U.S. military and commercial sensors lat-
a robust PNT jamming capability. Oth- noted the need for more extensive
er determine that the two Shamshir sat-
er proportional responses suggested deep space surveillance to track and
ellites are nearing the orbital slot cur-
by participants included dazzling or catalog objects beyond GEO.
rently occupied by three U.S. DirecTV
satellites located at 99.2°W longitude.92
As the two Shamshir satellites come
within close proximity to the first DirecTV
SSCCEENNAARRIIOO 44
satellite, it begins to experience signifi-
cant interference. Over the course of the
next few days, DirecTV loses all contact
with the satellite. Telemetry streams in-
CCOOMMMMEERRCCIIAALL SSPPAACCEE dicate that the front-end low noise am-
plifier on the receiver side was highly sat-
urated (overloaded) as one of the
Shamshir satellites approached, and it
SSYYSSTTEEMM PPRROOTTEECCTTIIOONN
eventually burned out the amplifier.
Within a week, all three DirecTV satel-
Hostilities between the United States and Iran have once again been flaring lites in this orbital slot are non-opera-
up over Iran’s nuclear program. New, more onerous sanctions are taking tional. DirecTV maintains robust on-or-
their toll on the Iranian economy, and Iran has promised strong retaliation. bit spares, with a second set of 3
Iran is now a player in the space domain as well, and it succeeds in launching two satellites at 102.8°W, but the loss of
small satellites into GEO with the help of Russia and China. Iran claims these sat- their fleet at 99.2°W significantly im-
ellites are for experimental purposes. A close inspection by U.S. GSSAP inspector pacts DirecTV customers. As the Sham-
satellites reveals two large, high- shir satellites begin a second drift to-
Field of View ly directional antenna dishes on ward the 102.8°W orbital slot, Iran
100° W
the satellites, which seem more informs the United States that it will
consistent with a co-orbital jam- continue to attack U.S. commercial
ming capability. broadcast satellites unless the U.S.
sanctions are lifted. The Super Bowl is
In recent months U.S.
Uplink next week, and the loss of these last
Footprint broadcasts of Radio
three satellites will impact millions of
Shamshir-1 Farda, the Iranian branch of Ra-
North American customers.
dio Free Europe, has suffered
country-wide outages in Iran. Current intelligence indicates that the
USSPACECOM and the U.S. Intel- satellites are being controlled from a
CLICK TO ligence Community suspect that high-powered base station in Venezue-
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
the Iranian satellites, nicknamed la. The United States judges that it could
“Shamshir” (after a type of Per- likely jam the uplink, but this would re-
SCENARIOS FOR DEFENSIVE COUNTERSPACE OPERATIONS 34 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

quire jammers positioned very close to • What additional capabilities do you A common thread throughout all the
Venezuela. Aruba, part of the Kingdom wish you had? scenarios was the need for better SDA.
of the Netherlands, is the most likely po- Accurate, timely, and comprehensive
◊ More practical exercises and train-
tential basing option. The United States SDA is fundamental to providing deci-
ing with civilian and commercial
refuses to comply with Iran’s demands sionmakers with the information they
satellite operators to understand
to lift the sanctions and instead directs need to properly assess options. While
how to react more quickly in these
the military to develop options to stop ground-based SDA is integral, many ex-
types of scenarios.
the Iranian satellites from carrying out perts suggested further investments in
◊ Airborne or shipborne jamming
further attacks. space-based SDA systems. These
systems to allow more responsive
space-based systems could include
uplink jamming options.
Questions for Participants: on-orbit radars and inspector satellites
◊ On-orbit defensive satellites in su- that can maneuver to provide more in-
• Is the interference and damage persynchronous orbit to rapidly formation during a crisis. It was also
caused by the Shamshir satellites in reach any longitude in GEO. clear that without SDA for cislunar and
this scenario a hostile act, an act of
◊ Ground-based or co-orbital ASAT lunar space, U.S. decisionmakers
aggression, a use of force, or an
weapons capable of disabling sat- would be at a great disadvantage if ad-
armed attack?
ellites in GEO using HPM weapons. versary space operations extended be-
yond the typical Earth orbits.
• What are your diplomatic and informa- ◊ Others?
tional options (public and private), and
Norms, rules of the road, and well-com-
what are the pros and cons of each? FINDINGS
municated thresholds also emerged in
Since this aggressive action against a the discussions for each scenario. Par-
• What are some response options
along with their pros and cons? commercial company in space was rel- ticipants agreed that without widely ac-
atively unprecedented, participants cepted norms of behavior in space, the
◊ Request the Kingdom of the Neth-
discussed proportionality and how United States is in murky waters. While
erlands to allow the United States
deeply the U.S. military should be in- norms will likely be disregarded once a
to position a jammer on the island
volved in such a situation. Economic conflict begins, they are useful in pro-
of Aruba to jam the Shamshir up-
sanctions and other non-space re- viding indications and warnings and
link but recognize that it might
sponses were considered first, before
shaping the environment prior to con-
take weeks to receive permission.
moving to actions affecting the space
flict. Participants also noted that norms
◊ Base a jammer on a U.S. Navy ship domain. Again, it was emphasized by in other domains, such as approaching
in international waters off the experts that if established norms of be- the perimeter of a military base or a
coast of Venezuela to jam Iranian havior were in place, these actions may speedboat approaching a warship at
uplinks to its satellites. have been deterred or Iran would have sea, often do not translate well into the
more international pressure to rectify
◊ Request assistance from USCY- space domain. For example, it is widely
its actions.
BERCOM to disable the ground understood that using deadly force to
station in Venezuela. stop someone from breaching or at-
KEY TAKEAWAYS
tempting to breach the perimeter of a
◊ Request assistance from USSO-
Throughout the workshops, several dif- military base is an appropriate and jus-
COM to deploy a team to physical-
ferent operational concepts were con- tifiable use of military force. But it is not
ly sabotage the ground station in
sidered and discussed among experts widely accepted that similar capabili-
Venezuela.
on how best to protect U.S. assets from ties in space, such as a kinetic shoot-
◊ Assist DirectTV in tracking the
counterspace attacks. It was widely back system, can be used to stop anoth-
Shamshir satellites, and provide
agreed that no single defensive concept er nation’s satellite from closely
maneuver and antenna pointing
would be sufficient to protect against all approaching a military satellite. While
options that would prevent dam-
counterspace attacks. Therefore, the close approaches occur in the air do-
age but would also take the Di-
U.S. government needs multiple con- main, such as aircraft from one nation
recTV satellites out of service
CLICK TO cepts of operation and defensive capa- flying dangerously close to U.S. aircraft
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS while the actions are underway.
bilities to provide a wide range of op- operating in international airspace, a
◊ Other options? tions to decisionmakers in a crisis. key difference is that in the air domain
SCENARIOS FOR DEFENSIVE COUNTERSPACE OPERATIONS 35 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

both sides eventually must go back to tems. Investing in cyber capabilities
their respective bases. In space, a close and the flexibility of such counterspace
approach—including one that interferes attacks or defensive options would al-
with a satellite’s mission capabilities— low decisionmakers to have more at-
can be maintained continuously for tractive defensive options.
months or years.
In space, all objects are constantly in
motion, and therefore linear rules of
engagement, such as maintaining safe-
ty perimeters around critical assets,
are not practical. A simple keep-out
distance around satellites is not suffi-
cient because the threat another space
object poses depends on more than
just distance. Defenders must be con-
cerned about the change in velocity
(delta V) needed for one satellite to in-
tersect another, the ability of other sat-
ellites to maneuver, recent maneuvers,
and the capabilities of an approaching
satellite. Moreover, all of this is compli-
cated by imperfect, delayed, and inter-
mittent information on what is hap-
pening in the space domain.
It was commonly agreed in the work-
shops that a proportional response to
an attack in space may not be an action
in the space domain. This may cause or
aggravate tensions between USSPACE-
COM, USSTRATCOM, and other regional
combatant commands, depending on
which countries are involved in the
conflict. A key takeaway from the work-
shops was that it is important to use
such scenarios within DoD and among
allies to practice and determine how
the chain of command and responsibil-
ities for being the supported and sup-
porting command might shift during a
conflict.
Experts also agreed that more informa-
tion on or better options for cyberat-
tacks on and against space systems is
essential. Cyberattacks were often
viewed as a possible convenient and
CLICK TO proportional response, especially if the
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
cyberattacks could be directed against
the perpetrating adversary space sys-
SCENARIOS FOR DEFENSIVE COUNTERSPACE OPERATIONS 36 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

DDEEFFEENNSSEE AAGGAAIINNSSTT TTHHEE CCHHAAPPTTEERR 66 DDAARRKKSS AARRTTSS IINN SSPPAACCEE
CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
The United States maintains a of modernizing many of its key between satellites intended for different
“Numbing
distinct strategic advantage satellite constellations. The deci- missions or may not trust this distinc-
the pain
in space. While China and sions made over the coming tion. Disaggregation of strategic and tac-
for a
Russia have significant space ca- months and years about what tical missions may also make attacking a
while will
pabilities of their own, the main types of space architectures to tactical system more attractive because
make it
security challenge they pose in field and which defenses to incor- it reduces the risk of strategic escalation.
space is the wide array of counter- worse porate will have repercussions for
Technical types of passive defenses,
space weapons they continue to when you the life of these systems. As this
such as electromagnetic shielding,
develop, test, and proliferate. Rus- finally report demonstrates, a wide
jam-resistant waveforms, and antenna
sia and China are arguably making feel it.” range of active and passive de-
nulling, can make systems more diffi-
advances in counterspace weap- fenses are available to protect
cult to attack and can limit the degra-
ALBUS
ons faster than the United States is space systems and the ground in-
DUMBLEDORE, dation in capabilities that occurs
improving its defenses against HARRY POTTER frastructure they depend upon
during an attack. The main downside
AND THE
these threats. While the public dis- from different types of threats.
GOBLET OF for technical defenses is that they can
course about the threats to space FIRE add cost, weight, and complexity to
Space defenses can be organized
systems—not just from Russia and
systems. Space domain awareness,
into three categories of passive defenses
China but also from lesser powers such
particularly from space-based systems,
(architectural, technical, and operation-
as North Korea and Iran—has become
stands out as particularly important
al) and two categories of active defenses
more prominent in recent years, the lack
because it is helpful across a wide vari-
(space-based and terrestrial-based).
of a concurrent discussion about how to
ety of scenarios and is a key enabler
Among the architectural passive defens-
defend space systems against these
that makes many other types of space
es explored in this study, one of the key
threats has left some to incorrectly con- defenses more effective. The need to
takeaways is that distributed, diversified,
clude that space is not defendable. improve space domain awareness ca-
and proliferated constellations can all be
pabilities was a consistent theme
Given the myriad of defensive options used in various combinations to compli-
throughout the workshops conducted
available, the question facing policy- cate the targeting calculus of an adver-
as part of this study.
makers is not whether space is defend- sary and reduce the benefits of attacking
able but rather which defenses the mili- any single satellite. Disaggregating space Operational passive defenses, such as
tary should be investing in and how missions to separate platforms may re- satellite maneuver, stealth, deception,
CLICK TO they should be employed. This conver- duce the risks of miscalculation and in- and decoys, can be used to make satel-
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
sation is especially important now be- advertent escalation in a conflict, but an lites difficult to find, track, and target.
cause the U.S. military is in the process adversary may not be able to distinguish Rapid deployment can be used to
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 37 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

launch new capabilities an adversary tainty about whether such attacks A broad conclusion from this study is
may not be expecting once a conflict be- would be feasible and effective in a cri- that the character of space warfare is
gins, and reconstitution can be used to sis. Terrestrial-based kinetic forms of evolving. This evolution is being driven
replace systems that are damaged or attack to disable an adversary’s coun- by how the major military powers view
destroyed. However, maneuver is not terspace weapons, such as a direct-as- and use the space domain—particular-
likely to be a successful defense on its cent ASAT attack in space or firing cruise ly whether it is primarily an informa-
own because ASAT warheads have an missiles at counterspace ground sites, tion domain or a physical domain. The
inherent maneuver advantage over tended to be viewed as more escalatory information domain school of thought
large satellites, and reconstitution ca- options that would likely be reserved emphasizes the use of space for remote
pabilities may not be useful in a conflict until armed conflict was already under- sensing and communications. It is an
until an adversary’s counterspace capa- way on the ground. The United States enabler for forces in the other domains
bilities are neutralized. and its allies and partners have a strong and a key component of battle net-
incentive to avoid using kinetic attacks works and the sensor-to-shooter kill
Space-based active defenses protect
in space that are likely to produce orbit- chain. This school of thought has dom-
space systems by disrupting or destroy-
al debris, even if such defenses may be inated the planning for conflict that
ing an adversary’s counterspace weap-
warranted. could begin or extend into space for
ons, effectively raising the costs of at-
nearly six decades.
tacking space systems. Non-kinetic
The workshops and hypothetical scenar-
active defenses can be deployed in In contrast, the physical domain school
ios for conflict in space also highlighted
space to jam or spoof adversary radars of thought places relatively more em-
many ambiguities that exist in space. As
systems, to blind optical or infrared sen- phasis on the physical components of
a physically distant and inhospitable en-
sors, or to create physically damaging operations in space, including space
vironment, it can be difficult to monitor
effects on ASAT weapons using directed launch, the application of force in space
and understand adversary capabilities
energy systems. A kinetic shoot-back or from space, and the use of space for
and intentions in the space domain, sim-
system can use projectiles, guided war- transportation, logistics, and other
ilar to the difficulties encountered in un-
heads, or small satellites to physically physical support functions. While some
dersea operations. Dual-use space sys-
impact a threat in space. These kinetic of these more physically focused mili-
tems that can be used for both peaceful
and non-kinetic systems can be de- tary space missions are still in their in-
and military purposes and the lack of
ployed on the satellites they protect or fancy, they are likely to become increas-
widely accepted norms of behavior in
on separate guardian satellites that or- ingly prominent in the coming years due
space further compound this problem of
bit nearby or roam among satellites, to reductions in the cost of launch and
understanding actions and intents.
creating a zone defense. The workshops the proliferation of counterspace weap-
These factors combine to make it diffi-
and scenarios highlighted the value of ons and space defenses.
cult to determine proportionality of a re-
having a satellite that can physically
sponse, including whether certain defen-
The challenge for space strategists is to
seize objects in space to move or dis-
sive actions are warranted. Thresholds anticipate how this gradual shift from
able them. This could be particularly
for triggering defensive actions or offen- space being more focused on informa-
useful in situations where there is ambi-
sive escalation may appear fluid or con- tion operations to physical
guity about a threatening object’s real
fusing to an opponent because these operations will proceed. The “You sort
status and capabilities or where deci-
thresholds can be non-linear and highly evolution in the character of of start
sionmakers may want to mitigate the
risk of orbital debris. context dependent. This study also space conflict and how quick- thinking
found that there is significant overlap be- ly that evolution proceeds
anything’s
Terrestrial-based active defenses can be tween the capabilities needed for defen- directly impacts the types of
possible if
used to target counterspace weapons in sive and offensive counterspace opera- space defenses and opera-
you’ve got
space and the ground systems that con- tions, particularly for active forms of tional concepts the military
enough
trol and operate these weapons. Cyber- space defense. For example, an adver- should be developing today.
attacks and jamming or spoofing of sary could view a space-based shoot- With the evolving character nerve.”
command uplinks to counterspace back system, whether kinetic or non-ki- of space warfare in mind, this
GINNY WEASLEY,
CLICK TO weapons proved to be attractive op- netic, as no different than an offensive study recommends the fol- HARRY POTTER
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS tions in the workshop scenarios, al- space-based ASAT system or a space- lowing priorities, actions, AND THE
HALF-BLOOD
though participants noted the uncer- based missile interceptor system. and additional analysis.
PRINCE
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 38 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

These recommendations are made • A better understanding is needed of
“We must choose
without regard for what may already ex- the operational, political, and strate-
between what is easy
ist or be in development. gic risks involved in the use of stealth,
and what is right.”
maneuver, rapid deployment, and
• A priority should be placed on in- reconstitution before committing ALBUS DUMBLEDORE, HARRY
vestments in improved space do- significant resources to these passive POTTER AND THE GOBLET OF FIRE
main awareness capabilities, to in- defenses.
clude more space-based sensors,
• Further analysis and gaming are
better integration with commercial
needed to explore gray zone compe-
and friendly foreign government
tition in space and when it is advan-
systems, and the use of artificial in-
tageous (or not) to do nothing in re-
telligence to analyze data and form
sponse to an attack or threat of
a better understanding of capabili-
attack.
ties and intentions.
If space is to remain a source of eco-
• Additional effort should be placed on
nomic and strategic advantage, the
developing improved indications
United States must prioritize and expe-
and warnings for space that give de-
dite its efforts to improve space defens-
cisionmakers more time and infor-
es. Robust space defenses make con-
mation to tailor potential defensive
flict in space less likely. Many of the
responses to the specific circum-
architectures and technologies already
stances of a conflict.
exist to make space systems more de-
fendable and resilient. Senior leaders
• New space architectures are needed
in DoD and Congress need to make
that use a combination of distribu-
top-level decisions about which types
tion, proliferation, and diversification
of defenses to pursue and then provide
of orbits. These new architectures do
sustained investments to fund these
not necessarily need to replace legacy
capabilities to fruition.
architectures but rather can be used
to supplement and diversify capabili-
ties that already exist.
• Non-kinetic active defenses, such as
onboard jamming and lasing systems,
are needed to thwart kinetic attacks
against high-value satellites. A physical
seizure capability should also be ex-
plored that could double as an inspec-
tor and on-orbit servicing satellite.
• New options should be considered
to improve DoD’s integration with
commercial space operators and
better leverage existing space sys-
tems for national security purposes.
For example, DoD could create a
program like the Civil Reserve Air
Fleet (CRAF) with commercial space
operators and use that program to
CLICK TO incentivize investments in better
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
passive defenses for commercial
space systems.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 39 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Todd Harrison is the director of Defense Budget Analysis and director of the
Aerospace Security Project at CSIS. As a senior fellow in the International Security
Program, he leads the Center’s efforts to provide in-depth, nonpartisan research
and analysis of defense funding, space security, and air power issues. He has au-
thored publications on trends in the defense budget, military space systems, threats
to space systems, civil space exploration, defense acquisitions, military compensa-
tion and readiness, and military force structure, among other topics. He teaches
classes on military space systems and the defense budget at the Johns Hopkins
“Mischief Managed”
School of Advanced International Studies.
HARRY POTTER, HARRY POTTER AND
Mr. Harrison joined CSIS from the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, THE PRISONER OF AZKABAN
where he was a senior fellow for defense budget studies. He previously worked at
Booz Allen Hamilton, where he consulted for the U.S. Air Force on satellite commu-
nications systems and supported a variety of other clients evaluating the perfor-
mance of acquisition programs. Prior to Booz Allen, he worked for AeroAstro Inc.
developing advanced space technologies and as a management consultant at Dia-
mond Cluster International. Mr. Harrison served as a captain in the U.S. Air Force
Reserves. He is a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with both a
BS and an MS in aeronautics and astronautics. Mr. Harrison is a proud member of
Gryffindor House.
Kaitlyn Johnson is deputy director and fellow of the Aerospace Security Proj-
ect at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. Ms. Johnson manages
the team’s strategic planning and research agenda. Her research specializes in
topics such as space security, military space systems, commercial space policy,
and U.S. air dominance. Previously, Ms. Johnson has written on national security
space reorganization, threats against space assets, the commercialization of
space, escalation and deterrence dynamics, and defense acquisition trends. Ms.
Johnson holds an MA from American University in U.S. foreign policy and national
security studies, with a concentration in defense and space security, and a BS
from the Georgia Institute of Technology in international affairs. Ms. Johnson is a
proud member of Slytherin House.
Makena Young is a research associate with the Aerospace Security Project at the
Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). Her research interests include
international collaboration, space security, and orbital debris. Prior to joining CSIS,
Ms. Young worked for the Federal Aviation Administration as an aerospace engineer,
focusing on automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast certification and integra-
tion in small aircraft. She holds a BS in aeronautical and astronautical engineering
from Purdue University with minors in international relations and environmental
engineering. Ms. Young is a proud member of Hufflepuff house.
CLICK TO
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 40 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

ENDNOTES
1 Traditional U.S. strategy notionally demarks six phases of operational action: Phase 0
– Shape, Phase I – Deter, Phase II – Seize the Initiative, Phase III – Dominate, Phase IV
– Stabilize, and Phase V – Enable Civil Authority.
2 Robert Bowman, Star Wars: A Defense Insider’s Case Against the Strategic Defense
Initiative (Los Angeles, CA: Teachers Publications, 1986), 14.
3 Laura Grego, “A History of Anti-Satellite Programs,” Union of Concerned Scientists,
, 3, 
files/2019-09/a-history-of-ASAT-programs_lo-res.pdf.
4 See Caroline Dorminey and Eric Gomez, eds., America’s Nuclear Crossroads (Washing-
ton, DC: Cato Institute, 2019), 30, 
americas-nuclear-crossroads-full.pdf.
5 “Advance Policy Questions for General John W. ‘Jay’ Raymond,” Senate Committee on
Armed Services, 116th Cong., 1st sess., 2019, 6, 
gov/imo/media/doc/Raymond_APQs_06-04-19.pdf.
6 “2020 year in review,” Bryce Space and Technologies, October 31, 2020, https://
brycetech.com/reports/report-documents/Bryce_2020_Year_In_Review.png.
7 Starlink passed the 1,000 satellites launched mark in early 2021, China had 363
satellites operational as of . See: Jeff Foust, “SpaceX surpasses 1,000-satel-
lite mark in latest Starlink launch,” SpaceNews, January 20, 2021, 
com/spacex-surpasses-1000-satellite-mark-in-latest-starlink-launch/; and China Power
Team, “How is China Advancing its Space Launch Capabilities?” China Power, Novem-
ber 5, 2019, Updated August 25, 2020, Accessed January 25, 2021, 
csis.org/china-space-launch/.
8 See: Todd Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2020 (Washington, DC: CSIS, ), 
Assessment20_WEB_FINAL-min.pdf; Victoria Samson and Brian Weeden, Global
Counterspace Capabilities (Washington, DC: Secure World Foundation, ),
 and
U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space (Washington, D.C.,
), 
Power%20Publications/Space_Threat_V14_020119_sm.pdf.
9 Joan Johnson-Freese, Space as a Strategic Asset (New York: Columbia University Press,
2007), 106.
10 Todd Harrison, International Perspectives on Space Weapons (Washington, DC: CSIS, May
27, 2020), 
11 U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication 3-14: Space Operations (Washington, DC:
), I-2, 
pdf?ver=qmkgYPyKBvsIZyrnswSMCg%3d%3d.
12 Harrison, International Perspectives on Space Weapons.
13 “USSF Mission,” U.S. Space Force, n.d., 
Space-Force/Mission/.
14 “Mission,” U.S. Space Command, n.d., 
15 Kevin L. Pollpeter, Michael S. Chase, and Eric Heginbotham, The Creation of the PLA
Strategic Support Force and Its Implications for Chinese Military Space Operations (Santa
Monica, CA: RAND, 2017), 16, 
16 Ibid., 14.
17 Harrison et, al., Space Threat Assessment 2020, 11.
CLICK TO
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS 18 Ibid., 25.
19 There is not one perfect source for determining where Russian counterspace
ENDNOTES 41 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

weapons are housed. Recent suspiciously maneuvering LEO satellites were launched
and operated by the Russian Aerospace Forces. However, the the Peresvet ground-
based laser, which would ostensibly be operated by the Aerospace Forces, has been
tracked to Strategic Missile Forces bases. See: “Russia Launches Kosmos 2542
Military Satellite Abroad Soyuz-2 Rocket,” Defpost, November 27, 2019, https://
defpost.com/russia-launches-kosmos-2542-military-satellite-abroad-soyuz-2-rock-
et/; and Bart Hendrix, “Peresvet: a Russian mobile laser system to dazzle enemy
satellites,” The Space Review, June 15, 2020, 
article/3967/1.
20 “Defense Space Strategy Summary,” French Ministry of Defense, , https://

strate%CC%81gie%20spatiale%20de%20de%CC%81fense.pdf.
21 Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment, 51.
22 Vivek Raghuvanshi, “India to launch a defense-based space research agency,” Defense
News, June 12, 2019, 
launch-a-defense-based-space-research-agency/.
23 Paul Scharre, “The US Military Should Not Be Doubling Down on Space,” Defense One,
August 1, 2018, 
be-doubling-down-space/150194/?oref=d-river.
24 Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment, 3–4.
25 Ibid., 3–4.
26 “Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space, and Under
Water,” Department of State, 
27 Andrea Shalal-Esa, “China Jamming Test Sparks U.S. Satellite Concerns,” Reuters, Octo-
ber 5, 2006, as quoted in Yousaf Butt, “Effects of Chinese Laser Ranging on Imaging
Satellites,” Science & Global Security 17, no. 1 (2009): 20–35, 
curity.org/archive/sgs17butt.pdf.
28 Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment, 24–25.
29 Brian Garino and Jane Gibson, “Space System Threats,” in AU-18 Space Primer
(Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: Air University Press, ), 277, 
au.af.mil/au-18-2009/au-18_chap21.pdf.
30 Richard B. Langley et al., “Innovation: GNSS Spoofing Detection,” GPS World, June 1,
2013, -spoofing-detection-correlating-carri-
er-phase-with-ra pid-antenna-motion/.
31 Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment, 38–39.
32 Tzvi Joffre, “U.S. warns of GPS interference, communications spoofing in Persian Gulf,”
Jerusalem Post, August 8, 2019, 
us-warns-of-gps-interference-communications-spoofing-in-persian-gulf-597998.
33 Sui-Lee Wee, “China Denies It Is behind Hacking of U.S. Satellites,” Reuters, October 31,
2011, us-china-us-hacking/china-denies-it-is-behind-
hacking-of-u-s-satellites-idUSTRE79U1YI20111031.
34 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress
(Washington, DC: 2015), 296, 
ports/2015%20Annual%20Report%20to%20Congress.PDF.
35 Office of the Inspector General, Cybersecurity Management and Oversight at the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory (Washington, DC: NASA, 2019), 8–9, 
IG-19-022.pdf.
36 U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication 3-14: Space Operations, I-2.
37 U.S. Air Force, Annex 3-14 Counterspace Operations (Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: August
FL C Y L B IC A K C K TO T O 2018), 10, 
THE CONTENTS
Counterspace-Ops.pdf; and John W. Raymond, Chief of Space Operations’ Planning
Guidance (Washington, DC: ), 36, 
ENDNOTES 42 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

Nov/09/2002531998/-1/-1/0/CSO%20PLANNING%20GUIDANCE.PDF.
38 U.S. Air Force, Annex 3-14 Counterspace Operations, 9.
39 Florence Parly, “Presentation of the Defense Space Strategy,” SatelliteObservation.net,
July 25, 2019, English translation from: 
frances-new-space-defense-strategy/.
40 U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication 3-14: Space Operations, I-8.
41 Tom Risen, “Disaggregation,” Aerospace America, April 17, 2017, 
erica.aiaa.org/features/disaggregation/.
42 Department of the Air Force, Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 Budget
Estimates: Air Force: Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Space Force (Washing-
ton, DC: Department of Defense, ), 75–90, 
Portals/84/documents/FY21/RDTE_/FY21%20Space%20Force%20Research%20
Development%20Test%20and%20Evaluation.pdf?ver=2020-02-11-083608-887.
43 Dorminey and Gomez, eds., America’s Nuclear Crossroads, 29-36.
44 Ellen Pawlikowski, Doug Loverro, and Tom Cristler, “Disruptive Challenges, New Opportu-
nities, and New Strategies,” Strategic Studies Quarterly, Spring 2012, 
airuniversity.af.edu/Portals/10/SSQ/documents/Volume-06_Issue-1/Pawlikowski.pdf.
45 Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense & Global Security,
Space Domain Mission Assurance: A Resilience Taxonomy (Washington, DC: Department
of Defense, ), 6–7, 
Policy/ResilienceTaxonomyWhitePaperFinal.pdf?ver=2016-12-27-131828-623.
46 Risen, “Disaggregation.”
47 U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication 3-14: Space Operations, I-8.
48 Ibid., I-9.
49 Winfred B. Hirschmann, “Profit from the Learning Curve,” Harvard Business Review,
, 
50 Sandra Erwin, “Boeing to deliver WGS-11 communications satellite to U.S. Air Force by
2024,” Space News, December 26, 2019, 
11-communications-satellite-to-u-s-air-force-by-2024/.
51 Department of Defense, Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 Budget Estimates:
Space Development Agency: Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Defense-Wide,
Vol. 5 (Washington, DC: ), 1, 
tals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2021/budget_justification/pdfs/03_RDT_and_E/
SDA_PB2021.pdf.
52 Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense & Global Security,
Space Domain Mission Assurance, 7.
53 “Beidou Global Navigation Satellite System,” Information and Analysis Center for
Position, Navigation, and Timing, n.d., 
54 David Wright, Laura Grego, and Lisbeth Gronlund, The Physics of Space Security
(Cambridge, MA: American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 2005), 114, 133, https://
aerospace.csis.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/physics-space-security.pdf.
55 Sandra Erwin, “Air Force: SSA is no more; it’s ‘Space Domain Awareness’,” Space News,
November 14, 2019, 
main-awareness/.
56 Sandra Erwin, “Space Force needs sensors to distinguish weapons from benign
objects,” Space News, January 6, 2021, 
sors-to-distinguish-weapons-from-benign-objects/.
57 “Geosynchronous Space Situational Awareness Program,” Air Force Space Command,
CLICK TO June 22, 2017, 
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS geosynchronous-space-situational-awareness-program-gssap/.
58 Mark Dickinson, “A Space Data Association Focus: The current state of Space Situation-
ENDNOTES 43 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

al Awareness (SSA),” Sat Magazine, , 
php?number=1895054050.
59 Sydney J. Freeberg, Jr., “US Jammed Own Satellites 261 Times; What If Enemy Did?,”
Breaking Defense, December 2, 2015, 
jammed-own-satellites-261-times-in-2015-what-if-an-enemy-tried/.
60 “Technology,” HawkEye360, 
61 David S. F. Portree, “Starfish and Apollo (1962),” Wired, March 21, 2012, 
wired.com/2012/03/starfishandapollo-1962/.
62 Wright, Grego, and Gronlund, The Physics of Space Security, 128.
63 Ibid., 118.
64 Mosa Ali Abu-Rgheff, Introduction to CDMA Wireless Communications (Cambridge, MA:
Academic Press, 2007), p 167-169.
65 Todd Harrison, The Future of MILSATCOM (Washington, DC: CSBA, 2013), 25–26, https://
csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/Future-of-MILSATCOM-web.pdf.
66 William C. Cummings, “An adaptive nulling antenna for military satellite communica-
tions,” Lincoln Laboratory Journal 5, no. 2 (1992), 174, 
viewdoc/download;jsessionid=A294DF289CCE0FA300F262BD361D77C2?-
doi=10.1.1.230.8496&rep=rep1&type=pdf .
67 Patrick Howell O’Neill, “The quest for quantum-proof encryption just made a leap
forward,” MIT Technology Review, August 3, 2020, 
com/2020/08/03/1005891/search-for-quantum-proof-encryption-computing-nist/.
68 U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication 3-14: Space Operations, I-8.
69 James Mattis, Summary of the National Defense Strategy of the United States of America
(Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2018), 6, 
Documents/pubs/2018-National-Defense-Strategy-Summary.pdf.
70 Wright, Grego, and Gronlund, The Physics of Space Security, 46.
71 Rebecca Reesman and James R. Wilson, The Physics of Space War: How Orbital
Dynamics Constrain Space-to-Space Engagements (El Segundo, CA: Aerospace Corpora-
tion, ), 11–14, 
man_PhysicsWarSpace_20201001.pdf.
72 U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, Anti-Satellite Weapons, Countermea-
sures, and Arms Control (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, ), 81, 
ASAT-Weapons-and-Countermeasures-1985.pdf.
73 Jason A. Reiter, David B. Spencer, and Richard Linares, Spacecraft Stealth Through
Orbit-Perturbing Maneuvers Using Reinforcement Learning (Reston, VA: American
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, ), 
doi/10.2514/6.2020-0461.
74 U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Publication 3-14: Space Operations, I-9.
75 “MALD Decoy,” Raytheon, n.d., 
capabilities/products/mald-decoy.
76 Walker Mills, “A Tool for Deception: The Urgent Need for Em Decoys,” War Room, U.S.
Army War College, February 27, 2020, 
tactical-decoys/.
77 U.S. Space Force, Spacepower: Doctrine for Space Forces (Washington, DC: ),
36, 
Aug%202020.pdf.
78 For more on cross-domain deterrence, see: King Mallory, “New Challenges in Cross-Do-
CLICK TO main Deterrence,” RAND, 2018, 
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS perspectives/PE200/PE259/RAND_PE259.pdf.
79 “Northrop Grumman to install LAIRCM laser missile defense systems aboard U.S. large
ENDNOTES 44 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

military aircraft,” Military and Aerospace Electronics, May 6, 2020, 
aerospace.com/sensors/article/14175295/laser-missile-defense-large-aircraft.
80 Florence Parly, “Presentation of the Defense Space Strategy.”
81 Thomas G. Roberts, “What Can 24 Satellites Do for U.S. Missile Defense?,” CSIS, CSIS
Brief, , 
publication/181018_Roberts_24SatellitesMissileDefense.pdf?9qnhsjRijr4PmHWE3N-
sA0hshW2KlBJp6.
82 Thomas G. Roberts, “Bad Idea: Space-Based Missile Interceptors,” CSIS Defense360,
December 19, 2017, 
roberts/.
83 Caleb Henry, “Northrop Grumman’s MEV-1 servicer docks with Intelsat satellite,” Space
News, February 26, 2020, 
docks-with-intelsat-satellite/.
84 Tereza Pultarova, “Watch a Satellite Fire a Harpoon in Space in Wild Debris-Catching
Test,” Space.com, February 18, 2019, 
movedebris-satellite-video.html.
85 This is likely to remain the case until there is substantial economic activity and human
presence in space that is somewhat independent of Earth. For example, large-scale
mining of in-space resources and the use of those resources to support other activities
in space, such as human colonies on other celestial bodies, could give nations a reason
to protect or attack space lines of commerce to achieve economic and political
objectives in space rather than on Earth. Human history has shown that wherever
commerce goes, conflict is likely to follow.
86 See Christian Brose, The Kill Chain: Defending America in the Future of High-Tech
Warfare.
87 Kaitlyn Johnson, “A Balance of Instability: Effects of Direct-Ascent Anti-Satellite Weapons
Ban on Nuclear Stability,” Defense360, CSIS, October 21, 2020, 9–10, 
csis.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/2Kaitlyn_A-Balance-of-Instability.pdf.
88 For a more complete discussion of Space Domain Mission Assurance, see: Office of the
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense & Global Security, Space Domain
Mission Assurance.
89 The AM7 is a European built EUROSTAR Bus by Airbus with a Thales Alenia Payload, see

90 Due to continued delays in fielding M-Code GPS receivers, many U.S. forces and nearly
all allied forces are still reliant on P(Y) or SASSM receivers.
91 Dee Ann Divis, “FCC Raises Questions about U.S. Access to Non-GPS GNSS,” Inside
GNSS, January 16, 2015, 
to-non-gps-gnss/.
92 Multiple satellites may be located at the same orbital mode if their frequency plans are
coordinated. DirecTV has maintained three satellites in this location since 2014.
CLICK TO
FLY BACK TO
THE CONTENTS
ENDNOTES 45 HARRISON, JOHNSON, YOUNG

1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
202-887-0200 | 
Lanham · Boulder · New York · London
4501 Forbes Boulevard
Lanham, MD 20706
301-459-3366 |