December 7, 2021
Photo by: Indian Space Research Organisation
Indian Space Policy for the Private Sector
The Draft Space Activities Bill and its Challenges
BY Meera Rohera
In 2017, the Indian Department of Space (DOS) released nations. Space is a booming industry around the
the Draft Space Activities Bill, a proposed bill setting world—current estimates predict that the revenue
goals and regulations for the private space industry. The generated by the global space industry could increase to
Draft Bill was drawn up as a result of several startup over $1 trillion annually by 2040.1 For decades, India’s
companies in India expressing interest in space renowned space agency, the Indian Space Research
activities and the need to create an appropriate legal Organisation (ISRO), has independently launched and
environment for private industry. In 2020, the maintained India’s space program as one of the best in
Government of India announced that private companies the world.2 But in this rapidly growing environment, the
would be allowed to play a more active part in India’s Indian government has recognized that it cannot
space sector. The government introduced these policy harness the demand for space-based activities and
reforms intending to leverage the private sector to make services on its own. The new developments in the DOS
it one of the most self-reliant, spacefaring
1 "Space: Investing in the Final Frontier," Morgan Stanley, accessed 2 " M W e h e ic ra h S R p o a h c e e r a A g w e a nc s i e a s r A e r s e e C a o rc n h s i i d n e t r e e r d n T fo he r t B h e e s t A I e n r T o h sp e a W c o e r ld?"
September 24, 2021, FoSrebceusr, iJtuyn Per o29je, c2t0 a21t ,t ahcec Cesesnetde Or fcotor bSetrra 2t6e, g2i0c2 a1.n d
 
International Studies in Washington, D.C.
agencies-are-considered-the-best-in-the-world/?sh=32f328915245.
AEROSPACE.CSIS.ORG | 1

intend to open the floodgates for indigenous private History of India’s Space Program
companies to propel India’s odyssey in space forward.
India’s space program began with the inception of the
Whether the Draft Bill is conducive to private industry is
Indian National Committee for Space Research
a contentious issue. There are differences in the level of
(INCOSPAR) in 1962. In 1969, INCOSPAR was superseded
optimism among the government, industry leaders, and
by ISRO, formally institutionalizing the space
space and legal experts. Although both government and
program. India’s space capabilities have come a long
industry display a high level of optimism on the future of
way since 1969. ISRO launched its first satellite,
the private sector in space, the substance of the policy
Aryabhata, in 1975; commissioned the Indian National
deserves scrutiny to ensure its feasibility. The key
Satellite System in 1983; sent its first lunar probe,
question facing policy makers in India is will these policy
Chandrayaan-1, to the Moon in 2008; reached Mars on its
changes successfully bolster the Indian space sector? This
first attempt in 2014; and controversially (but
paper explores the challenges and opportunities in
successfully) conducted its first direct-ascent anti-
growing the private space sector in India under the Draft
satellite test (ASAT) in 2019.3 ISRO’s current focus is on
Space Activities Bill.
the Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV)
Mark II, which recently
failed to launch due to
difficulties in the cryogenic
upper stage, and the
Gaganyaan crewed orbital
spacecraft that plans to
launch on the GSLV Mark III.
While ISRO saw recent
success completing a third
long-duration hot test of
the liquid propellant Vikas
Engine for the crewed GSLV
Mark III launch, the launch
date has been delayed from
 to 2023.4
Amid the COVID-19
pandemic, ISRO supported
various State governments
Figure 1 Space Organizational Chart. Source: Indian Space Research Organisation,
 with geospatial tools and
location-based solutions to
track and fight COVID,5 and it also developed three
3 "ISRO's Timeline from 1960s to Today," ISRO, accessed September 
24, 2021, engine-long-duration-hot-test-gaganyaan-program.
today.
5 "Covid-19 Apps," ISRO, accessed September 24, 2021.
4"Third Successful Vikas Engine Long Duration Hot Test for 
Gaganyaan Program," ISRO, accessed September 24, 2021,
2 | ROHERA | Indian Space Policy for the Private Sector

different types of ventilators and transferred the Formed in 1992, Antrix is the commercial arm of ISRO,
technology to industry for manufacture.6 responsible for marketing ISRO products like satellite
communications (SATCOM), launch, remote sensing,
ISRO has been the center of the country’s space
spacecraft and subsystems, and ground infrastructure
program since its inception. While Figure 1 shows that
services to foreign entities.8 In 2019, however, a new
ISRO reports to the Department of Space, the hierarchy
nodal agency called NewSpace India Ltd. (NSIL) was
seems to be superfluous in actuality. ISRO has
created by the Government of India with a nearly
historically spearheaded the Indian space program. It is
identical purpose. It focuses on PSLV production, SSLV
important to note that ISRO and the DOS have the same
manufacturing, launch services, satellite-based services,
headquarters in Antariksh Bhavan in Bangalore, and
and satellite manufacturing and subsystems.9 The
interestingly, are housed on the same website under
creation of NSIL has been described as part of moving
ISRO’s name ( Additionally,
towards a demand-driven approach to bolster the space
the Chairman of ISRO, Dr. Kailasavadivoo Sivan is the
industry, but the government has not made it clear why
Secretary of the DOS and the Chairman of the Space
the almost identical Antrix cannot play that part. This is
Commission, which is responsible for the creation and
suspected to be the aftermath of the Antrix-Devas deal,
application of space policy to promote the development
where Antrix canceled an agreement with Devas
of space science and harnessing technology to benefit
Multimedia to lease them the S-band satellite spectrum
India socially and economically.7
to launch satellite-based applications on mobile
ISRO carries out end-to-end space activities—from the phones. Devas turned to international arbitration, and
design and development of launch vehicles and Antrix now owes them $1.2 billion in compensation.10 If
spacecraft, through launch and post-launch activities. Antrix goes bankrupt, NSIL could fill the gap left behind
One of its most prominent achievements is the Polar and be there to take its place—however, a U.S. federal
Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV), an expendable medium- court recently allowed Devas investors to track down
lift rocket designed and operated for multi-satellite Antrix’s assets, including transferred assets to the
deployment campaigns at a relatively low cost. ISRO, Government of India and NSIL.11
with the Antrix Corporation Ltd., has launched hundreds
Indian private industry has been active in the space
of Indian and foreign satellites into space, helping make
sector for over four decades, producing over 80% of
India a global player in the smallsat launching market.
ISRO components, and private firms are engaged in the
manufacturing of satellites for ISRO. These private
6"Isro Develops Three Types of Ventilators to Battle Covid-19," 10 Surendra Singh / TNN / Oct 30, 2020, "ISRO: Devas Wins 9-year-old
Hindustan Times, June 07, 2021, accessed September 24, 2021. Legal Battle against Antrix as US Court Awards It $1.2 Billion
 Compensation: India News - Times of India," The Times of India,
types-of-ventilators-to-battle-covid19-101623053775130.html. accessed September 24, 2021.

7 Federation, International Astronautical, "Indian Space Research
legal-battle-against-antrix-as-us-court-awards-it-1-2-billion-
Organisation (ISRO)," IAF, accessed September 24, 2021.
compensation/articleshow/78951639.cms.

research-organisation-(isro).html. 11"US Court Allows Devas Investors to Track down ISRO Commercial
Arm Antrix's Assets to Recover $1.3 Billion Compensation," The
8 "Welcome to Antrix," Antrix, accessed September 24, 2021.
Indian Express, August 19, 2021, accessed September 24, 2021.

9 "NSIL," Welcome to NSIL, accessed September 24, 2021, antrix-isro-1-billion-compensation-7460733/.

| 3

companies act as vendors to ISRO, supplying participate in the domestic and international space
manufactured space goods based on ISRO needs. Given economy instead of solely supplying to ISRO.
that there have been no other domestic buyers for space
Similarly, the DOS has expressed interest in encouraging
components, ISRO has been their sole customer for
private sector participation in space but has identified
these goods. Overall, this creates a ‘supply-driven Indian
two hurdles to its goal. In a 2020 webinar on ‘Unlocking
commercial space sector, as the private industry does
India’s Potential in Space Sector,’ ISRO’s Chairman Dr.
not have the ability to address global demand for space
K. Sivan explained that first, “there was no mechanism
services or innovate to fill demand gaps within the
available in the country to extend any kind of
country itself — they simply supply to ISRO. While this
technology or infrastructure support to [private
has been relatively successful to date, it may be unable
industry].”13 The success of private industry can be
to adapt to the booming global space industry.
improved with technology transfers and access to
A consequence is that the private sector is not a big ISRO’s facilities for research and development. Two
exporter of space systems and components as most memoranda of understanding signed between ISRO and
companies, with the exception of Accord Global space start-ups Skyroot, a space manufacturer and
Technology Solutions and Saankhya Labs, do not have launch service provider, and Agnikul, another new
products to export to begin with. Their sole focus is startup developing its own small-lift launch vehicle, give
meeting ISRO’s supply needs. Additionally, the private the companies access to ISRO facilities and expertise.14
space sector is regulated under India’s export control
Second, Dr. Sivan expressed that “there was no
system for SCOMET items, that is for ‘Special Chemicals,
regulatory mechanism to control the private sector
Organisms, Materials, Equipment, and Technologies’
activities.”15 Due to the national security importance of
that are dual-use. Although, these regulations on items
space, along with the regulatory requirements under
that have both civilian and military uses are standard
international law, the onus of monitoring all space
and similar to other countries.
activities falls on the national government. Space has
Reasoning for the Draft Bill become a strategic sector, and thus the government has
an interest in new technologies being developed,
In 2020, Finance Minister Nirmala Sitaraman announced
particularly if they are dual use for both civil and
the opening of India’s space sector to private industry,
national security interests. Since India is party to the
saying “We will allow private players to benefit from
Outer Space Treaty, the Liability Convention, and the
ISRO's assets and give them a level-playing field to
Registration Convention, the responsibility of any
boost India's space sector further.”12 Unlike before,
destruction or damage lies with the government. An
Indian private space companies can now actively
12 Achom, Debanish, "Space Travel, ISRO Facilities Opened To Private Lab, 4th Readies for Launch: India News - Times of India," The Times
Sector: Government," NDTV.com, May 16, 2020, accessed September of India, accessed September 26, 2021.
24, 2021. 
planetary-exploration-outer-space-travel-to-be-open-for-private- pace-2-firms-ink-key-pacts-with-isro-3rd-opens-new-lab-4th-
sector-nirmala-sitharaman-2229930. readies-for-launch/articleshow/86313514.cms.
13 YouTube, “Webinar on Unlocking India's Potential in Space 15 YouTube, “Webinar on Unlocking India's Potential in Space
Sector", ISRO, August 20, 2020, accessed September 24, 2021. Sector", ISRO, August 20, 2020, accessed September 24, 2021.
 
14 Chethan Kumar / TNN / Updated: Sep 18, 2021, "Isro: Pvt Space
Activity Gains Pace, 2 Firms Ink Key Pacts with Isro, 3rd Opens New
4 | ROHERA | Indian Space Policy for the Private Sector

adequate regulatory and monitoring capacity is thus stated that concerns raised included the “scope of space
crucial. activities, regulatory mechanism, licensing and
authorization procedures, sharing of liability burden
Specific Language in the Draft Bill
with a limit on damage costs, penal provisions, powers
of Central Government, etc.”18 By , ISRO
Introduced as a public draft in , the Draft
Chairman K. Sivan said that the Draft Space Activities
Space Activities Bill covered a variety of issues relating
Bill, along with a national space policy, was in the “final
to commercial activities in the space sector including
stages.”19 However, it is unclear what Sivan meant by
definitions, powers of the central government on space-
‘final stages’ as the Draft Bill has not passed through
related activities and actors, authorization and licensing
either of the two legislative houses of the Parliament of
registration of space objects and liability requirements,
India. become legislation. It also has not been approved
offenses and consequential penalties, and intellectual
by the Cabinet nor been passed in Parliament. It is
property rights. The Draft Bill aims to support the overall
possible that the bill has been lowered in priority due to
growth of Indian commercial space activities by creating
the COVID-19 pandemic. A clear lack of consensus for
a regulatory environment in compliance with
certain issues from Indian space stakeholders could also
international law and by addressing the previous
contribute to a slower approval process. ISRO has
hurdles to the goal of encouraging the private sector.
announced that it would also release a National Space
There was no standard format consistent with how the
Policy along with the final Space Activities Bill, but there
government (ISRO and DOS) signed agreements with
has been no public release of such a policy.20
private players, and the Draft Space Activities Bill would
make this more procedural. The Draft Bill was drawn up
Challenges to Implementation
based on the Model Law on National Space Legislation16
that was submitted by the International Law Association The ISRO
to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
The announcement by Finance Minister Nirmala
(COPUOS) as well as comparative studies of space acts
Sitaraman on opening the space industry to private
of other space-faring nations.
companies in 2020 seemed to be met with some
Comments, if any, had to be sent in by December 21st, hesitation by ISRO. In response, ISRO tweeted,
2017. A year later in , the DOS “Department of Space will follow Government
announced that it had received a total of 52 responses guidelines and enable private players to carry out space
from various stakeholders ranging from the aerospace activities in the country.”21 This tweet clearly lacked
industry and start-ups to lawyers and scientists.17 DOS
16 Draft Space Activities Bill, November 21, 2017, 19 "Space Activities Bill, Space Policy in Final Stages: ISRO Chief,"
 Business Today, accessed October 26, 2021.
Space%20Activities%20Bill%202017.pdf. 
activities-bill-space-policy-in-final-stages-isro-chief-263149-2020-07-
17"Bill on Commercialization of Space Activities Likely in 2019,"
05.
Hindustan Times, December 30, 2018, accessed September 24, 2021.
 20 Bubna, Vidhi, "The Upcoming Space Activities Bill in India and
commercialization-of-space-activities-likely-in-2019/story- What It Needs to Address," Modern Diplomacy, September 10, 2020,
2lxrwXC4ANBbfgAY5nsvUM.html. Accessed September 24, 2021.

18 Draft Space Activities Bill, November 21, 2017,
activities-bill-in-india-and-what-it-needs-to-address/.

Space%20Activities%20Bill%202017.pdf. 21 Isro, “Department of Space Will Follow Government Guidelines and
Enable Private Players to Carry out Space Activities in the Country,”
| 5

enthusiasm and gives the impression that the DOS is government. Without the right to information and
merely following the decision, instead of being a driving intellectual goods to create value with research and
force behind it. However, this is unsurprising due to the development, companies will likely be discouraged to
monopoly ISRO has enjoyed for decades. ISRO continue contributing to space activities in India. As
leadership may be uncomfortable with having private indicated in the conversations with space industry
companies on a ‘level-playing field’ with a government experts, space start-ups could shift to other countries
institution, especially the possible readjustment that that have more liberal legislation concerning IP and
will emerge from private companies taking a larger part provide a better environment for securing investment.
in space activities that have been a part ISRO’s program While it is understandable that the government would
for decades. ISRO may lobby to protect the want to control or access the dual-use space technology
organization’s relative monopoly in space activities by or IP that protects or threatens national security, this is
trying to concentrate private industry activities in a big obstacle in stimulating India’s commercial space
manufacturing rather than providing the full range of market. It may be preferable if IP was examined on a
space services. case-by-case basis or if the government could access IP
or control the use of IP without necessarily owning it.
A repeated complaint raised in interviews with space
industry leaders and experts is that the future of the Ambiguity and failure to address private
private industry in India may still follow more of a industry needs
supply-driven model because of the control ISRO wields.
The public version of the 2017 Draft Space Activities Bill
Additionally, because government-adjacent entities like
adequately identifies the international obligations India
NSIL and Antrix are pursuing similar commercial
has under relevant UN charters and treaties. The
activities as private companies, there is deep concern
explanatory note within the Draft Bill emphasizes that
that there will be pushback on which activities private
“non-governmental space activities are required to be
space companies are allowed to participate in. Private
licensed/ authorized and continuously supervised by a
companies suspect that ISRO will prioritize these
State in order to comply with treaty obligations.”22 While
government-affiliated organizations. This has a domino
this acknowledges India’s international responsibilities,
effect on investor confidence, as there is uncertainty
the legislation proposed falls short of being practical for
that innovative technologies or intellectual property (IP)
private companies because of its general lack of
ripe for investment will obtain licensing and
specificity.
authorization by the government due to competition
from government-affiliated organizations. Chapter I lays out the scope of application and defines
relevant terms in the Draft Bill, with section 1.2 stating
A manifestation of this problem is in Chapter VI of the
that the legislation would extend to “all space objects of
Draft Bill, which addresses miscellaneous issues not
Indian origin in outer space.”23 The lack of clarity in
covered in other parts of the bill. Section 25 of Chapter
outlining criteria for ‘objects of Indian origin’ creates
VI states that any form of IP generated from any type of
ambiguity in the scope of application for this
space activity will be deemed the property of the
Twitter, Twitter, 16 , 22 Draft Space Activities Bill, November 21, 2017,
 
Space%20Activities%20Bill%202017.pdf.
23 Ibid.
6 | ROHERA | Indian Space Policy for the Private Sector

section. How would it apply to, say, a company that has Similarly, Chapter IV Section 12 indemnifies the
done its research, development, and testing for its government of all liabilities arising from any space
satellites in India, but has a working entity in a foreign activity or in relation to the space object covered by the
country that uses the same IP to make the satellites and license provided. Section 26 of Chapter VI takes away
launch them from that said country? More clarity is any accountability held by the government “in respect
needed from the government to ensure a clear of anything done in good faith in pursuance of any space
regulatory environment for Indian companies looking to activity under this Act or any rule or order made
get into the space market. thereunder.”25 It would again be beneficial to have an
appeals process that gives private companies the ability
Chapter II of the Draft Bill outlines the regulatory
to create more accountability and impartiality in the
mechanism for the space industry, giving power to the
government’s actions and decisions.
Central government in terms of calling for information,
investigation, and making policy and planning There is a broad spectrum of space activities, ranging
decisions. Chapter III addresses developing state-run from the production of launch vehicles and satellites to
mechanisms for licensing and authorization. On operating satellites and ground stations to space-based
licensing, the Draft Bill only states that space activities services and resource utilization. The Draft Bill,
cannot jeopardize public health or the safety of however, legislates a single policy for the entire space
individuals or property. This is consistent with the industry. Mr. Narayan Prasad aptly wrote, “a national
international obligations of India through the Liability space legislation with blanket regulations to cover all
Convention and does not compromise the sovereignty companies, which could be pursuing activities as
and national security of India. However, the Draft Bill different as remote sensing and deep-space exploration,
does not offer any standard on which applications for may not provide the regulatory clarity required.”26
licenses will be accepted or denied, and no timeframe
Overall, while the Draft Bill legislates policy in line with
for this due process is outlined. Timeframes for approval
international law, it does not support the Indian private
have been a recurring problem for private space
space industry with the regulatory certainty it needs to
companies in India, with permissions often taking years
flourish. Currently, red tape and regulatory hurdles are a
only to be rejected. Section 5 of Chapter III also makes
serious impediment for commercial space investment,
insurance a prerequisite for any licensing approvals,
which the Draft Bill does not entirely solve. In interviews
with undefined insurance costs to be calculated with
with space industry leaders and experts, they expressed
government discretion. Private industry reactions to this
that the process of obtaining clearances and licensing
section included requests for more clarity on
still requires private companies to jump through
requirements, including insurance floors. As for the
numerous hoops—it is a lengthy, complicated, and
revoking of licenses, it states that the licensee would
grueling process. Hopefully, the creation of INSPACe will
have a “reasonable opportunity of being heard,” which
ease the process. The Draft Bill legislates how the
is highly ambiguous24. Furthermore, there is no formal
government will hold private actors accountable
process for companies to appeal such decisions.
without creating any accountability for itself. It is
24 Ibid. 26 Prasad, Narayan, "Space Activities Bill, Meant to Boost Private Role,
Will Create Confusion Instead," ThePrint, October 11, 2019. accessed
25 Ibid.
September 24, 2021. 
meant-boost-private-role-confusion/303950/.
| 7

important for the government to ensure smooth over others. To put it in perspective, NASA’s budget in
processes for the space industry without unnecessary fiscal year 2020 was $22.629 billion compared to the
red tape, time delay, or corruption and middlemen. approximately $1.798 billion ISRO budget––
Lawyer Ashok G.V. wrote in 2019, “the right policy prioritization and privatization is crucial if India wants to
around the sector can mitigate the crisis created by poor be competitive with its international counterparts.29
investor sentiment and thus help emerging start-ups.”27 Given that the ISRO’s budget is so constrained (in 2021,
A clearer policy will increase the predictability and it was approximately 0.4% of the total national
security of investments, assuring returns and thus budget30), this shift in responsibility presents an
investor confidence. This would also be in the interest of opportunity to pass on some space missions to private
the government, as it would help the space sector actors. If ISRO transferred tried and tested technologies
flourish with less federal investment. such as launch services and PSLV production to private
sector companies, it would have more time and
Looking Forward
resources to focus on deep space scientific and
technological research. Competition between new
Why emphasize the private space sector?
private sector firms could help build launch capabilities
The Draft Bill intends to promote and enhance the
and services that are internationally competitive with
private space sector in order to supplement and build
other spacefaring nations and companies like SpaceX.
on India's long space legacy. In a press release, ISRO
Introducing private actors would let market efficiencies
explained that “in order to enhance utilization and
prevail and allow the better allocation of resources and
maximize benefits from the space assets, it is proposed
technology development. NSIL must work on public-
to change the approach from ‘Supply Based Model’ to
private partnerships for the PSVL and technology
‘Demand Based Model.”28 A demand-based model would
transfers.
allow for a private industry that develops and delivers
Opening the space sector to private companies will also
solutions based on the identification of needs of the
increase the diversity of the Indian space program. If
Indian and global space markets, instead of the current
commercial actors are allowed to service needs outside
model, where the ISRO dictates the supply provided by
of ISRO, the market will be able to expand and find new
private industry. The space industry could benefit from
niches in space activities. As of , the
a more free market based approach.
Indian space market is worth $7 billion, which is 2% of
Opening the space sector to private actors presents an
the global space market.31 These new regulations could
opportunity for ISRO to prioritize certain space activities
allow private companies the opportunity to enter the
27 V., Ashok G, "The Space Activities Bill- Does It Deliver?" ORF, 30 "ISRO Will Transform in 2021 as India Pumps Big Money to Draw in
accessed September 24, 2021. Startups for the 'second Space Age'." Business Insider. February 04,
speak/the-space-activities-bill-does-it-deliver-50019/. 2021. Accessed December 03, 2021.

28 "Opening Up Indian Space Sector For Private Sector –Reforms,"
transform-in-2021-as-india-pumps-big-money-to-draw-in-startups-
ISRO, accessed September 24, 2021.
for-the-second-space-age/articleshow/80683054.cms.

sector/opening-indian-space-sector-private-sector-–reforms. 31 Pricewaterhousecoopers "Preparing to Scale New Heights:
Enhancing Private Participation in India's Commercial Space
29 "ISRO Budget 2020 Allocated ₹13,479 Crore for Space Exploration,"
Sector," PwC, accessed September 24, 2021.
Business Insider, February 01, 2020, accessed September 24, 2021.

heights.html.
2020-allocation-and-updates/articleshow/73830948.cms.
8 | ROHERA | Indian Space Policy for the Private Sector

global market. Given its unique geographic and socio- is planned to have its own cadre empowered to take
economic position as compared to other space-faring independent decisions including members from IN-
nations, India could become a space service provider for SPACe, industries, academia, and DoS, along with an
other nearby regions in the global south. Companies inbuilt monitoring mechanism. It will also have access
could gain the expertise of adapting technologies to to the Space Commission to solve disputes between the
different regions, languages, and cultures and government and private companies, as well as a
implement them where space markets are not yet fully proposed organization like the Telecom Disputes
developed. Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) that would
serve as an appellate body for solving conflict.
Lastly, having an indigenous private space industry
would lead to higher tax generation, job creation, and To ensure success, IN-SPACe needs to be able to act as a
the export of services. As emphasized in the central separate organization from ISRO. This would help avoid
government’s MakeInIndia initiative and Atmanirbhar conflicts of interest that could arise in the case that it is
Bharat (which translates to Self-Reliant India), these not independent, such as IN-SPACe restricting licensing
policies could help to make India self-sustaining in the to maintain ISRO’s monopoly on commercial space
space sector through public-private partnerships while activities.
making it a more important part of the global space
Several key IN-SPACe leadership positions were recently
economy.
assigned, including the appointment of Mr. Pawan
IN-SPACe: Regulate or Stimulate? Kumar Goenka, the former Managing Director of
Mahindra & Mahindra, as Chairman. The fact that Mr.
In , the DOS set up the Indian National Space
Goenka is not an ex-ISRO official is a positive step for IN-
Promotion and Authorization Center (IN-SPACe) as an
SPACe. Dr. Susmita Mohanty, a space entrepreneur who
institutional mechanism to regulate, support, and
has co-founded space companies in San Francisco,
stimulate private industry investment in the space
Vienna, and Bangalore and has worked with NASA and
sector. IN-SPACe offers some hope on the topic of
Boeing, remarked that the choice of the Chairman was
conflict of interest between ISRO and private
promising. But, she pointed out four pitfalls that were
commercial activities. IN-SPACe is an autonomous body
made in selecting the board. First, she said that she was
under DOS, which acts as a single-window nodal agency
not sure if any of the candidates had worked in the
to permit, oversee, and facilitate the activities of Non-
aerospace sector abroad. While there was robust
Governmental Private Entities (NGPEs). This is similar to
domestic experience, it would be better to have at least
the new Office of Space Commerce at the US
one candidate with credible understanding of and
Department of Commerce, which is intended to be a
experience in the international aerospace industry.
single point of contact for commercial space companies.
Foreign experience lends an international perspective
Its role includes sharing the space technology,
and comparative understanding of developed versus
infrastructure, and premises of ISRO with NGPEs as a
emerging space economies – both vital for liberalizing
way to help create temporary facilities and monitor all
India’s private space sector. Second, she noted that
activities.32 The future of IN-SPACe does look hopeful. It
there was no representation from the Indian NewSpace
32 "INSPACe Structure," ISRO, accessed September 24, 2021.

authorization-center-space/space-structure.
| 9

community of nearly fifty private space start-ups. If SPACe, as well as the DOS, to help legislators and
having prime contractors like Hindustan Aeronautics regulators take industry perspectives into account.
Limited (HAL) and Larsen & Toubro (L&T), traditional
Space Sustainability
space manufacturers that historically supply to ISRO, is
not considered a ‘conflict of interest’, it would only be An area of potential improvement for the Draft Bill is
fair to include a NewSpace startup on the Board. Third, space sustainability. Section 8 of Chapter III and Section
she emphasized that there was only token female 16 of Chapter V emphasize the requirement against
representation on the IN-SPACe Board—there is just one damaging the environment on Earth or in outer space
woman, Professor Preeti Aghaiayam from IIT Madras. At and elaborates on potential punishments if such
least ⅓ of the board should be women. India has no damage is incurred. However, the Draft Bill lacks any
dearth of accomplished women working in science, further specific language related to space sustainability
tech, and innovation. Lastly, she said that the newly practices. The responsibilities of private space
appointed Board’s composition is such that strictly companies as described in the Draft Bill are vague, and it
speaking IN-SPACe cannot be labeled a truly may be useful to have particular requirements on space
autonomous body. A large majority of the Board is sustainability explicitly included. During the 2018
directly or indirectly affiliated to ISRO—either as current Observer Research Foundation Kalpana Chawla Annual
or former employees, or as industrial contractors. Space Policy Dialogue, Lt. Gen. Amit Sharma, the former
Commander-In-Chief of the Indian Strategic Forces
All eyes will continue to be on IN-SPACe’s leadership and
Command, stated that “given India’s reliance on space
the actions and authorizations that will be made in the
assets, it must not shy away from framing the rules for
first years of the organization’s lifetime. IN-SPACe could
space sustainability.”34 This advice must be taken
be at the forefront of bolstering India as a space power.
seriously from all aspects of India’s space enterprise.
It must put the effort in promoting and fairly regulating
private industry while keeping international law and Two areas worthy of further exploration are space
national security in mind. Should IN-SPACe’s board debris mitigation and satellite end-of-life disposal. The
continue to be filled with ISRO insiders, it is unlikely that UN Office for Outer Space Affairs has a comprehensive
the organization will achieve these goals. document, the ‘Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space’,
Another positive step was the recent meeting held by
which outlines several mitigation measures that can be
ISRO where Dr. K Sivan interacted with large private
adopted. As a founding member of COPUOS and a
firms, startups and academics that have proposed ideas
signatory to the long-term sustainability guidelines,
to IN-SPACe. In that meeting, Dr. K Sivan also urged
India should have direct provisions in the Draft Bill
private industry to join the newly formed Indian Space
fulfilling the commitments it has made internationally.
Association (ISpA), an advocacy group representing
Additionally, for space debris mitigation, the
stakeholders of the space industry.33 ISpA could aid in
government needs to begin by setting good standards
bringing a streamlined industry perspective to IN-
33NewIndianXpress, "Space Industry Advocacy Group ISpA Presents 34 "India Should Not Shy Away Framing Rules for Space
Roadmap to ISRO Chariman K Sivan," The New Indian Express, Sustainability," ORF, accessed September 24, 2021.
August 27, 2021, accessed September 24, 2021. 
 framing-rules-for-space-sustainability/.
industry-advocacy-group-ispa-presents-roadmap-to-isro-chariman-
k-sivan-2349768.html.
10 | ROHERA | Indian Space Policy for the Private Sector

itself and avoid creating unnecessary space debris as it exploration missions, and tenders for private companies
did with its direct-ascent ASAT weapon test in 2019. It on its website.36
should also require all satellites and launch vehicles to
However, this may only encourage the same supply-
have an end-of-life disposal plan to not create lingering
driven model that already exists. With current proposed
debris in popular orbits.
regulations, titan space companies like SpaceX or Blue
Conclusion Origin will not be able to easily operate in
India. Regulations related to IP and ambiguity in other
India has reached an inflection point in space. The
regulations make it difficult for indigenous companies
country can emerge as a leading space power in private
to compete globally and could lead to them leaving
sector innovation and sustainability, or it risks falling
India to set up shop elsewhere in Europe or the United
behind and slowly losing its spot as a leading
States.
spacefaring nation. The Draft Space Activities Bill is a
Being a global space power has always been on the
momentous opportunity for the Indian space sector that
Indian agenda. Just as Vikram Sarabhai, regarded as the
has excited the commercial space industry and built
father of the Indian space program, said, “if we are to
investor confidence. A recent article titled “A Breath Of
play a meaningful role nationally, and in the community
Fresh Air for Indian Startup” in GW Prime captures the
of nations, we must be second to none in the
new hope in the Indian space startup landscape.35 It is
application of advanced technologies to the real
important to ensure that it is not just ‘a breath’ but a
problems of man's society.”37 India is chasing down that
whirlwind of government action and policy promoting
dream of being at the forefront of space technology to
the private space industry.
serve the needs of its people and the world. However, to
Even with the current optimism, the space sector could
do so, it must develop a robust portfolio in space with
get stuck in a paradox. The government opened up
the help of indigenous private space companies.
commercial space to private companies to diversify
There is a clear path forward, especially since India has
space activities without spending its own money, but
the indigenous talent in science and engineering that it
the Draft Space Activities Bill has shaken investor
needs. First, the DOS must ensure that the private
confidence in some respects. It seems that while ISRO
industry operates within the bounds of international law
wants more private sector participation, the
through regulation. Second, the DOS should nurture
organization is limiting participation to its existing
NewSpace startups with technology and infrastructure
suppliers and not fostering growth for new commercial
support while also giving these startups leeway to
companies to enter the sector. ISRO continues to list
develop their own path and pursue market
cutting-edge technology areas for development by
opportunities beyond the Indian government. It is
industry, opportunities in selected science and
important to ensure that IN-SPACe is a completely
separate entity from ISRO to avoid conflicts of interest
35 Sharma, Bhavna, "A Breath of Fresh Air for Indian Startups," promotion-and-authorization-center-space/announcement-of-
GWPrime, September 21, 2021, accessed September 26, 2021, opportunities-ngpes.

37 Business Standard, "Who Was Vikram Sarabhai, ISRO Founder,
trends/a-breath-of-fresh-air-for-indian-startups/.
Vikram Sarabhai Discoveries, Vikram Sarabhai News," Business
36"Announcement of Opportunities for NGPEs," ISRO, accessed Standard, accessed September 24, 2021, 
September 24, 2021, standard.com/about/who-is-vikram-sarabhai.
| 11

and that the Draft Space Activities Bill satisfies changing certain clauses, this new legislation could have
regulatory and industry needs. Third, the Draft Bill a significantly greater impact. When the Draft Bill is
should include normative provisions for sustainability in brought for discussion in the parliament, the Indian
terms of hard guidelines on debris mitigation, end-of-life government should pay heed to security and
retirement, and environmental pollution. international law while also giving adequate
consideration to industry needs.
In its current state, the Draft Space Activities Bill cannot
adequately bolster the private space industry in India.
By allowing the private sector more freedom and
12 | ROHERA | Indian Space Policy for the Private Sector

About CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research organization dedicated to
advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding former U.S. Senator Sam Nunn (D-GA).
Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of values—nonpartisanship,
independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity and professionalism, and talent development.
CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research, analysis, and recommendations. We
organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media appearances that aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and
salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policymakers and the thinking of key influencers.
We work toward a vision of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS is ranked the number one think tank in the United States as well as the defense and national security center of excellence for
2016-2018 by the University of Pennsylvania’s annual think tank report.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be understood to be solely those of
the author(s).
| 13