BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY SPACE FORCE INSTRUCTION 13-604
OF THE AIR FORCE
30 
Nuclear, Space, Missile, Command and
Control
SYSTEM ACCEPTANCE
COMPLIANCE WITH THIS PUBLICATION IS MANDATORY
ACCESSIBILITY: This publication is available for downloading or ordering on the e-
Publishing website at 
RELEASABILITY: There are no releasability restrictions on this publication
OPR: SF/COO/X Certified by: SF/COO
(Lt Gen DeAnna Burt)
Supersedes: AFSPCI10-605, 20 Pages: 16
This publication implements Air Force Policy Directive (AFPD) 13-6, Space Policy, and
Department of the Air Force Policy Directive (DAFPD) 63-1, Integrated Life Cycle Management.
It provides guidance and procedures on system acceptance throughout the Space Force. This
publication applies to uniformed members of the United States Space Force (USSF) and
Department of the Air Force (DAF) civilian employees. This publication does not apply to the
United States Air Force (USAF). USSF information systems processing both Special Access
Program (SAP) and Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) will adhere to the more
restrictive policies of each of the respective SAP and SCI communities. This publication may be
supplemented. This publication may be supplemented at any level, but all supplements must be
routed to the Office of Primary Responsibility (OPR) listed above for coordination prior to
certification and approval. Refer recommended changes and questions about this publication to the
OPR listed above using the DAF Form 847, Recommendation for Change of Publication; route
DAF Forms 847 from the field through the appropriate chain of command. The authorities to waive
delta/unit level requirements in this publication are identified with a Tier (“T-0, T-1, T-2, T-3”)
number following the compliance statement. See DAF Manual (DAFMAN) 90-161, Publishing
Processes and Procedures for a description of the authorities associated with the Tier numbers.
Submit requests for waivers through the chain of command to the appropriate Tier waiver approval
authority, or alternately, to the requestor’s commander for non-tiered compliance items. Ensure all
records generated as a result of processes prescribed in this publication adhere to Air Force
Instruction (AFI) 33-322, Records Management and Information Governance Program, and are
disposed in accordance with (IAW) the Air Force Records Disposition Schedule, which is located
in the Air Force Records Information Management System.

2 SPFI13-604 30 
SUMMARY OF CHANGES
This document supersedes AFSPCI 10-605, Operational Acceptance Process, 20 . This
instruction contains an increased scope to cover fielding and operational acceptance, authorities
and processes within the current USSF organization structure, distinction between systems
developed for force presentation and those not for presentation.
Chapter 1—INTRODUCTION 3
1.1. Overview. ................................................................................................................. 3
Figure 1.1. Systems Acceptance Process ................................................................................... 3
1.2. Cross-Command and Multi-Service Cooperation. ................................................... 4
Chapter 2—ORGANIZATIONAL ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 5
2.1. The Deputy Chief of Space Operations for Operations, Cyber and Nuclear (Chief
Operations Officer (COO) or SF/COO). .................................................................. 5
2.2. Field Command (FLDCOM) Commander. .............................................................. 5
2.3. Acquisition Organization Leadership. ..................................................................... 6
2.4. Space Training and Readiness Command Commander. .......................................... 6
2.5. Space Delta Commander.......................................................................................... 6
2.6. Space Force Test & Evaluation Director. ................................................................ 7
Chapter 3—SYSTEM ACCEPTANCE PROCESS 8
3.1. System Acceptance Process Overview .................................................................... 8
3.2. System Development. .............................................................................................. 8
3.3. Entry. ....................................................................................................................... 8
3.4. Integrated Test. ........................................................................................................ 9
3.5. System Fielding Decision. ....................................................................................... 9
3.6. Deliberate Readiness Development. ........................................................................ 10
3.7. Operational Acceptance Decision ............................................................................ 10
3.8. Force Presentation .................................................................................................... 12
Attachment 1—GLOSSARY OF REFERENCES AND SUPPORTING INFORMATION 14
Attachment 2—SUMMARY OF SYSTEMS ACCEPTANCE CONDITIONS AND
CRITERIA 16

SPFI13-604 30 3
Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION
1.1. Overview. This instruction defines the USSF system acceptance process necessary to ensure
new systems meet operational and institutional requirements, and have the necessary elements
required to support mission execution. System acceptance is implemented through a thorough and
scalable process to deliver essential space warfighting capabilities to the war fighter in accordance
with (IAW) Chief of Space Operations (CSO) strategic objectives. System includes, but is not
limited to, a weapon system intended for operational employment as part of the joint force,
institutional capabilities, service-retained capabilities, software, permanent modifications to
existing systems, training systems, and test and evaluation systems.
1.1.1. This instruction defines the six-step process of intentional activities and decision points
for transferring systems to the operational unit and fielding the force. These steps, as shown
in Figure 1.1 are: (1) Entry, (2) Integrated Test, (3) Fielding Decision, (4) Deliberate
Readiness Development, (5) Operational Acceptance, and (6) Force Presentation.
Figure 1.1. Systems Acceptance Process
1.1.2. The system acceptance process allows the USSF to receive multiple categories of
systems from disparate sources. These categories of systems are further defined in paragraph
3.3.
1.1.3. The system acceptance process has two exit points. These are driven by the end goal of
the system under development.
1.1.3.1. USSF Institutional Systems. Systems developed to meet USSF institutional
requirements (e.g., test, training, and experimental systems) do not require the full scope
of the system acceptance process and are not intended for operational employment. These
systems will not be presented to a combatant command (CCMD). These systems exit the
process of systems acceptance once the fielding decision is made and the system is fielded
as part of an Institutional Force.
1.1.3.2. Systems for Presentation to CCMDs. Systems developed to be presented to a
CCMD will exit this process when the system is declared operationally accepted and made
available for force presentation to CCMDs. Although the system may not be immediately
presented to a CCMD, all stakeholders have tested and evaluated the system against
development and operational criteria and requirements, and the operational acceptance
authority has declared the system suitable for operational use.

4 SPFI13-604 30 
1.2. Cross-Command and Multi-Service Cooperation. Delivery of new systems may involve
stakeholders from other commands, services, agencies, commercial, or allied partners. The
processes outlined in this instruction rely on mutual support among stakeholders and a clear
understanding of what each contributes to the system acceptance process. These stakeholders are
responsible to participate in the system acceptance process and provide input to decisions. The
system acceptance process generates products and outcomes providing leadership with the
necessary information to make informed decisions. Decision points are inherent in the process to
provide the operational acceptance approval authority and stakeholders the opportunity to review
and evaluate system performance prior to an operational acceptance decision. These decision
points should be completed for approval and advancement to the next step or return to a previous
step for further development, test, or evaluation as determined by the approval authority (reference
chapter 2 for organizational roles and responsibilities).

SPFI13-604 30 5
Chapter 2
ORGANIZATIONAL ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
2.1. The Deputy Chief of Space Operations for Operations, Cyber and Nuclear (Chief
Operations Officer (COO) or SF/COO).
2.1.1. The operational acceptance approval authority for systems intended for the USSF as
determined by the Chief Operations Officer.
2.1.2. The early use approval authority for all systems intended for the USSF.
2.1.3. The rapid deployment approval authority for all systems intended for the USSF.
2.1.4. Recommends the addition of operationally accepted systems to forces assigned or
allocated to CCMDs in the Global Force Management processes IAW Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff (CJCSI) 3100.01E, Joint Strategic Planning System.
2.1.5. Recommends the removal of systems from assigned or allocated forces IAW CJCSI
3100.01E.
2.1.6. Recommends apportionment of SAP systems into IJSTO IAW DoDD 5205.07, Special
Access Program (SAP) Policy and CJCSI 3120.08D, Integrated Joint Special Technical
Operations.
2.2. Field Command (FLDCOM) Commander.
2.2.1. The operational acceptance approval authority for all USSF systems for which it has, or
will, have overall operational responsibility. Exceptions are those cases when the Chief
Operations Officer directs approval at the Service level.
2.2.2. The gaining FLDCOM Commander, along with the Milestone Decision Authority
(MDA), as applicable, is the fielding decision authority for all USSF systems coming to their
FLDCOM.
2.2.3. Develops and executes an operational acceptance plan and acceptance criteria to include
full Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leadership, Personnel, Facilities, and Policy
(DOTMLPF-P) elements.
2.2.4. The gaining FLDCOM Commander is the approval authority for interorganizational
transfer of a previously operationally accepted system with residual capability for Institutional
Forces (e.g., a system transferred from Space Operations Command [SpOC] to Space Training
and Readiness Command [STARCOM] for training and/or testing purposes).
2.2.5. Ensures cybersecurity monitoring and testing capability is available and implemented
on systems throughout the life cycle of the fielded system.
2.2.6. Ensures cybersecurity testing and evaluation is conducted throughout the acquisition
life cycle and integrated with interoperability and other functional testing; and that a
cybersecurity representative participates in planning, execution, and reporting of integrated
test and evaluation activities as documented in DoDI 5000.02, Operation of the Adaptive
Acquisition Framework.

6 SPFI13-604 30 
2.3. Acquisition Organization Leadership.
2.3.1. The Program Executive Officer and Program Manager execute integrated life cycle
management responsibilities for space systems, as documented in DoDI 5000.02 and AFI 63-
101/20-101, Integrated Life Cycle Management, and related issuances. Ensures appropriate
resources and funding to support activities required for operational acceptance and maintains
the ability to address deficiencies found during deliberate readiness development.
2.3.2. The Program Manager, in conjunction with STARCOM, defines test and evaluation
strategy for engineering and developmental testing. The MDA and Program Manager
participate in the fielding criteria, test, and evaluation strategy discussions to ensure systems
meet operational requirements.
2.3.3. The MDA (or Service Acquisition Executive [SAE] for Acquisition Categories [ACAT]
ID, IB, IC, IAC, and special interest programs) issues a Materiel Fielding Decision
Memorandum, following a Materiel Release Review, documenting the decision to authorize
the materiel to be fielded. The Program Manager, consistent with DAFPAM 63-128,
Integrated Life Cycle Management, certifies there are no unmitigated operational risks or
deficiencies over the lifecycle affecting the performance or fielding of the system, or remaining
unmitigated risks or deficiencies are accepted by the appropriate authority. The Program
Manager also ensures a safety release has been completed IAW DAFI 91-202, The US Air
Force Mishap Prevention Program, or applicable safety guidance.
2.3.4. The Program Manager delivers the new or modified systems to the operational user(s).
2.4. Space Training and Readiness Command Commander.
2.4.1. Conducts independent integrated test and evaluation of appropriate USSF systems and
delivery of timely, accurate, and expert information in support of system development,
fielding, and operational acceptance IAW DoDI 5000.89, Test and Evaluation, and DoDI
5000.89_DAFI 99-103, Capabilities-Based Test and Evaluation. The independent testing and
evaluations will include Blue Team vulnerability evaluations and intrusion assessments (e.g.,
cooperative vulnerability identification and cooperative vulnerability & penetration
assessment, cybersecurity inspection/assessments, and red team operations [e.g., adversarial
assessment]). (T-1)
2.4.2. Analyzes collected test data against an objective evaluation framework and delivers
timely and accurate decision-quality results.
2.4.3. Provides recommendations via results briefings or written reports to inform the fielding
and operational acceptance authority decision-makers.
2.4.4. Provides environment and infrastructure (e.g., range) to conduct tests and evaluations.
2.5. Space Delta Commander.
2.5.1. Reviews technical data in system acceptance documentation for accuracy and
completeness and provides feedback.
2.5.2. Provides recommended changes to initial and critical sparing plans in system
acceptance documentation for accuracy and completeness.

SPFI13-604 30 7
2.5.3. Utilizes Delta internal processes to address system acceptance support, including
providing feedback to the program office during development, test support, scheduling and
schedule deconfliction, deployment support, required training provided by other FLDCOMs,
required manning, additional required resourcing, and other programmatic issues.
2.5.4. Supports the conduct of the appropriate deployment and employment reviews for
operational systems in coordination with service component leads or institutional stakeholders
as appropriate, ensuring deficiencies are identified to the appropriate acquisition program
office for resolution.
2.5.5. Participates in system acceptance planning/strategy for space systems to clearly identify
operational acceptance requirements, testing strategy, and system delivery expectations.
2.5.6. Supports definition and coordination of operational acceptance criteria.
2.5.7. Ensures units are ready to assume day-to-day responsibilities for the system upon
fielding decision.
2.5.8. Provides operational acceptance approval recommendation for the operational
acceptance decision authority’s consideration.
2.5.9. Responsible for managing assigned weapon systems and cannot delegate the
responsibility. Unit commanders must approve changes to system operations, within the
approved configuration, to manage resources and assure the preservation of system baseline
characteristics. (T-2) If change impacts currency of the operations technical order, the
commander should work with the applicable program office to ensure the update is
appropriately documented.
2.6. Space Force Test & Evaluation Director.
2.6.1. Provides oversight of the Space Force Test & Evaluation (T&E) enterprise, to include
the Integrated Test Force (ITF), the Integrated Test process, and T&E resourcing.
2.6.2. Reviews Test & Evaluation plans for all USSF systems and provides recommendations
for required T&E activities.
2.6.3. Provides recommendations, based on T&E activity results, for system acceptance
and/or residual use capability, to the FLDCOM Commander.

8 SPFI13-604 30 
Chapter 3
SYSTEM ACCEPTANCE PROCESS
3.1. System Acceptance Process Overview . The system acceptance process is the formal
process by which USSF, through FLDCOMs, accepts delivery of a new system or permanent
modifications to existing systems. The program office retains overall responsibility for the life
cycle management of the system throughout the system life cycle, regardless of operational
alignment, transfer, or transition, unless responsibility is agreed to in writing by Chief Operations
Officer. The process is intended to be rigid in its structure, but offers flexibility within each step
(e.g., tailored test) depending on the entry parameters.
3.1.1. This instruction does not provide guidance regarding Initial Operational Capability
(IOC) or Full Operational Capability (FOC) criteria or milestone declarations.
3.1.2. The system acceptance process may be applied more than once during the lifecycle of
an acquisition program. The process uses data gathered during acquisition, technical
evaluations, and operational evaluations to support a final acceptance decision. The steps
within the system acceptance process must be flexible and may be tailored based upon unique
requirements of a program. At a minimum, the Program Management Office (PMO), test
agencies, Deltas, operational units, and FLDCOM must be fully engaged during this process.
(T-1)
3.2. System Development. The responsible PMO leads the development of the system and will
weigh operational, sustainment, and cybersecurity factors as early and as often as possible
throughout the development of a system to minimize risk, cost and performance issues to operators
and sustaining organizations. (T-1) Systems that collect, process, produce, or consume
intelligence data should have intelligence supportability plans, risks, and cost drivers (to include
workforce development) identified as outlined in DoDI 5000.86, Acquisition Intelligence.
3.3. Entry. This process allows the USSF to receive multiple categories of systems from
disparate sources.
3.3.1. The first category of systems to enter the system acceptance process are those that
follow the pathways defined in DoDI 5000.02, The Adaptive Acquisition Framework. This
includes systems acquired by Space Systems Command (SSC) and the Space Development
Agency (SDA). Systems in this category are developed to fulfill an operational or institutional
need.”
3.3.2. The second category of systems to enter this process includes interdepartmental,
interagency, commercial, or international transfers. It also includes systems developed and
operated by DAF sources external to USSF FLDCOMs or PMOs (e.g., Air Force Research
Laboratory, Space Rapid Capabilities Office [SpRCO], and the Missile Defense Agency).
Once these systems have met the objectives of the prototype development, experimentation,
pathfinder, or operations and they still have utility and usable lifespan, then they may be
considered for operational use and system acceptance.
3.3.3. The third category of system to enter this process is the transfer of a previously
operationally accepted system to the Institutional Force with the intent to utilize any residual
system capabilities (e.g., the transfer of an operationally accepted system from SpOC to
STARCOM that is no longer force presented and has residual capabilities for training).

SPFI13-604 30 9
3.3.4. Program managers for systems entering the acceptance process from the first or second
category will notify the Future Operations Division (SF/COO/X) workflow at
SF.COOX.Workflow@spaceforce.mil upon entry. (T-1)
3.4. Integrated Test. After entry into the systems acceptance process, each system will undergo
test and evaluation IAW Department of Defense guidance for the appropriate acquisition model.
(T-1) This is to ensure the system meets the design requirements and is effective, suitable, and
survivable. Proper evaluation and system development adjudication is required for systems
described in paragraphs 3.3.2 and 3.3.3 with residual use to be integrated to the USSF.
3.4.1. Integrated test is an essential step for all systems to include cases of interdepartmental,
interagency, international, commercial, and residual use systems. This process may be
expedited in the case of interagency systems and residual use cases because system
development has already been accomplished and the system was operational for the current
user.
3.4.2. If the gaining FLDCOM Commander deems that formal test and evaluation is not
required, then a commander’s estimate shall be required from the gaining unit. (T-2) This
estimate is required to ensure the gaining unit meets readiness requirements to receive the
system or upgrade.
3.5. System Fielding Decision. The fielding decision is the point at which the system and day-
to-day responsibility is transitioned from the current owner (e.g., PMO, SpRCO, commercial, or
FLDCOM) to the FLDCOM responsible for operating the system. The fielding decision should
not be made until the FLDCOM responsible for operating the system has the necessary resources
available to begin deliberate readiness development, if required.
3.5.1. System fielding alone does not constitute full operational capability and should not be
used for CCMD-driven operations until formal operational acceptance. The current owner
must plan appropriate resources and funding to support activities to address deficiencies found
during deliberate readiness development in a timely manner. (T-2) Systems that have been
fielded but do not constitute operational capability can be used for test, training, or other
institutional activities. Further, for enterprise-wide capabilities/subsystems that support
multiple operational programs/systems across an enterprise, operational acceptance criteria
will be jointly determined by the user and development communities and documented in an
approved operational acceptance plan. (T-2)
3.5.2. If the system entered the system acceptance process IAW paragraph 3.3.1,
collaboration between the FLDCOM and the acquisition MDA is required for a successful
fielding. The MDA or SAE authorizes the system for fielding and the FLDCOM Commander
retains decision authority to accept the system.
3.5.3. Systems developed to be used for test, training, research and development, and
experimental forces are considered fielded once it is determined that they meet development
criteria.

10 SPFI13-604 30 
3.6. Deliberate Readiness Development. Upon fielding, systems intended to conduct CCMD
operations transition to a period of deliberate readiness development. The gaining FLDCOM is
responsible for the specific readiness criteria and timelines. Distinguishing between a fielding and
an acceptance decision allots a time period for an operational unit to attain proficiency and for the
CCMD to increase their employment confidence. This ensures that all parties are ready and able
to employ the system when the capability is presented to a CCMD. Deliberate readiness
development does not apply to systems fielded with the purpose to fulfill USSF institutional
requirements.
3.6.1. A component of deliberate readiness development is the trial period. The trial period
provides the operating unit an opportunity to exercise the system using operational techniques
and procedures. It ensures the unit is able to perform continued day-to-day operations and all
associated support activities. The system will be employed in an operational configuration
with sufficient operational safeguards in place to mitigate risk. (T-2) Trial period length is
determined by the operational acceptance approval authority and is documented in the
operational acceptance plan.
3.6.2. In addition to the trial period, the deliberate readiness development phase includes: live
training, live fire exercises, mission rehearsals, and tactics development. Each of these
activities are used to demonstrate the tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs), command
and control, intelligence, force protection, logistical, and interoperability elements available to
enable mission accomplishment, as well as the full DOTMLPF-P elements required to support
sustained operational activities.
3.6.3. The unit gaining a system will require readiness training during deliberate readiness
development. (T-2) Interdepartmental, interagency, or international transfer authorities have
a significant role during this period and are required to provide all necessary documents and
procedures to enable a seamless transfer (e.g., TTPs, safety information, technical and
operations manuals).
3.6.4. While a system operates in its operational environment with the operations unit, no
CCMD-directed operations are authorized at this point without coordination consistent with
processes described in paragraphs 3.8.3.1 or 3.8.3.2. For SpOC systems, exceptions may be
granted by SpOC/S3 when fielding of a system requires that CCMD-directed operations must
be executed during trial period to accomplish required fielding and operational testing
activities (e.g., the use of a ground system in trial period to control operationally accepted
satellites that are broadcasting operational signals supporting CCMD-directed operations).
3.7. Operational Acceptance Decision . The final significant decision point in the system
acceptance process is the operational acceptance decision. When operational acceptance criteria
are met, DOTMLPF-P elements required to support sustained operational activities are in place,
risks are deemed acceptable for employment in an operational capacity through coordination with
service component leads or institutional stakeholders, and the approval authority declares the new
system or modification able to support its operational mission. The operational acceptance
approval authority could: 1) accept, 2) accept with liens, or 3) reject a system for operational use.

SPFI13-604 30 11
A lien is placed on the operational acceptance decision when a criterion is not met. The lien will
be documented in the operational acceptance memorandum along with a designated responsible
party to resource and execute the remedy. (T-1) Operational acceptance decisions may be
executed multiple times within a program’s life cycle depending on the unique delivery schedule
of capabilities or modifications to a fielded system. For example, the launch of an additional
satellite into an existing constellation (e.g., Global Positioning System) may drive an operational
acceptance decision for use of that particular asset.
3.7.1. The operational acceptance approval authority declares the new system able to perform
its operational mission and is ready for presentation to the CCMD. The approval authority
takes recommendations from stakeholders into consideration and is the final approval
authority. If the approval authority makes the decision to reject the system for operational use
and determines fix actions are necessary, the program office is responsible to lead the effort to
rectify the identified issue and/or resource changes needed to meet operational acceptance
criteria. By rare exception all Category 1 deficiencies discovered in testing will be addressed
by the program office and cleared by the Integrated Test Team IAW T.O. 00-35D-54, USAF
Deficiency Reporting, Investigation, and Resolution, prior to operational acceptance. (T-1)
The operational acceptance decision is documented with an operational acceptance
memorandum signed by the approval authority, or their delegated representative. The rationale
supporting the operational acceptance decision will be documented in the memorandum (e.g.,
why it was accepted, accepted with lien(s), or rejected a system for operational use). (T-2)
3.7.2. The operational acceptance approval authority determines if new systems have: 1)
achieved documented operational objectives, 2) demonstrated required levels of reliability and
dependability, and 3) accounted for the resources necessary to support sustained operations as
defined within the operational acceptance plan.
3.7.3. The operational acceptance plan is a tailored plan that documents the specific actions,
timelines, criteria, and organizational responsibilities for operational acceptance of a new
system. It is focused from operational testing through deliberate readiness development to
operational acceptance and addresses key decision points with corresponding criteria for
success.
3.7.4. Operational acceptance plans are developed for new systems and new capabilities to
existing systems. Because operational acceptance criteria, decision parameters, risk tolerances
and delivery timelines are unique for each program capability, the operational acceptance plan
may be a tailorable document to address the unique parameters of each capability delivery. At
a minimum, the operational acceptance plan must address the criteria required for an
operational acceptance decision. (T-1) An initial operational acceptance plan must be
approved before Milestone B for major capability acquisition or within two years of start for
middle tier acquisition. (T-1)

12 SPFI13-604 30 
3.7.4.1. Responsibility for developing the operational acceptance plan resides with the
FLDCOM that has, or will have, overall operational responsibility for the system. The
designated FLDCOM will update the operational acceptance plan when a significant
change to the development, fielding, or sustainment of the program or system impacts the
ability to execute the plan. The operational acceptance plan is coordinated with identified
stakeholders at the level commensurate with the operational acceptance approval authority.
Coordination will include the MDA, PM, appropriate FLDCOM directorates, the test unit,
the gaining operational unit, and other organizations as required. (T-2) Stakeholder
meetings may be used to address issues on operational acceptance criteria and other
important aspects of the operational acceptance plan. The operational acceptance decision
authority is the final approval authority for operational acceptance.
3.7.5. Modifications are changes to hardware or software to satisfy an operational mission
requirement by removing or adding a capability or function, enhancing technical performance
or suitability, or changing the form, fit, function, or interface of an in-service, configuration-
managed DAF asset as documented in DAFPAM 63-128. Modifications require an operational
acceptance decision, unless the modification includes only operation and maintenance funded
actions which preserve a previously established performance through routine, recurring
maintenance actions to address product quality or identified vulnerabilities (e.g., software
version patching). The PM, FLDCOM directorate, and operational unit coordinate on the level
of modification and required decision.
3.8. Force Presentation . Following operational acceptance, the system is ready to be presented
to a CCMD. The operational acceptance authority will notify the Force Management Division
(SF/COO/S7O) that a system may be included in the Global Force Management processes IAW
CJCSI 3100.01E. (T-0)
3.8.1. The Chief Operations Officer recommends if a system to be presented to a CCMD for
operations adequately supports warfighter requirements. If a system is incorporated into a
USSF unit that is not currently assigned to a CCMD, per the Forces For table, then that system
will be service retained IAW CJCSI 3100.01E. (T-0)
3.8.2. Integrated Joint Special Technical Operations (IJSTO) is the process used by CCMDs
and components to plan, task, and employ SAP capabilities. The USSF will apportion SAP
capabilities into IJSTO at the earliest opportunity IAW CJCSI 3120.08D, Integrated Joint
Special Technical Operations. (T-0)
3.8.3. Systems that do not complete the full system acceptance process may still be requested
for use by a CCMD. These could be systems that meet an urgent need, and the operational
acceptance process cannot be completed in a timely manner. These systems will use the
following deviations from the system acceptance process.
3.8.3.1. Early Use. Early use is the operational use of a system while it is still in
development. Operational users may consider early use of an asset if there is a CCMD-
driven operational need and it is deemed necessary and advantageous to deploy the asset
to increase military utility with the understanding the asset is still in development. The
requesting agency and gaining FLDCOM will coordinate the early use request with the
acquiring organization to determine capabilities, limitations, risks, interim procedures,
resource requirements and readiness levels. The responsible FLDCOM in conjunction with
the gaining command and operations community assesses the feasibility of early use for a

SPFI13-604 30 13
system. Users may conduct early use operations in parallel with development and testing
activities. The providing program office and gaining FLDCOM will resolve conflicts
between operational and developmental priorities on a case-by-case basis. Systems that
meet the criteria of early use require Chief Operations Officer approval informed by the
FLDCOM responsible for operating the system and the acquisition organization. Early use
does not negate the requirement to adhere to the system acceptance process, which still
applies to gain an operational acceptance decision.
3.8.3.2. Rapid Deployment. Capabilities requiring rapid deployment (e.g., Joint Urgent
Operational Needs (JUON), Joint Emergent Operational Needs (JEON), Joint Capability
Technological Demonstrations (JCTD), and Urgent Operational Needs (UON)) follow
rapid acquisition development processes for fielding. These processes follow tailored
acquisition and test activities requiring the execution of the system acceptance process in
a compressed/modified timeline to ensure systems can be successfully fielded with
required support and acceptable risk. Systems that meet the criteria of rapid deployment
systems require Chief Operations Officer approval informed by the gaining FLDCOM
responsible for operating the system and the acquisition organization.
DEANNA M. BURT
Lieutenant General, USSF
Chief Operations Officer

14 SPFI13-604 30 
Attachment 1
GLOSSARY OF REFERENCES AND SUPPORTING INFORMATION
References
DoDI 5000.02, Operation of the Adaptive Acquisition System, 8 
DoDI 5000.86, Acquisition Intelligence, 11 
DoDI 5000.89, Capabilities-Based Test and Evaluation, 13 
DAFI 90-161, Publishing Processes and Procedures
CJCSI 3100.01E, Joint Strategic Planning System, 21 
CJCSI 3120.08D, Joint Special Technical Operations, 28 
AFPD 13-6, Space Policy, 13 
AFI 63-101/20-101, Integrated Life Cycle Management, 30 
AFI 33-322, Records Management and Information Governance Program, 23 
DAFPAM 63-128, Integrated Life Cycle Management, 3 
T.O. 00-35D-54, USAF Deficiency Reporting, Investigation, and Resolution, 1 
Prescribed Forms
None
Adopted Forms
DAF Form 847, Recommendation for Change of Publication
Abbreviations and Acronyms
CCMD—Combatant Command
CSO—Chief of Space Operations
DAF—Department of the Air Force
DOTMLPF-P—Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leadership, Personnel, Facilities,
and Policy
FLDCOM—Field Command
JCTD—Joint Capability Technical Demonstrations
JUON—Joint Urgent Operational Needs
PMO—Program Management Office
USSF—United States Space Force
UON—Urgent Operational Needs
JEON—Joint Emergency Operational Need

SPFI13-604 30 15
USAF—United States Air Force
IAW—In Accordance With
CJCSI—Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction
STARCOM—Space Training and Readiness Command
SpOC—Space Operations Command
SSC—Space Systems Command
MDA—Milestone Decision Authority
TTPs—Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures
O&M—Operations and Maintenance
IJSTO—Integrated Joint Special Technical Operations
SAP—Special Access Program
Terms
System—a weapon system intended for operational employment as part of the joint force,
institutional capabilities, service-retained capabilities, software, permanent modifications to
existing systems, training, and test and evaluation systems.
Vulnerability Assessment—Systematic examination of an information system or product to
determine the adequacy of security measures, identify security deficiencies, provide data from
which to predict the effectiveness of proposed security measures, and confirm the adequacy of
such measures after implementation.
Category 1 Deficiency—Those deficiencies which may cause death, severe injury, or severe
occupational illness; may cause loss or major damage to a weapon system; critically restrict the
combat readiness capabilities of the using organization; or which would result in a production line
stoppage, and for which there is no viable workaround.

16 SPFI13-604 30 
Attachment 2
SUMMARY OF SYSTEMS ACCEPTANCE CONDITIONS AND CRITERIA
A2.1. Entry of system from PMO to be force presented to support CCMD activities.
A2.1.1. IAW paragraph 3.3.1, the system will go through the entire six-step process of: (1)
Entry, (2) Integrated Test, (3) Fielding Decision, (4) Deliberate Readiness Development, (5)
Operational Acceptance, and (6) Force Presentation.
A2.1.2. The system is an operationally accepted system which is available for CCMD
activities.
A2.2. Entry of system from PMO for use by an Institutional Force.
A2.2.1. IAW paragraph 3.3.1., The system will go through steps one and three of the six-
step process: (1) Entry, (3) Fielding Decision.
A2.2.2. The system undergoes a fielding decision by an Institutional Force and will be used
for USSF activities.
A2.3. Entry of system from an external agency to be force presented to support CCMD
activities.
A2.3.1. IAW paragraph 3.3.2, the system will go through the entire six-step process of: (1)
Entry, (2) Integrated Test, (3) Fielding Decision, (4) Deliberate Readiness Development, (5)
Operational Acceptance, and (6) Force Presentation.
A2.3.2. A commander’s estimate is required to ensure the gaining unit is properly postured to
receive the system IAW paragraph 3.4.1.
A2.3.3. This system is an operationally accepted system which is available for CCMD
activities.
A2.4. Entry of system from an external agency for use by an Institutional Force.
A2.4.1. IAW paragraph 3.3.2, the system will go through steps one through three of the six-
step process of: (1) Entry, (2) Integrated Test, (3) Fielding Decision.
A2.4.2. A commander’s estimate is required if integrated test is expedited or not required IAW
paragraph 3.4.1.
A2.4.3. The system undergoes a fielding decision by an Institutional Force and will be used
for USSF activities.
A2.5. Return of system from CCMD operations to an Institutional Force.
A2.5.1. IAW paragraph 3.3.3, the system will go through steps one through three of the six-
step process of: (1) Entry, (2) Integrated Test (3) Fielding Decision.
A2.5.2. The system will be recommended to be no longer assigned or allocated to CCMDs
IAW paragraph 2.1.2.
A2.5.3. A commander’s estimate is required if integrated test is not required IAW paragraph
3.4.1.
A2.5.4. This system is available to be used for USSF activities.