FLY ME TO THE MOON
Worldwide Cislunar and Lunar Missions
AUTHOR
Kaitlyn Johnson
A Report of the
CSIS AEROSPACE SECURITY PROJECT

FLY ME TO THE MOON
Worldwide Cislunar and Lunar Missions
AUTHOR
Kaitlyn Johnson
A Report of the
CSIS AEROSPACE SECURITY PROJECT

II
Fly
Me
to
the
Moon
About CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, non-
profit policy research organization dedicated to advancing practical ideas to
address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in
2015, succeeding former U.S. senator Sam Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962,
CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president and chief executive
officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by
a distinct set of values—nonpartisanship, independent thought, innovative
thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity and professionalism, and
talent development. CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making
real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their
research, analysis, and recommendations. We organize conferences, publish,
lecture, and make media appearances that aim to increase the knowledge,
awareness, and salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and the
interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key
policymakers and the thinking of key influencers. We work toward a vision of
a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed
herein should be understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2022 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
All rights reserved
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
202-887-0200 | 

Kaitlyn
Johnson
About the Aerospace Security Project
The Aerospace Security Project (ASP) at CSIS explores the technological,
budgetary, and policy issues related to the air and space domains and inno-
vative operational concepts for air and space forces. Part of the International
Security Program at CSIS, ASP is led by Senior Fellow Todd Harrison. ASP’s
research focuses on space security, air dominance, long-range strike, and civil
and commercial space. Learn more at aerospace.csis.org.
III
Project Scope
This project contains a compendium of cislunar and lunar missions from
government and commercial entities around the world. There are several
planned national and commercial missions to explore cislunar space or the
Moon. Often government efforts will enable or utilize private industry missions;
however, sometimes commercial space companies are independently pur-
suing such missions. This paper concludes with analysis on the trends and
commonalities across all of these planned endeavors.
Timelines for space missions shift regularly due to challenges such as funding
inequities or technical delays. While this paper is as accurate as possible as of
its publication, it is highly likely that dates and details of missions will continue
to change as missions progress.
Acknowledgments
This publication is made possible by general support to CSIS. The author would
like to thank Nico Wood, Todd Harrison, and Will Taylor for their support of
the research, design, and publication processes.

Contents
Introduction 1
Defining Cislunar 2
Europe and Russia 3
European Space Agency 4
France 5
Germany 5
Italy 5
Luxembourg 6
Russia 6
Ukraine 8
United Kingdom 8
Indo-Pacific 9
Australia 10
China 10
India 12
Japan 12
South Korea 13
Thailand 13
Americas 15
Canada 16
Mexico 16
United States of America 16
Middle East and Africa 21
Israel 22
Turkey 22
United Arab Emirates 22
Trends across Planned Missions 23
About the Author 28
Endnotes 29
IV
Fly
Me
to
the
Moon

Kaitlyn
Johnson
Introduction
The crowning achievement of the notorious Space Race between the United
States and the Soviet Union occurred in , when the first humans
landed on the Moon. Prior to this, the United States and the Soviet Union sent
several uncrewed missions to the lunar surface, culminating in an American
crewed mission on the Moon. Now, over 50 years later, nations are looking
toward the Moon as a goalpost of both national space capability and pride. To
achieve these goals—and potentially go beyond the Moon to Mars—nations
will need to build significant cislunar and lunar infrastructure. This open-
source assessment aggregates and analyzes publicly available statements,

documents, and sources describing these worldwide efforts in cislunar space.
This assessment begins with an evaluation of national and international
definitions of cislunar space, as there is no commonly accepted definition
across the international or technical community. It then evaluates national
and commercial plans to send missions to cislunar space or the Moon. The
analysis presents an overview of national civil, military, and commercial ac-
tivity, as well as multinational activity, in or planned for cislunar space.1 Lunar
missions are also included to showcase the demand signal of missions that
will pass through cislunar space or be supported by satellites in cislunar orbits.
The assessment concludes with key trends, possible future flashpoints, and
recommendations for further analysis.
Many nations view lunar and cislunar investments as a means to advance
their domestic space industrial capabilities and as the first step toward a
greater presence in near-Earth space. The scientific and economic potential
of a robust space presence and international partnerships in space drives
many companies and countries to pursue lunar and cislunar missions.2 The
opportunities lunar and cislunar missions present have caused nations to
begin designing policies to regulate and promote celestial resource extraction
and in situ resource utilization (ISRU)—or the production and manufacture of
materials found on the Moon or other celestial bodies.
The rush to settle cislunar space or the Moon is motivated both by science and
the important strategic value held by certain sites in cislunar space or on the
lunar surface. For various sites, certain physical properties add value, such as
stability on orbit or the prospect of water in the form of ice. For more detail on
these high-value locations, see: Eyes on the Prize: The Strategic Implications
of Cislunar Space and the Moon.3

Defining Cislunar
Thus far,
Despite many nations, organizations, and companies investing in lunar and
there is no
cislunar ventures, few specifically define cislunar. Competing definitions include:
▪ “The area between the Earth and the Moon, including the Moon’s or-
consensus
bit”—including low Earth orbit (LEO), medium Earth orbit (MEO), and
geosynchronous orbit (GEO);4 and
on the
▪ The distance from beyond GEO (also known as XGEO) to the Moon’s surface.5
demarcation
The definition of cislunar may influence national policies and plans, commercial
investments, and broader international understanding. Thus far, there is no
of cislunar
consensus on the demarcation of cislunar space, and to ensure entities with
lunar ambitions are not talking past one another, establishing a formal defini- space.
tion of cislunar space could be a valuable action taken by the United Nations.
While China, Russia, and the United States occasionally reference the bounds
of cislunar space in public documents or statements, other nations do not ap-
pear to specifically and consistently define cislunar space. While it seems that
many civil space organizations and universities have written on the technical
aspects of cislunar space, policymakers and the wider international community
have not settled on one consistent technical definition. This may be because
there is no clear “shoreline” or distance from Earth at which the properties of
the space environment change significantly to designate it as cislunar space.
For this paper, cislunar space includes the area between XGEO and the Moon,
as well as orbits that are affected by lunar gravitational pull and go beyond
the Moon. This does not include LEO, MEO, and GEO but does include low
lunar orbit (LLO)—the area between 100 kilometers of the Moon’s surface and
the L1 and L2 Lagrange points.6 Earth-Moon Lagrange points L4 and L5—the
stable regions of the Moon’s Trojan points along the Moon’s orbit—are also
considered part of cislunar space for
the purposes of this paper. Once
satellites are placed in XGEO orbit,
*The Moon’s orbit around or higher, the Moon’s gravity has
the Earth is not to scale.
Distances are not to scale. an increasingly significant effect
L4
(in addition to the Earth’s gravity).
At lower altitudes (including LEO,
GEO
MEO, and GEO), the Moon’s gravity
MEO
has relatively less effect on satel-
LEO
lites due to the nonuniformity of the
Earth’s gravitational field and other
LLO

forces, such as atmospheric drag at
L3 L1 L2
lower altitudes.7 This definition of
cislunar space also appears to be
CISLUNAR SPACE most consistent with much of the
technical research found.
L5
Figure 1: Visual Representation
of Cislunar Space
Source: Author’s own research and analysis.
Fly
Me
to
the
Moon

EUROPE & RUSSIA

Europe
and
Russia
the discussion focused around lunar and deep-space
European Space Agency
exploration missions, as well as telemetry, tracking, and
The European Space Agency (ESA) is contributing to many control for these missions.14 In the past, ESA and CNSA
international cislunar and lunar efforts. One prominent have discussed cooperation for south pole lunar missions,
effort is the partnership between ESA and Roscosmos, the including the successful Chang’e-5 lunar return mission.15
Russian space agency, on three lunar missions involving
two landers and one orbiter. For Luna 25, ESA provided a ESA’s Moonlight Initiative
European Pilot-D camera that will assist the lunar landing
The Moonlight Initiative is an effort led by ESA to partner
by imaging the terrain. Luna 25 is expected to launch in
with spacefaring nations and commercial space com-
.8 Expected in 2024, the Luna 26 orbiter mission
panies to develop a communication and navigation
will utilize an ESA ground station for communications
infrastructure in cislunar space. This network will support
back to Earth.9 In 2025, the Luna 27 mission will launch
lunar missions and add the capability for lunar landers
and land on the Moon. ESA is contributing to the Luna 27
to land on the lunar surface more easily because they
mission once again by providing Pilot cameras that will
could rely on a shared the network instead of developing
assist the lander in completing the challenging landing
separate communications and navigation systems for
near the Moon’s south pole. The Pilot cameras observe
individual missions.16
the lunar terrain and correlate their view with data from
maps of the lunar surface. This allows the lander to rec- An impressive collection of European companies, organi-
ognize craters and determine its location over the Moon’s zations, and universities will support the effort, including
surface while landing. For Luna 27, ESA will also provide Surrey Satellite Technology, Airbus, SES, Kongsberg Sat-
the European Prospect Drill, which will collect samples ellite Services, Goonhilly Earth Station, and GMV-NSL.17
of water, ice, and other minerals and chemicals under
A second tranche of European commercial companies
the lunar surface at the south pole. Along with Russian
will also take part in the initiative, including Telespazio,
instruments, the European drill will assist in the lander’s
Thales Alenia Space, Inmarsat, Hispasat, Aerospace
mission to identify water and other minerals by using an
Logistics Technology Engineering Company, Argotec,
onboard miniature laboratory built into the drill itself.10
and Nanoracks Europe, as well as two universities: the
As part of ESA’s Space 4.0 initiative, which highlights new Politecnico Milano and the Università Commerciale Luigi
commercial technologies as well as new national objectives Bocconi. In addition to this wide base of commercial
in space, ESA proposed the Moon Village concept.11 The expertise, ESA plans to engage with other spacefaring
Moon Village is an idea that a cohesive lunar community nations, including China, India, Russia, and the United
can be “created when groups join forces without first States.18
sorting out every detail, instead simply coming together
with a view to sharing interests and capabilities.”12 The ESA Support to the U.S. Lunar Gateway
Moon Village would allow participation from any nation and Artemis Programs
or non-governmental actor, and participation would vary
ESA selected Airbus Defence and Space as the main contrac-
in involvement, sector, and activity. For example, some
tor for the European Service Module (ESM) of the Artemis
actors would have a wholly robotic presence, while some
program, run by the United States’ National Aeronautical
might wish to establish a permanent crewed scientific
and Space Administration (NASA). While NASA’s Orion
outpost (such as in Antarctica), while others may only
spacecraft will carry crew from Earth to cislunar space,
be interested in tourism to the Moon. The Moon Village
the ESM will act as the spacecraft’s service module and
is an idea or vision for future human cooperation not
will be providing “electricity, water, oxygen, and nitrogen,
defined by national interest or competition.13 However,
as well as keeping the spacecraft at the right temperature
any of these future activities envisioned would require
and on course.”19 A total of six ESMs have been awarded
significant cislunar and lunar-based infrastructure, such
to Airbus as of .20 Three ESMs are currently
as cislunar communications relays and lunar life support.
in development to support the Artemis program. ESM-1 is
On April 1, 2021, the new director of ESA met the direc- already paired with the U.S.-designed Crew Module and
tor of the China National Space Administration (CNSA) is undergoing final preparations prior to a planned 2022
to discuss future space cooperation between the two test launch. 21 ESM-2 is ready to be flown from Germany
space agencies. According to the CNSA press release, to NASA’s Kennedy Space Center and will be included

Kaitlyn
Johnson
in the first crewed test flight to send astronauts in orbit France is not currently planning any military or national
around the Moon.22 ESM-3 will support the landing of the security space missions to cislunar orbit or the lunar
first woman and person of color on the Moon. surface.32 There are also no concrete plans from French
commercial space companies to conduct cislunar missions
ESA’s European Large Logistics Lander (L3) program is
without government funding or as part of a broader ESA
currently in the study phase with two potential prime
initiative. However, a French-Italian company, Thales
contractors, Airbus Defense and Space and Thales Alenia Alenia Space, has been awarded several contracts to
Space.23 These two companies will study options for the support ESA’s contribution to the Artemis program. See
Cis-Lunar Transfer Vehicle (CLTV) for ESA. The CLTV will the Italy section for details on these programs.
be an advanced on-orbit servicing satellite that can also
assist in lunar descent. The CLTV will be able to transport

cargo or fuel into lunar orbit and transfer a larger lunar
module into LLO for landing and ascent missions. It will
Germany
also be capable of servicing other satellites in non-cislunar
orbits, such as GEO.24 The planned lander is envisioned to Germany is not currently planning any military or national
support the Artemis program and independent European security space missions to cislunar orbit or the lunar
missions by delivering massive amounts (possibly 1.5 tons) surface.33 The German Space Agency (DLR) is also not
of cargo payload to the lunar surface.25 The study phase planning any national civil space missions to cislunar
began in mid-2021 and is expected to move to the System space. While most of Germany’s civil space endeavors are
Design Review in late 2022.26 ESA has already selected through ESA, DLR funded an effort from Kiel University to
develop an instrument that measures radiation in space.
three contending payloads for the first L3 mission. The
This effort, known as the Lunar Lander Neutron and Do-
first payload will be selected in 2022 with an undefined
simetry instrument, was successfully launched onboard
first launch date in the late 2020s.27
China’s Chang’e-4 lunar lander, which is still active.34
The international habitation module, or I-HAB, is being
Plus Ultra Space, a European space company based in
led by ESA, in cooperation with the Japan Aerospace
Germany, Spain, and Luxembourg, plans to build a con-
Exploration Agency, Canadian Space Agency, and NASA.
stellation of satellites called Harmony in LLO to establish
The I-HAB is a pressurized module designed for crew
better communications and navigation infrastructure for
quarters that will allow for external vehicle docking.
cislunar and lunar missions.35 Plus Ultra Space recently
Thales Alenia Space is the prime project manager and
signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for a
is working to develop aspects of the pressurized module
demonstration mission in 2023, with the satellite becoming
infrastructure, including avionics, thermal and mechanical
operational in LLO by 2024.36
systems, and pressurized hatches.28 The I-HAB is intended
to launch in 2026.29
Italy
France The Italian Space Agency is waiting for its nanosatellite
ArgoMoon to launch on NASA’s Space Launch System
The French space agency, Center National D’Études
(SLS). Designed by Italian company Argotec, the Ar-
Spatiales (CNES), does not currently have any planned
goMoon satellite is critical to testing technology and
independent cislunar or lunar missions, but it plans to
providing proof of concept for future cislunar missions.
partner bilaterally with many other nations and through
A key aspect of the mission is to “demonstrate the ability
ESA. For example, France was one of the first partners that to perform operations in close proximity of the Interim
signed on to NASA’s Artemis program. Additionally, the Cryogenic Propulsion Stage (ICPS)” on the Orion space-
Chinese Chang’e-6 mission will feature a French radon craft.37 The ICPS is the second stage liquid oxygen/liquid
measurement instrument, DORN.30 DORN’s objective is to hydrogen-based booster.38 ArgoMoon will take pictures
measure and record regolith outgassing and other volatile of the ICPS during its flight to the Moon.39 After this test,
gasses in the lunar exosphere. Chang’e-6 is expected to ArgoMoon will photograph the Earth, Moon, and sur-
launch in 2024.31 rounding environment in an orbit that passes through

cislunar space.40 The expected launch date continues to from within celestial bodies. While the 1967 Outer Space
slip with SLS delays but is currently expected in 2022.41 Treaty dictates that no territory can be claimed on the
Moon or another celestial body, Luxembourg asserts that
As previously mentioned, the French-Italian space com-
there is nothing illegal about claiming resources derived
pany Thales Alenia Space is a key partner for Artemis and
from a celestial body.49 An analogy often referred to is the
the Lunar Gateway. Italy may further support the Artemis
finishing industry: while a nation cannot own international
program by supplying “crew habitats, lunar surface sci-
waters, fishermen have ownership rights to the resources
entific investigations, and telecommunications services”;
(e.g., fish, shellfish) they catch in them.50
however, further details have not yet been announced.42
Commercial
ESA awarded Thales Alenia Space several cislunar and
This legal framework in Luxembourg has drawn several
lunar contracts to support these international partnerships.
commercial endeavors, such as Cislunar Industries and
The Habitation and Logistics Outpost (HALO)—the first
ispace Europe, to establish headquarters in Luxembourg.
module for the Lunar Gateway—is also being supported
Luxembourg is a part of the Artemis program and intends
by Thales Alenia Space. HALO is led by U.S. company
to support in situ resourcing and mining missions.51
Northrop Grumman Corporation, and Thales Alenia
Space was selected to “provide its primary structure and
micrometeoroid protection system.”43 HALO is planned
to launch in 2024, along with the Power and Propulsion
Element and will serve as the pressurized living quarters Russia
for any visiting astronauts to the Lunar Gateway.44
The Russian space agency, Roscosmos, has several part-
ESA also awarded Thales Alenia Space the European nerships and cooperative lunar missions. Furthermore,
System Providing Refueling, Infrastructure, and Telecom- there are several pseudo-commercial subsidiaries of
munications (ESPRIT) contract in early .45 The Rosocosmos that will likely be involved in these future
government-led lunar missions. The flagship of Russian
ESPRIT module for the Lunar Gateway is a cross-Thales
lunar exploration is the Luna program, which includes
Alenia Space mission involving teams from France, Italy,
five planned missions: Luna 25–29 (Table 1 includes a
Belgium, Spain, and the United Kingdom. ESPRIT will be
description of each mission).
responsible for communications and refueling for the
Lunar Gateway and will have an observation window.
ESPRIT refueling will extend Lunar Gateway’s operational
life, as well as enable a future reusable lunar lander or
support other deep-space exploration missions.46 There
are two modules that make up ESPRIT: the HALO Lunar
Communication System that is planned to launch in
2024 and the ESPRIT Refueling Module that is planned
for launch in 2027.47
Luxembourg has
positioned itself

Luxembourg
to have a niche in
While not a major space power, Luxembourg has po-
sitioned itself to have a niche in space resourcing and
space resourcing
mining, including materials on the Moon. To do this,
the country launched the SpaceResources.Lu Initiative and mining,
in 2016, which established a “unique legal, regulatory,
and business environment enabling private investors including materials
and companies to explore and use space resources.”48
Luxembourg’s legal and regulatory framework allows on the Moon.
legal ownership of minerals or other resources mined
Europe
and
Russia

Kaitlyn
Johnson
water might be as a resource for future lunar missions,
Government
including a sustained presence on the Moon.
Luna 25 is a lunar lander mission and will be the first
Russian lunar program since Luna 24 in 1976.52 Luna 25 Luna 28, or Luna Grunt, is a lunar sample return mission
will land near the Moon’s south pole to search for signs planned by Roscosmos. The Luna 28 module is expected
of water and other minerals under the lunar surface as to return to Earth samples of regolith from the lunar south
well as to evaluate dust and plasma that make up the polar region. The expected total mass of these samples
Moon’s exosphere. The mission is expected to last at is 2 to 4 kilograms. The mission will select samples from
least one year and will launch in , a date later various locations around the south pole that are likely to
than originally expected due to critical issues that arose include ice.57 The mission is expected to launch in 2027
during testing.53 As aforementioned, ESA is a key partner or later.58 Luna 29 will include a lunar rover that will carry

for this mission. instruments capable of analyzing geological samples on
site.59 The estimated launch date for this mission is 2029.60
Scheduled for 2025, the Luna 26 orbital mission will study
the lunar surface from low lunar polar orbit to inform Russia is planning for a crewed mission to orbit the Moon
in 2028 called Oryol.61 Dependent on successful uncrewed
the landing site for Luna 27 and serve as a communica-
flights in 2023 and 2024, the Oryol spacecraft will fly around
tions relay for Russian lunar landers.54 Luna 26 will also
the Moon and better position Russia for consistent crewed
“monitor the solar wind and high-energy cosmic rays.”55
capability to cislunar space and—with a future lunar
ESA is again partnering with Roscosmos on this mission.
lander—to the lunar surface.62 Recently, Dmitry Rogozin,
Luna 27, or Luna Resurs, is anticipated in 2026 and will director general of Roscosmos, announced that he met with
not only land on the Moon but also be able to prospect NASA representatives at the International
and analyze the lunar surface. The highly capable drill that Astronautical Congress to discuss the possibility of the
is central to the mission is being developed by ESA and Oryol spacecraft with the Lunar Gateway and the need
will search for underground ice and study the makeup of to adapt technical standards to ensure compatibility.63
the lunar bedrock.56 This mission will bring better under-
standing of how much subsurface ice might be present Table 1: Announced Russian Cislunar and Lunar Missions
near the south pole of the Moon and how accessible this Source: Author’s own research and analysis.
NAME ESTIMATED LAUNCH LOCATION MISSION PARTNERS
Luna 25 Lunar South Pole Region Search for water and minerals ESA
under lunar surface and evaluate
exosphere
Luna 26 2025 Low Lunar Orbit Study lunar surface and ESA
determine Luna 27 landing site
Luna 27 2026 Lunar South Pole Region Prospect and analyze below ESA
(Luna Resurs) lunar surface
Luna 28 2027 or later Lunar South Pole Region Collect samples (including ice) N/A
(Luna Grunt) and return to Earth
Luna 29 2029 TBA Rover with capability to analyze N/A
lunar geological samples
Oryol (test) 2023 Cislunar Orbit Uncrewed test flight N/A
Oryol 2024 International Space Test flight N/A
(second test) Station
Oryol 2028 Crewed Lunar Mission Crewed lunar landing N/A

In , Rogozin directed the Energia Space will move 10 meters from the lander and provide video
Rocket Corporation to study the possibility of downsiz- and 3D lidar imaging of the lunar surface.70 A walking
ing the Oryol spacecraft to make a smaller two-seater rover has legs instead of the traditional wheels to navigate
resupply spacecraft. Dubbed Orlyonok, this craft would more easily around the rough and cratered lunar surface.
use 90 percent of Oryol’s technology and therefore be a Shortly after this first lunar mission, Spacebit will return
cheaper alternative.64 to the Moon with a second mission, this time launched
on a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket.71 The second is a Ukrainian
Another long-term goal for Russia is to establish a human
mission, described previously.
settlement on the Moon by 2040. There are several stages
to achieving this goal, including landing Russia’s first Surrey Satellite Technology Ltd (SSTL) will launch its
cosmonauts on the Moon.65 One recent announcement Lunar Pathfinder mission in 2024.72 The Lunar Pathfinder
is the Russian-Chinese agreement to establish a joint 1 is a cislunar relay satellite that will likely be in LLO. It is
lunar base (see for more).66 Russia is clearly in- planned to be the first of a series of more capable lunar
vesting in cislunar and lunar operations for the future of communication and navigation satellites that will support
the civil space program; however, it is less clear how the future lunar (crewed and uncrewed) missions. Lunar Path-
Russian military may utilize this area of space, as there finder 1 will enable easier communication for polar and
are no public sources indicating plans or goals for lunar far-side lunar explorations. Pathfinder will also host two
military operations. ESA experiments: one is a test of navigation technology
for the Moon, and the second is a radiation detection
Another long-term goal for Russia is to establish a human
monitor for cislunar space. NASA will also collaborate
settlement on the Moon by 2040.
by providing a laser retro-reflector payload, which will
provide data to allow comparison of orbit positioning
data from ESA’s navigation experiment. 73
The Moon Probe Initial Explorer (MoonPIE) project from
Ukraine
TCT Aerospace, a UK-based company, intends to launch a
Ukraine has no government capability (civil or commer- lunar sample return mission in 2025. MoonPIE will return
cial) to place a satellite in cislunar orbit or on the Moon. around 1 kilogram of lunar samples to Earth for further
However, the Ukrainian government is funding Spacebit, a study. MoonPIE also plans to demonstrate reusability
British company led by a Ukrainian CEO, to place a walking for lunar return missions, as well as send a time capsule
rover on the Moon, possibly in late 2022. The estimated to the lunar surface. To reduce ecological harm to the
cost to the Ukrainian government is $1.5 million.67 Moon, the mission intends to land only 50 meters from
the Apollo 12 landing site.74
United Kingdom
The United Kingdom is not currently planning any military
or national security space missions to cislunar orbit or the
lunar surface. The United Kingdom is also not planning
any national civil space missions to cislunar space, as 008
most of the United Kingdom’s civil space endeavors are
through ESA. 68
Commercial
Spacebit, a UK-based company, is planning two lunar
missions. The first will be launched on the inaugural
United Launch Alliance (ULA) Vulcan Centaur launch in
2022.69 The Spacebit walking rover will be deposited on
the lunar surface by the Peregrine lunar lander, developed
by the U.S. company Astrobotic. The first walking rover
Europe
and
Russia

INDO-PACIFIC

Indo-Pacific
Australia
Australia has a long
Australia has a long history of providing integral support
history of providing
to cislunar and lunar missions, including the Australia
Carnarvon station that supported the first Moon landing on
integral support
the Apollo 11 mission.75 From its position in the southern
hemisphere, Australia is ideally situated to integrate with
to cislunar and
other telemetry and tracking capabilities from countries
in the northern hemisphere.
lunar missions.
Government
In coordination with NASA, the recently established
Australian Space Agency is promoting a Moon to Mars
Initiative. This initiative includes $150 million for invest-
ment in Australian space companies or technologies over
the next five years. To distribute funding, the Australian
Space Agency has identified three integrated elements
for applicants:
▪ the Supply Chain program, which will focus on de-
key goal of the Seven Sisters effort is to firmly establish
veloping a noncompetitive (to the United States)
Australia and Australian industry as leaders in space
supply chain network within Australia;
exploration and research by 2030.80
▪ the Demonstrator program, which includes grants
to promote Australian companies developing space Lunar Ascent, another Australian industry-led effort was
technologies; and announced in . Lunar Ascent is a satellite
transport bus that will provide rideshare opportunities
▪ the flagship Trailblazer program that will contribute
for other government and commercial payloads to cislu-
flagship Australian space capability within NASA’s
Artemis program.76 nar space. The first mission is expected to be around 60
kilograms and launch in 2024. There are two customers
On October 12, 2021, NASA and the Australian Space committed thus far.81
Agency announced plans to cooperate on a future lunar
Australia-based Saber Astronautics is partnering with
rover. This mission is part of the “Moon to Mars” flagship
Rhea Space Activity, a new U.S.-based space consulting
Trailblazer program and could land on the Moon as early
firm that won a $50,000 contract from the U.S. Air Force to
as 2026. Australia will support NASA’s Artemis mission by
provide lunaspatial intelligence (LUNINT). Saber will work
providing a lunar rover that will be able to collect surface
toward creating a 3D dashboard that displays noteworthy
samples and return them to an ISRU system, which will
attempt to extract oxygen from these samples.77 objects (including satellites) in cislunar orbit. This product
will add to the limited amount of cislunar situational
Although Australia recently established a space division awareness that exists today. If successful, Saber’s CEO
within the Royal Australian Air Force, there are no publicly hopes that the other Five Eyes nations (Canada, New
announced plans for military missions to cislunar space. 78 Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States)
will be interested in similar capabilities.82
Commercial
Several commercial Australian cislunar missions are also
in progress. Announced in , Seven Sisters
is an Australia-based nongovernmental effort to reach the
China
Moon. A total of 10 entities (including two universities) are
collaborating to send Australia’s first nanosatellites into Like their Russian counterparts, Chinese lunar or cislunar
cislunar orbit in 2023 to search for accessible water. This programs are coordinated by the government at one
effort is in collaboration with NASA’s Artemis program, in point or another—either through direct investment or
which the Australian government is a partner.79 A stated indirect ownership of pseudo-commercial companies.

Kaitlyn
Johnson
Also anticipated to launch in 2024, the Chang’e-7 mis-
Government - Civil
sion consists of a cislunar telecommunications relay, a
China’s Lunar Exploration Program has conducted several
lunar orbiter, a lunar lander, a rover, and a flying probe.87
successful civil lunar missions to date. The stated overall
After releasing the lander package (including the rover
scientific goals include to study the water and chemical
and probe), the orbiter will continue to make scientific
composition of the Moon, assess the age of the South
observations and study from cislunar space. After a soft
Pole Aitken basin, evaluate the early impact history of the
landing on the lunar surface near the south pole, the
solar system, perform ISRU tests, and conduct bioscientific
rover will deploy to perform in situ experiments, while
experiments, among others. Some of these scientific goals
the flying probe will carry an instrument to detect and
are well underway due to the previous Chang’e missions;
study water molecules and hydrogen isotopes.88 Due to
however, this section will focus on ongoing or planned
the absence of an atmosphere, the probe will have to be 011
cislunar and lunar missions.
powered by rockets instead of a rotary wing mechanism
Unlike the other countries in this assessment, China is such as NASA’s Mars helicopter, Ingenuity.
currently operating a robotic lunar rover on the Moon.
With an expected 2027 launch, the details around Chang’e-8
Chang’e-4 is a lunar lander that conducted the first ever
are still solidifying.89 A 2020 paper details that Chang’e-8
soft landing on the far side of the Moon on January 3,
will include a lunar lander, a rover, and another flying
2019. The Chang’e-4 spacecraft operated in LLO before
probe to carry out exploration and verification necessary
landing on the lunar surface. The lunar lander released
for the future lunar station. This mission will conduct an
from the spacecraft, Yutu-2, has traversed the lunar
ISRU experiment to include “separation and extraction of
surface for over two years, exceeding expectations for
rare gasses from lunar soil.”90 These experiments are likely
its operational life.83
to be the foundation of a sustainable Chinese presence
To support the Chang’e-4 mission, China launched two on the Moon and will support the future lunar station.
communications relay satellites into cislunar orbit around
International Lunar Research Station
the L2 point in . These satellites were designed
China has long been planning for a permanent lunar
to support communications from Earth around to the far
research station, but headlines were made in 
side of the Moon—a new challenge for humanity, as no
when China and Russia signed an MOU to cooperate on
other country had ever attempted sustained operations
a joint lunar research station. The document is a vague
on the far side.84
outline of what the partnership may develop into; how-
Launched in , Chang’e-5 is China’s first ever, it does outline some goals and principles that will
lunar sample return mission. The mission was highly underpin the international effort—specifically, that the
successful and returned 1.731 kilograms of material to International Lunar Research Station (ILRS) will have “the
the Earth’s surface just under a month later. Chang’e-5 capability of long-term autonomous operation, built on
included an orbiter and, critically, a lunar lander with the lunar surface and/or on the lunar orbit that will carry
the ability to reascend and rendezvous with the orbiter out multidisciplinary and multiobjective scientific research
in order to return lunar samples to Earth. The lander activities, such as the lunar exploration and utilization,
included capabilities to drill and scoop materials into lunar-based observation, basic scientific experiment, and
a secure capsule, which was later jettisoned from the technical verification.”91 In a meeting with the ESA director
orbiter and made a hard landing on the Earth’s surface.85 general, the CNSA administrator stated that China and
Russia were in agreement to be open to international
Chang’e-6 was originally designed as a backup mission,
cooperation from all nations on ILRS. France has already
prepared in case Chang’e-5 failed. However, with the
expressed interest in the project.92
success of Chang’e-5, the sixth mission will proceed with
a more challenging sample return mission from the lunar An initial version of ILRS is expected to be operational
south pole on the far side of the Moon. It is intended to in the early 2030s, with the capability to host long-term
launch in 2024. Notably, the Chang’e-6 mission will be autonomous robotic missions and short-term crewed
equipped with several international payloads, including missions. By the late 2030s to early 2040s, ILRS will evolve
those from France and Italy. Russia and Sweden have also into a more permanent lunar base that will be able to
been identified as potential contributors.86 sustain long-term crewed missions.93

China is well underway to developing the necessary ca- ISRO is also a key partner with Japan on a joint Lunar
pabilities to establish ILRS, including a new human-rated Polar Exploration (LUPEX) mission, which will launch a
launch vehicle that will be ready by 2030. This same vehi- lunar lander and rover to the Moon’s south pole around
cle will also be able to launch more mass to space than 2024.101 For more information, see the Japan section.
any prior Chinese launch vehicle—something that may
be critical to efficiently building the lunar base.94 There
is also a human-rated lunar lander under development,
but there are minimal publicly available details on this
Japan
project. At a 2020 conference, a presentation indicated
that China will also construct a lunar orbiter and crewed In partnership with ISRO, the Japan Aerospace Exploration
rover for future lunar exploration.95 Agency (JAXA) is developing the LUPEX mission, which
includes a lunar lander and unpressurized rover that will
Government - Military
explore the south pole area of the Moon. The mission is
There is a scarcity of public information about China’s expected to launch no earlier than 2024. In ,
military ambitions in cislunar space and on the Moon. the JAXA president said that this mission will hopefully
However, in mid-2016, Lieutenant General Zhang Yulin, the lead to further human exploration of the Moon, and that
deputy chief of the armament development department the LUPEX is the first step toward developing a pressur-
within China’s leading national defense organization—the ized lunar rover for crewed missions.102 Furthermore,
Central Military Commission—reported that Chinese this mission with ISRO is the foundation for future space
ambitions included military capabilities in cislunar space. cooperation between the two nations, to include “oppor-
Zhang also described the benefits of using cislunar space tunities for cooperation in space situational awareness
and the Moon for research and exploration missions.96 and [a] professional exchange programme.”103 Notable
for this cislunar space assessment, the LUPEX mission
will not have a communication relay satellite but will
directly communicate with ground stations on Earth.104
India
Two cubesats, both designed by JAXA and the Univer-
Lunar exploration is a clear goal of the Indian Space Research sity of Tokyo, will be launched into cislunar space on
Organisation (ISRO). The Chandrayaan-2 mission an SLS flight in 2022. The EQUULEUS cubesat “plans to
included both a lunar lander and an orbiter. Unfortunately, demonstrate low-energy trajectory control techniques
due to a software glitch, the Vikram lander suffered a hard within the Earth-Moon region at EML2 (Earth-Moon L2
landing on the lunar surface, which destroyed the lander Lagrange point), using a new water propulsion system with
and rover.97 The rover mission was intended to survey low thrust and little propellant.”105 EQUULEUS will also
the area near the Moon’s south pole in search of data on monitor radiation in near-Earth space by imaging Earth’s
ice below the surface. The orbiter is intended to have a
seven-year operational life and is currently in operation
in cislunar space.98 Chandrayaan-3, a new lunar mission
planned for , includes a lander and rover
with the same scientific instruments as the failed Chan-
drayaan-2 mission. Originally intended for launch in 2021,

the mission was delayed due to the Covid-19 pandemic.
Chandrayaan-3 will target the same launch site as the
Chandrayaan-2 mission.99
China has long
India is also looking to send humans into space, and
if the mission succeeds as planned, India will become been planning for
the fourth country with a national capability to do so.
India’s long-term goals appear to include a sustained a permanent lunar
human presence in LEO, with the potential for further
human exploration past LEO, likely to include cislunar research station.
space and the Moon.100
Indo-Pacific

Kaitlyn
Johnson
plasmasphere. This data should support further research ispace-designed rover.116 Future planned missions include
on protecting humans from radiation during extended rovers designed to survey for water and will acquire and
space travel.106 The second cubesat, OMOTENASHI (Out- sell data for future lunar missions. In the long term, ispace
standing Moon Exploration Technologies Demonstrated intends to develop an “industrial platform that enables
by Nano Semi-Hard Impactor), will be the smallest lunar stable lunar development by utilizing the water resources”
lander to date. OMOTENASHI also breaks lunar lander identified beneath the Moon’s surface.117
tradition by heading straight to the lunar surface after
In , JAXA signed an agreement with Toyota
deploying from the SLS, instead of performing an orbital
to develop a pressurized rover for the Moon. Currently,
pass prior to landing. This small and relatively inexpensive
the project is working on developing a prototype and
satellite could open possibilities for more lunar missions
simulating different scenarios to confirm power and heat
from smaller or emerging space nations.107 013
dissipation effects on the lunar surface. Dubbed the LUNAR
JAXA is also developing the Smart Lander for Investigating CRUISER, this is the first step toward a semipermanent or
Moon (SLIM) lunar lander mission, which will attempt permanent human presence on the Moon, and JAXA is
pinpoint landing and obstacle detection capabilities beginning discussions with other industries to eventually
on the lunar surface. This technology will allow future bring this vision to life. The expected launch date of the
missions to choose a landing site during the mission, LUNAR CRUISER is the latter half of the 2020s.118 The LUNAR
instead of having a site prechosen based on easy access CRUISER effort is separate from the LUPEX mission, but
or lack of obstacles. According to JAXA, “By achieving this, there are certainly similarities between the programs.
it will become possible to land on planets even more
resource scarce than the moon.”108 The SLIM mission’s
secondary focus is to lighten the weight of the payload
and ensure small-scale technology for future missions.109
South Korea
This mission is expected to launch in 2022.110 The SLIM
payload provides a similar capability as the Pilot camera The first lunar mission of the Korea Aerospace Research
system that ESA is developing for Russian lunar missions. Institute (KARI), the Korea Pathfinder Lunar Orbiter (KPLO),
is expected to launch in and will reach LLO
In support of the Lunar Gateway, JAXA intends to provide
in mid-December. KPLO is planned to orbit the Moon for
habitation technology and logistics resupply missions.111 at least one year.119 The orbiter will carry several South
The logistics resupply missions will be carried out through Korean instruments and one U.S. instrument. These
the H-II Transfer Vehicle (HTV)-X program, which is currently instruments include two cameras to image the lunar
under development to support International Space Station surface, a gamma-ray spectrometer, a magnetometer, and
(ISS) resupply missions. The first anticipated launch of NASA’s ShadowCam, which will search for ice deposits
the new HTV-X launch vehicle is in 2022.112 and is based off of the LRO.120 Beyond developing national
lunar capabilities, KPLO will utilize NASA’s Deep Space
A long-term lunar roadmap presented by Japan at a
Network, through Delay/Disruption Tolerant Networking.121
2019 session of the United Nations’ Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space outlines future crewed KARI will continue to focus on the Moon as a national
landers, rovers, fuel cells, and eventually a lunar base.113 goal over the next decade. On March 25, 2021, South
The president of JAXA also noted in that “in Korean president Moon Jae-in stated that “by 2030, we
future, JAXA might begin the development of a hydrogen will achieve our dream of landing on the Moon by using
fuel station to ensure a sustainable human presence our own launch vehicle.”122
on the Moon.”114 JAXA’s Space Exploration Innovation
Hub Center was established in 2015 to collaborate with
Japanese industry to support future space missions.115
Thailand
Commercial
A Japanese commercial company, ispace, will deposit the In , Anek Laothamatas, Thailand’s minister
Emirati Rashid rover on the Moon in 2022 on a SpaceX of higher education, science, research, and innovation,
Falcon 9 rocket via their HAKUTO-R lunar lander. A sec- announced an ambitious plan to go to the Moon by 2027.123
ond HAKUTO-R lander will launch in 2023, carrying an A month later government officials held a Facebook Live

conference releasing details on the mission, including that
there will be a series of developments to establish the Thai
Space Consortium (TSC). TSC-Pathfinder development is
underway, with launch scheduled no earlier than 2022.
TSC-1 will include an optical instrument to observe the
Moon from LEO no earlier than 2025. TSC-2 is the true
“moonshot,” set to travel to cislunar space in 2027. TSC-3
through -5 are also planned, but no further details have
been released.124 Thailand is also currently moving to
approve a Space Activities Bill, which will establish a new
organization focused on space policy and regulations.125

Indo-Pacific

AMERICAS

Americas
The robots will “browse randomly and independently in
Canada
the natural satellite until finding each other in a swarm
The Canadian Space Agency (CSA) created the Lunar that will be connected electrically and will form a solar
Exploration Accelerator Program (LEAP), which provides panel.”131 Data will then be communicated back to Earth
funding to Canadian companies to develop technology for further study.132
for cislunar orbit or on the lunar surface. LEAP is part of
a broader national effort to foster innovation in science
and technology. Along with space, this includes artificial
intelligence, machine learning, health, and robotics. LEAP’s
United States of America
funding “support[s] the commercialization of innovative
ideas from Canadian industry, including small and me- The United States is also experiencing a resurgence of
dium-sized businesses, in order to help them become interest in the Moon. The government, primarily through
an integral part of the growing new-space economy.”126 NASA and the Department of Defense, is planning lunar
The total budget is $150 million over five years. The pro- and cislunar missions. This is incentivizing the growing
gram describes several areas for industry and academic commercial space sector within the United States to focus
contribution, including: on the Moon as well. Notably, the recent National Space
Priorities Framework released by the Biden administration
1. “science instrument(s) or technology destined
in included the goal to “advance a robust
for the Moon or beyond selected by a partner
cislunar ecosystem” as a key priority.133
space agency”;
2. “contributions to support the development of a Government – Civil
proto-flight model, and its adaptation, delivery,
NASA has a long history of robotic and human exploration
integration, and launch”;
on the Moon. In 2020, NASA confirmed the presence of
3. “science initiatives targeting the Moon or beyond”; water on the lunar surface near the Moon’s south pole.134
4. “mission concepts and technologies to position Today, NASA has one ongoing mission in cislunar space,
Canada for future lunar and deep-space explora- the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO). Launched in 2009,
tion missions”; LRO is still operating in lunar orbit and has contributed
to some groundbreaking discoveries, such as that the
5. “technology development for the lunar supply
Moon is slowly drifting farther away from the Earth.135
chain”; and
6. a “micro-rover technology demonstrator.”127 Artemis
NASA’s Artemis program is the next evolution of the
Thus far, 14 contracts have been awarded to companies
agency’s human spaceflight and large-scale exploration.136
and universities in Canada.128 Currently, there are two open
Through Artemis, NASA will send humans back to the
funding opportunities.129 CSA has also agreed to support
Moon, including the first woman and the first person of
the U.S.-led Lunar Gateway through the production of a
color. The plan is to establish sustainable cislunar and
smart robotic system known as Canadarm3, based on
lunar infrastructure to enable future exploration through
the Canadian-built robotic arms used for decades on
testing and demonstration of new technologies. NASA
the Space Shuttle and the ISS.
intends to utilize cislunar and lunar activities to prove
technologies and methods that will one day support a
human exploration mission to Mars. The Artemis program
will also support the next generation of space technologies,
Mexico allowing more companies and countries to invest and
develop capabilities for the Moon and deep-space travel.
Mexico will be launching its first national lunar mission
on the Peregrine lunar lander built by the U.S. company A key piece of the Artemis and Lunar Gateway missions
Astrobotic. As previously noted, the Peregrine lander will be Orion, a human-rated spacecraft for deep-space
was delayed in production, causing a delay of launch missions, including to the Moon. Orion will sit atop SLS
until 2022.130 Developed by the National Autonomous and send U.S. astronauts back to the Moon. It is being
University of Mexico (UNAM), nine microbots will land on built by Lockheed Martin and Airbus Defense and Space.
the Moon and measure the radioactivity of regolith dust. NASA expects to spend $9.3 billion on Orion through the

Kaitlyn
Johnson
Orion Capsule
Source: NASA.
resources on the Moon, Mars, and
asteroids.”139 The Artemis Accords’
stance on space mining and resourc-
ing has been publicly contested by
China, Russia, and other nations
who have a stricter interpretation
of the Outer Space Treaty.140

Lunar Gateway
There are several core mission el-
ements designed to support the
Artemis program. The first critical
first (robotic) test, anticipated in March or .
piece of infrastructure is the Lunar Gateway, an orbiting
The second Artemis mission and first human mission is
space station that will utilize a near-rectilinear halo orbit
expected in , but a human landing on the Moon
(NRHO) and will serve as a logistics and transportation hub
is not feasible until 2025 at the earliest. NASA must first
between Earth and the Moon. The NRHO is well suited for
successfully complete these first test missions, including
conducting missions to the lunar polar regions. The Lunar
at least one uncrewed landing on the Moon.137
Gateway will also serve future deep-space human travel,
2022 | Artemis 1: Uncrewed Test Flight in Cislunar Space including missions to Mars. The Power and Propulsion
Element (PPE) and Habitation and Logistics Outpost
2024 | Artemis 2: Crewed Test Flight in Cislunar Space
(HALO) will be the first two modules launched, as they
2025 | Artemis 3: Crewed Lunar Landing will directly support the missions to the Moon’s surface.141
2026 | Artemis 4: Gateway Assembly mission While the PPE is being built by Maxar Technologies in
the United States, HALO is being supported by ESA, as
2027+ | Artemis 5: Possible Crewed Lunar Landing with
well as a U.S. company, Northrop Grumman. SpaceX was
Mid-Way Stop at Gateway 138
selected by NASA to launch these two modules in 2024
To support the Artemis program and enable greater in- on a Falcon Heavy rocket.142
ternational participation, NASA established the Artemis
As part of the next stage of the Lunar Gateway, NASA has
Accords, a set of principles the United States intends to use
established the Commercial Lunar Payload Services (CLPS)
to support, govern, and guide future lunar missions. Fifteen
initiative. NASA has selected 14 U.S. commercial space
countries have signed onto the Artemis Accords so far,
companies to carry out lunar supply missions, including
including most countries that have pledged to participate
integration of payloads, mission operations, launch, and
in the Artemis program. As of , these countries
landing on the Moon. Along with NASA payloads, the
include Australia, Brazil, Canada,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg,
Mexico, New Zealand, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom,
and the United States. Notably, the
accords promise to lend reasonable
emergency assistance—in the case
of astronauts being stranded—and
allow nations to “extract and utilize
Lunar Gateway with Approaching
Orion Capsule
Source: NASA/Alberto Bertolin.

companies are encouraged to include other commercial On the same flight, the Lunar InfraRed Imaging cubesat
payloads during a supply mission. The CLPS project will conduct a lunar flyby and other technology tests to
has already contracted for several missions, including collect data in support of future lunar missions.154
18 payloads to be delivered to the Moon in 2022. The
Two lunar missions were selected through NASA’s small
Polar Resources Ice Mining Experiment-1 (PRIME-1), for
spacecraft program: Small, Innovative Missions for Planetary
example, will be NASA’s first ISRU mission on the Moon.143
Exploration (SIMPLEx). LunaH-Map, the first mission, is a
More payloads will follow in 2023, including almost 20 cubesat designed to orbit the Moon and evaluate how
science and technology instruments and the Volatiles much water is in the permanently shadowed craters on
Investigating Polar Exploration Rover (VIPER).144 VIPER is the lunar surface. LunaH-Map is designed and built by
a mobile robotic rover that will explore the South Pole of Arizona State University and will launch on SLS in early
the Moon to evaluate for future lunar activities and search 2022.155 The second mission is the Lunar Trailblazer. Led
for water deposits.145 Astrobotic, a U.S. commercial space by the California Institute of Technology, Lunar Trailblazer
company, was selected through the CLPS program to will also detect and map areas of water on the Moon’s
deliver VIPER to the Moon on their Griffin lunar lander. surface.156 Launch is scheduled for .157
Astrobotic recently announced that SpaceX’s Falcon Heavy
Lunar Base Camp
will launch the lander and rover to the Moon in 2023.146
The anticipated lunar base camp, designed for long
All these instruments, experiments, and tests will support expeditions on the surface, is the next big step after the
the Lunar Gateway’s first crewed mission, which will in- first Artemis missions and the Lunar Gateway. The Base
clude a human-rated lunar lander so that the crew can Camp will include an unpressurized (open-top) rover, a
venture to the lunar surface from the orbiting spacecraft. human-rated pressurized rover, a habitation module,
The Human Landing System program, part of NASA’s Next power systems, and ISRU systems.158 The Base Camp will
Space Technologies for Exploration Partnerships (Next- be located at the lunar south pole in order to have access
STEP) private-public partnership model, chose SpaceX to potential water and mineral deposits.159
to develop the lander under a $2.89 billion contract.147 To
support Artemis, new spacesuits called the Exploration Government – Military
Extravehicular Mobility Unit are also being developed.
Unlike many other countries, the United States has been
The first trip is expected to last about one week.148
clear about the military advantages of reaching the Moon
and cislunar space.160 The U.S. Space Force and NASA
NASA will be returning to the Moon with the CAPSTONE
signed an MOU in to cement continued
mission. CAPSTONE is a 55-pound cubesat designed to
partnership and the “furtherance of space exploration,
test spacecraft-to-spacecraft navigation technology in
scientific discovery, and security.”161 Since its founding,
cislunar space. This mission is critical to establishing
NASA has coordinated with other government agencies,
the Lunar Gateway, NASA’s next long-term orbiting space
including the Department of Defense, on science and
station.149 CAPSTONE will be launched on the Electron
technologies that have military value. Similarly, national
space launch vehicle by the U.S.-New Zealand company
security agencies share relevant discoveries or technologies
Rocket Lab in .150
with NASA. There are several relevant cooperative areas
Several other modules for the Lunar Gateway are under outlined in the MOU: “deep space survey tracking technol-
consideration and development. The current goal is a ogies to support extended SDA (space domain awareness)

finished assembly by 2028 that will be approximately and NEO (near-Earth orbit)
one-sixth the size of the ISS.151 detection beyond geosyn-
July 13, 2020(cid:1)
chronous orbit”; “capabilities
Water and Ice
and practices enabling safe,
Another NextSTEP program is the Lunar IceCube nano-
sustained near-Earth and
satellite that will evaluate ice deposits on the Moon, (cid:17)(cid:35)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:42)(cid:1)(cid:29)(cid:52)(cid:1143)(cid:1)(cid:15)(cid:28)(cid:47)(cid:36)(cid:42)(cid:41)(cid:28)(cid:39)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:42)(cid:41)(cid:28)(cid:48)(cid:47)(cid:36)(cid:30)(cid:46)(cid:1)(cid:28)(cid:41)(cid:31)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:43)(cid:28)(cid:30)(cid:32)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:31)(cid:40)(cid:36)(cid:41)(cid:36)(cid:46)(cid:47)(cid:45)(cid:28)(cid:47)(cid:36)(cid:42)(cid:41)(cid:1)
cislunar operations”; “ride Eyes on the Prize
The Strategic Implications of Cislunar Space and the Moon
mapping them and providing further data for future BY(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:43)(cid:32)(cid:41)(cid:30)(cid:32)(cid:45)(cid:1)(cid:12)(cid:28)(cid:43)(cid:39)(cid:28)(cid:41)(cid:1)
m l b a o u is a n s r c i d o h t n h i s n e . T A e h a rt e r e l s y m p 2 i a s 0 c - 2 e 1 2 c l . a r 1 a 5 u 2 ft n L w c u h i n l l a a a n r c d F c l o w a m s il h l p m l a ig n a h y p t t t w h h e i e l l f l i u a rs n ls t a o A r r b s te o e m u o t i n h s F s M re o t o a r r a o d m t n E e o a y g r n e i e c d s i i n c o m f i n o s p r l t o u m h r n e t a a a t P r n i o r s c i n p z e e a o o c n b f e y t t , h h e e (cid:20)(cid:14)v(cid:42)(cid:46)(cid:39)(cid:33) (cid:21)(cid:43)(cid:31)(cid:40)(cid:42)(cid:28)(cid:46)(cid:39)(cid:47) (cid:48) (cid:32) (cid:42) (cid:35) (cid:47) (cid:48) e (cid:31) (cid:35) (cid:33) (cid:33) (cid:45)(cid:32) (cid:21) (cid:49) (cid:28) (cid:16) (cid:41) (cid:36) (cid:1) (cid:45) (cid:47) (cid:32) (cid:32) n (cid:30) (cid:30) (cid:45) (cid:49) (cid:46) (cid:32) (cid:19) (cid:32) (cid:1) (cid:32) (cid:34)(cid:28) (cid:1) (cid:41) (cid:36)(cid:46) (cid:30) (cid:16) (cid:46) (cid:36)t (cid:28) (cid:1) (cid:22) (cid:49) (cid:41) (cid:45) (cid:2) (cid:49)(cid:36) (cid:14)(cid:47) (cid:45) u (cid:32) (cid:36) (cid:28) (cid:41) (cid:41) (cid:28) (cid:32) (cid:15) (cid:36) (cid:42) (cid:1) (cid:36) (cid:1) (cid:41) (cid:21) (cid:46) (cid:28) r (cid:34) (cid:49) (cid:47) (cid:39) (cid:42) (cid:34) (cid:34) (cid:30) (cid:46) (cid:36) (cid:41) e (cid:36) (cid:36) (cid:46) (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:36) (cid:41) (cid:32) (cid:53) (cid:36) (cid:42) (cid:47) (cid:1) (cid:32) (cid:42) (cid:1) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:33) (cid:33) s (cid:46) (cid:46) (cid:34) (cid:32) (cid:28) (cid:8) (cid:1142) (cid:31) (cid:48) (cid:45) (cid:40) (cid:41) (cid:31) (cid:41) (cid:50) (cid:1) (cid:1141) (cid:1) (cid:45) (cid:46) (cid:31) p (cid:42) (cid:34) (cid:47) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:10) (cid:39) (cid:42) (cid:28) (cid:20) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:30) (cid:36) (cid:30) (cid:39)(cid:47) (cid:4) (cid:35) (cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:45) (cid:1) (cid:40) r(cid:42) (cid:52) (cid:39) (cid:20) (cid:36)(cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:42) (cid:42) (cid:36) o (cid:31) (cid:1) (cid:41) (cid:28) (cid:46) (cid:1) (cid:32) (cid:41) (cid:1) (cid:46) (cid:10) (cid:47) (cid:41) (cid:30) (cid:1)(cid:45) (cid:1) (cid:50)l (cid:39) (cid:46) (cid:46) (cid:1)(cid:47) (cid:15) (cid:47)(cid:41) (cid:32) (cid:28) (cid:1162)i (cid:32) (cid:48) (cid:28)(cid:30) (cid:31) (cid:46) (cid:35) f (cid:1) (cid:32) (cid:30) (cid:36) (cid:30) (cid:47) (cid:47)(cid:47) (cid:28) e (cid:21) (cid:46)(cid:32) (cid:41) (cid:1142) (cid:41) (cid:1) (cid:41) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:35) (cid:35)(cid:36) (cid:1) (cid:48) (cid:33) (cid:1) (cid:30) r (cid:33) (cid:46) (cid:28) (cid:6) (cid:28) (cid:40) (cid:34) (cid:42) (cid:46) (cid:1) (cid:31) (cid:28) (cid:36)(cid:45) a (cid:45) (cid:46)(cid:31) (cid:35)(cid:41) (cid:30) (cid:45) (cid:19) (cid:32) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:36) (cid:45)(cid:41) (cid:1)(cid:31) (cid:33) t(cid:28) (cid:1) (cid:28) (cid:36) (cid:47) (cid:1) (cid:1142) (cid:28) (cid:31) (cid:1)(cid:31) (cid:32) (cid:48) e (cid:47) (cid:6) (cid:33)(cid:1) (cid:40) (cid:52) (cid:34) (cid:46) (cid:36) (cid:28) (cid:45) (cid:33) (cid:35)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:31) (cid:42) . (cid:39) (cid:40) (cid:20) (cid:1) (cid:36) (cid:1) (cid:38)(cid:33) (cid:36) (cid:33) (cid:1) (cid:41) (cid:36) (cid:39) (cid:30) (cid:32) (cid:41) (cid:32) (cid:36) (cid:48) B (cid:40) (cid:1) (cid:40)(cid:41) (cid:28) (cid:32) (cid:21) (cid:46) (cid:50) (cid:31)(cid:48) (cid:32)(cid:1)(cid:50) (cid:34) (cid:41) e (cid:14) (cid:48) (cid:49) (cid:46) (cid:45) (cid:1) (cid:36) (cid:28) (cid:1) (cid:46) (cid:39) (cid:10) (cid:36) (cid:1) (cid:46) (cid:36) (cid:46) t (cid:31) (cid:32) (cid:46) (cid:41) (cid:47) (cid:45) (cid:1) (cid:47) (cid:15) (cid:42) (cid:46)(cid:42)(cid:41) (cid:36) w (cid:1)(cid:46)(cid:52) (cid:32) (cid:47) (cid:35) (cid:46) (cid:42) (cid:28) (cid:41) (cid:30) (cid:28) (cid:41) (cid:45) (cid:42) (cid:1) (cid:36) (cid:28) (cid:1) (cid:46) (cid:47) (cid:4) (cid:1) e (cid:40) (cid:42) (cid:35) (cid:33) (cid:42) (cid:46) (cid:28) (cid:34)(cid:47) (cid:40) (cid:46) (cid:41)(cid:47) (cid:42) (cid:1) e (cid:1) (cid:35) (cid:47) (cid:10) (cid:41) (cid:1) (cid:47)(cid:33) (cid:32) (cid:36) (cid:1)(cid:40) (cid:30) (cid:32) (cid:1141) (cid:20) (cid:48) (cid:32) (cid:1) (cid:47) (cid:42) (cid:32) n (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:28) (cid:1) (cid:46) (cid:1) (cid:42) (cid:28) (cid:21)(cid:47) (cid:41) (cid:30) (cid:13) (cid:45) (cid:34) (cid:41) (cid:28) (cid:1) (cid:41) (cid:1) (cid:30) (cid:42) (cid:46) (cid:43)t(cid:30) (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:35) (cid:35) (cid:47) (cid:22) (cid:36) (cid:14) (cid:46) (cid:52) (cid:35) h (cid:47) (cid:32) (cid:30) (cid:1) (cid:32) (cid:28) (cid:28) (cid:43) (cid:36) (cid:41) (cid:30) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:1) (cid:36) (cid:15) (cid:35)(cid:46) e (cid:36) (cid:1141) (cid:41) (cid:28)(cid:29) (cid:46) (cid:39) (cid:29) (cid:32) (cid:42)(cid:42) (cid:41) (cid:1) (cid:42) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:28) (cid:47) (cid:45) (cid:47) (cid:46) (cid:32) (cid:2) (cid:28)M (cid:49) (cid:36) (cid:47) (cid:40)(cid:39) (cid:1) (cid:39) (cid:52) (cid:1) (cid:46) (cid:39) (cid:47) (cid:49) (cid:39) (cid:52) (cid:46) (cid:42)(cid:47) (cid:30) (cid:36) (cid:41) (cid:19)(cid:36) (cid:42) (cid:35) (cid:1) (cid:43) o (cid:41)(cid:42) (cid:47) (cid:1) (cid:32)(cid:40) (cid:28)(cid:42) (cid:43) (cid:34) (cid:43) (cid:31) (cid:36)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:32) (cid:32) o (cid:34)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:20) (cid:43) (cid:41) (cid:32) (cid:40) (cid:36) (cid:32) (cid:47) (cid:40) (cid:45) (cid:1) (cid:29) (cid:30) (cid:1) (cid:46) (cid:1) (cid:43)n (cid:35) (cid:46)(cid:17) (cid:45) (cid:32) (cid:1089) (cid:31) (cid:47) (cid:46) (cid:1) (cid:28) (cid:42) (cid:42) (cid:32) (cid:1) (cid:36) (cid:42) (cid:28) (cid:42)’ (cid:32) (cid:46) (cid:1088) (cid:48) (cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:28) (cid:41) s (cid:29) (cid:39) (cid:39) (cid:1) (cid:34) (cid:47) (cid:41) (cid:33) (cid:46) (cid:1) (cid:47) (cid:1) (cid:30) (cid:43) (cid:36) (cid:41) (cid:4) (cid:14) (cid:34) (cid:28) (cid:36)(cid:1) (cid:32) v (cid:30) (cid:32) (cid:45) (cid:47) (cid:49) (cid:28) (cid:34)(cid:30) (cid:45) (cid:31) (cid:1) (cid:41) (cid:6) (cid:28) (cid:1) (cid:1) a (cid:52)(cid:41) (cid:41) (cid:42) (cid:28) (cid:30) (cid:32) (cid:36) (cid:34)(cid:49) (cid:32) (cid:1) (cid:40) (cid:40) (cid:31) (cid:42) (cid:1) s(cid:30) (cid:47) (cid:32) (cid:28) (cid:46) (cid:39) (cid:28) (cid:42) (cid:2) (cid:32) (cid:1)(cid:48)(cid:49) t(cid:36) (cid:1) (cid:41) (cid:42) (cid:46) (cid:41) (cid:47)(cid:39) (cid:28) (cid:31)(cid:46)(cid:41) (cid:32) (cid:15) (cid:1141) (cid:28) (cid:48) (cid:32) r (cid:36) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:31) (cid:40) (cid:42) (cid:47) (cid:39) (cid:42) (cid:1)(cid:42) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) e (cid:39) (cid:5) (cid:47) (cid:1) (cid:47) (cid:1143) (cid:28) (cid:32) (cid:48) (cid:1142) (cid:48) (cid:28) (cid:30) (cid:1) (cid:41) (cid:41) (cid:42) (cid:28) s (cid:1) (cid:40) (cid:45) (cid:1) (cid:45) (cid:1) (cid:47) (cid:36) (cid:46) (cid:30) (cid:32) e (cid:21) (cid:1) (cid:45) (cid:32) (cid:46) (cid:1)(cid:32) (cid:52) (cid:35) (cid:39) (cid:1) (cid:28) (cid:34) (cid:1) r (cid:48) (cid:1142) (cid:32) (cid:28) (cid:1) (cid:9) (cid:1141) (cid:47) (cid:32) (cid:1) v (cid:1) (cid:41) (cid:32) (cid:28) (cid:28) (cid:45) (cid:1) (cid:41) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:6) e(cid:30) (cid:47) (cid:1)(cid:46) (cid:39) (cid:28) (cid:29) (cid:1) (cid:46) (cid:1) s(cid:36) (cid:1) (cid:28) (cid:45) (cid:1) (cid:32) (cid:1) (cid:39) (cid:1) (cid:1) T(cid:46)(cid:46)i(cid:42)(cid:2)(cid:50)(cid:36)(cid:31) Ma(cid:30) m (cid:46) (cid:32)(cid:32) (cid:28)n h (cid:33)(cid:46) (cid:32)(cid:1)(cid:36) o (cid:1) (cid:48) (cid:45)(cid:47) (cid:41) (cid:1)(cid:47) (cid:47) d (cid:32) e p (cid:47) (cid:47)(cid:49) s (cid:35) SSI (cid:35) (cid:41) (cid:35) (cid:1) (cid:43) n (cid:39) o t (cid:29) (cid:32)M pe e (cid:32) (cid:1) (cid:32) (cid:36) t (cid:40)(cid:32) (cid:1) r (cid:44) c (cid:1) i (cid:32) e (cid:46) c e (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:28) m o t (cid:1) (cid:14) (cid:46) un (cid:43) (cid:14) o(cid:1) (cid:48) r a (cid:36) (cid:46) (cid:48) (cid:42) o nr (cid:41) c (cid:28) (cid:28) n (cid:32) p (cid:1) n i (cid:42) (cid:47) (cid:28) a e (cid:39) n t (cid:36) (cid:30) (cid:45) (cid:39) (cid:28) (cid:36)oo t y (cid:40)(cid:42) r t (cid:1) (cid:52) (cid:39) (cid:46) ’ (cid:32) (cid:47) i (cid:45) (cid:36) s mr i PK (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:41) o (cid:32) (cid:53) (cid:1)n (cid:43)(cid:1) (cid:28) t (cid:28) (cid:46) (cid:32) s ar (cid:32) n (cid:46) a (cid:1) i (cid:41)s (cid:39)(cid:42) (cid:36)(cid:52) o c (cid:51) c p a (cid:1) (cid:47) (cid:31) (cid:46) n i (cid:34) (cid:46) j (cid:31) (cid:46) (cid:29)i (cid:43) g (cid:1) l le (cid:1) e vt (cid:28)(cid:47) a (cid:45) (cid:36) (cid:47) (cid:1) S (cid:32) h (cid:39) c l (cid:47) (cid:32) (cid:47) (cid:28) a(cid:42) n (cid:1) (cid:42) n y (cid:36) tt (cid:30) (cid:35)(cid:31) t(cid:40) (cid:49)(cid:42) l u (cid:1) t (cid:45) s a (cid:32) (cid:32) w uf (cid:32)(cid:1)i (cid:36) (cid:28)(cid:41) d (cid:33) o f (cid:47) t (cid:39) (cid:41) (cid:1142) e i(cid:1)(cid:42) a i (cid:32) (cid:47) (cid:1) i (cid:52) (cid:42) (cid:32) n r t c (cid:28) e (cid:28). (cid:36) (cid:45) sh (cid:46) (cid:1) (cid:31)(cid:42) (cid:43)t s (cid:28) t (cid:41) (cid:1) P(cid:29) v (cid:47) ae (cid:47) o h (cid:41)(cid:1) (cid:43) (cid:41) i (cid:36)(cid:31) (cid:35) (cid:47) r a (cid:39) n (cid:28) C i r (cid:32) (cid:42) i (cid:1) t(cid:42) (cid:31) s (cid:1) (cid:32)l (cid:45) e m (cid:39)(cid:47)h eW u (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:32) (cid:45) (cid:1)(cid:1) (cid:41) (cid:1) s (cid:35) (cid:35) a (cid:29) n (cid:39) (cid:47) e(cid:47) e (cid:46) e a (cid:42) a (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:48) (cid:42) n t (cid:42) (cid:32) a r es E (cid:50) s(cid:30) (cid:50) (cid:1) (cid:41) (cid:46) a (cid:31) i (cid:32) h (cid:28) rr t a (cid:35) l (cid:47) c l (cid:36) (cid:1) (cid:1142) e y i (cid:52)(cid:51) (cid:45) f (cid:46) y (cid:1) (cid:47)r n (cid:1) h (cid:41) o (cid:39)(cid:30) (cid:43) (cid:36) , (cid:1) m (cid:52) (cid:35) t (cid:28) s (cid:45) g (cid:46) (cid:42) r (cid:35) i h t (cid:1) (cid:42) (cid:32) i (cid:36)(cid:29) n (cid:47) (cid:36) t h S s s (cid:32) (cid:39) (cid:1141) (cid:47)’(cid:32) o (cid:28) (cid:50) t (cid:42) (cid:1)(cid:42) s t (cid:1) e (cid:39) e i f n (cid:43) (cid:41)(cid:30) r (cid:31) (cid:34) s (cid:45) r (cid:32) g ra, (cid:35) M (cid:30) (cid:45) (cid:28) o n (cid:36) (cid:52) (cid:45) t D e t (cid:32) (cid:41) (cid:32)(cid:28) (cid:47) (cid:33) h m(cid:1) e o f o (cid:31) . (cid:46) (cid:48) (cid:42)(cid:34) (cid:1)(cid:29) o Cg (cid:42) eo (cid:32)l (cid:32) (cid:39) (cid:1)(cid:45) ri. (cid:39) o (cid:33) b (cid:1) (cid:33) c (cid:41) (cid:36) n (cid:32) M (cid:32) (cid:47) (cid:45) t (cid:1) (cid:32) g o (cid:39) (cid:52) (cid:42) h (cid:47) (cid:1) a ’ (cid:40) (cid:36) (cid:46) (cid:33) os (cid:46)y (cid:43) (cid:33) t e (cid:40)(cid:45) n (cid:1) (cid:32) h (cid:1) o , (cid:31) (cid:42) (cid:32) r(cid:32) (cid:47) d A (cid:1) e t(cid:42) (cid:1) n (cid:42) (cid:31) (cid:32) (cid:40) (cid:46) (cid:1) i e (cid:45) h s t (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:28)(cid:31) (cid:41) ’ (cid:1) r (cid:34) (cid:42) s(cid:30) e so (cid:1) o (cid:31)(cid:6) (cid:36) (cid:1) (cid:28) (cid:45) (cid:33) (cid:6) (cid:30) a u s s h (cid:1) (cid:36) (cid:36)(cid:28) (cid:36) p (cid:28) (cid:28) (cid:47) t (cid:28) b r (cid:41)i (cid:45) (cid:36) rc a s (cid:47) (cid:45) (cid:47) i(cid:30) (cid:47) (cid:1) a (cid:32) l (cid:36) (cid:47)t e c (cid:35) (cid:28)i (cid:42) (cid:35) t o (cid:31) e t s (cid:1) e (cid:39) (cid:41) y (cid:1141) r (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1088) (cid:47) g (cid:47) y (cid:1142) (cid:1) t(cid:42) (cid:42)(cid:1) i (cid:36) o c (cid:47) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:1)
pole. Its mission includes using lasers to look for ice.153 Spencer Kaplan. (cid:1)(cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:1141)(cid:4)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:1141)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1182)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1088)(cid:1)
Americas

Kaitlyn
Johnson
organize, and develop LUNINT. The first phase of the
The United States
project was to develop a LUNINT dashboard, or virtual
simulation of notable objects and their orbital details
has been clear
within cislunar space. This dashboard will later be in-
tegrated into mission control software suites that allow
about the military
the U.S. military and allies to visualize and understand
the space environment, enabling decisionmaking and
advantages of
planning for current or future capabilities.167 In , Rhea Space Activity was awarded a contract exten-
reaching the Moon
sion for the project.168

and cislunar space. The Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) released A
Primer on Cislunar Space in , which is directed
at military space professionals as they develop opera-
tional concepts for the space domain. The paper also
explains the challenges with the detection and tracking
of spacecraft and how methods used in near-Earth orbits
such as LEO, including traditional two-line elements
(TLEs) used to describe an object’s trajectory, are useless
in cislunar space given the introduction of a third body,
the Moon. The report introduces cislunar space concepts
and potential operations, including the unique physical
shares and hosted payloads to and beyond Earth orbit”;
dynamics of the cislunar and lunar regions and different
“interoperable spacecraft communications networks for
capabilities cislunar spacecraft will require in comparison
Earth orbit and beyond”; and others.162
to spacecraft in near-Earth orbits.169 AFRL is pursuing an
Other Space Force personnel have written publicly about experiment to develop and launch space-based sensors
U.S. military operations in cislunar and lunar space, arguing in cislunar space in order to demonstrate foundational
that the Space Force should leverage its military expertise SDA capabilities. This program is known as the Cislunar
to support and develop future civil space activities.163 Highway Patrol System.170 In a joint project with the De-
The Outer Space Treaty forbids many military activities fense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), AFRL
on celestial bodies, including establishing military bases is working on the Defense Deep Space Sentinel (D2S2), a
or conducting military maneuvers.164 However, some be- cislunar satellite designed to be highly mobile and carry
lieve there still may be room to provide military support a 20-centimeter camera to provide space domain and
to civilian missions and remain in line with the United lunar surface awareness. The D2S2 satellite is expected
States’ international obligations though the treaty.165 to launch in late 2022.171
Spacepower, published in 2020, is the first doctrine pub- DARPA also has two separate relevant ongoing initiatives
related to the Moon and cislunar space. Announced
lished by the U.S. Space Force and declares that while
in , DARPA will pursue technologies for
today economic and military space activities are confined
in situ manufacturing to produce large space or lunar
to the near-Earth, future technologies and capabilities
structures. This program is called the Novel Orbital and
will “expand the reach of vital National space interests
Moon Manufacturing, Materials, and Mass-Efficient Design
to the cislunar regime and beyond.”166 The document
program and is in the early stages of development.172 In
also uses the far side of the Moon as an example for
situ manufacturing is critical to overcoming the mass
how some parts of space can only be observed through
and volume limits of launch from the Earth’s surface. If
orbiting spacecraft, and that there is desire to ensure full
structures or components could be developed in space
domain awareness.
or on the Moon, the ability to live and work in space will
Several ongoing projects funded or led by the Department be more quickly achievable. The current program is split
of Defense, including within the Space Force, focus on into three 18-month phases and will likely be completed
cislunar space or the Moon. Of note is the U.S. Air Force in the mid to late 2020s.173 The second DARPA effort is
contract with Rhea Space Activity in to collect, the Demonstration Rocket for Agile Cislunar Operations

program. This program intends to demonstrate nuclear craft will take Japanese billionaire Yusaku Maezawa, who
thermal propulsion by 2025. Nuclear propulsion enables has purchased all seats on this first flight for himself and
greater maneuver capabilities and provides operators eight other artists, around the Moon on a trip that will
with the ability to better monitor spacecraft in cislunar last six to seven days.181
space or near the Moon.174 In , DARPA selected
Blue Origin, Lockheed Martin, and General Atomics for
the first phase of the project.175
Commercial
Separately from NASA or Department of Defense funding,
several U.S. commercial space companies are working
on cislunar or lunar missions.
United Launch Alliance has laid out its Cislunar 1000
roadmap, which intends to eventually sustain 1,000
people in Earth-Moon space. This self-sustaining plan
relies on ISRU, among other critical technologies.176 It is
focused on developing a wide-reaching cislunar economy
with other commercial companies, including Bigelow
Aerospace, Astrobotic, and others.177 Cislunar 1000 fits
in well with the Lunar Gateway and NASA’s plans for a
sustainable future cislunar presence.
Astrobotic describes itself as a “Moon company” and has
built its business case on lowering the barriers to access
the Moon for science, exploration, and even to send
keepsakes. Along with the Griffin lunar lander that will
take NASA’s VIPER to the Moon in 2023, Astrobotic has
several planned lunar missions. The first is Astrobotic’s
Peregrine Mission One lunar lander that will carry a suite
of scientific instruments and experiments from NASA and
several international companies. Peregrine is expected
to launch in 2022 and would make Astrobotic the first
commercial company to reach the lunar surface. In 2023,
Astrobotic plans to launch a mid-sized lunar rover, called
Moon Ranger, to the lunar South Pole. This is also part of
NASA’s CLPS program. Moon Ranger will map the lunar
surface, and that data will be used to build 3D maps in
support of future lunar exploration missions.178
Also sponsored by NASA’s CLPS program, Intuitive Ma-

chines is competing with Astrobotic to be the first com-
mercial lander on the Moon, and its lander will head to
the South Pole to drill for ice. The Nova-C lander will
“hop” around the lunar surface and access craters that
have yet to be explored by robotic rovers.179 Its launch
date slipped from mid-2021 to early 2022 due to licensing
and launch issues.180
SpaceX’s first cislunar space tourism mission—tentatively
scheduled for 2023—will fly through cislunar space, orbit
the Moon, and return to Earth. SpaceX’s Starship space-
Americas

MIDDLE EAST & AFRICA

Middle
East
and
Africa
and wide, and 28 inches tall, it will weigh approximately
Israel
22 pounds (10 kilograms) with its payload.”188 The lunar
Cislunar and lunar landing efforts in Israel are largely mission is scheduled to launch in 2022 on a SpaceX Falcon
led by an Israeli commercial company, SpaceIL. SpaceIL 9 rocket. The rover will be deposited at “an equatorial
is responsible for the first ever nongovernmental lunar locale on the Moon’s near side” by the HAKUTO-R lander,
landing attempt. In 2019, the Beresheet 1 lunar lander designed and operated by ispace.189
successfully reached lunar orbit but was unable to land
Plans are already underway for a second rover to be
and instead crashed onto the Moon. SpaceIL is working on
launched in 2024 or 2025. Furthermore, the United Arab
the Beresheet 2 program to attempt once again to reach
Emirates is evaluating how to expand its lunar program
the lunar surface, but this time the mission will include
in other ways, to potentially include an orbiter, human
two lunar landers and an orbiter.182 The two landers will
exploration, and a lunar base fit for 1,000 people by 2040.190
be smaller than the original Beresheet 1 lander, and the
orbiter will be in operation for a couple of years. SpaceIL
is looking for international partners to help financially
support the program. According to the New York Times, the
United Arab Emirates was one entity of seven interested
in the program.183 Beresheet 2 is currently scheduled to
launch in 2024.184
Another Israeli company, Helios, is betting on long-term
sustainability on the Moon by building in situ resourc-
ing and mining equipment. For their first test of Lunar
Extractor-1, Helios will be ridesharing on Japanese
company ispace’s second mission to the lunar surface
in 2023. Helios has also confirmed that Lunar Extractor-2
will be flown on another ispace mission to the Moon in
mid-2024.185
Turkey
In , Turkey’s President Recep Tayyip Erdo-
gan announced an ambitious plan for the Turkish Space
Agency. This 10-year plan includes a lunar mission by 2028
that will consist of a rover deposited on the lunar surface
by a Turkish national space launch vehicle. A 2023 test of
the launch vehicle and lunar lander will support the 2028
mission. There are few additional details.186
United Arab Emirates
In , Vice President Sheikh Mohammed
bin Rashid announced the Emirates Lunar Mission. It will
include a lunar rover, called Rashid, that will be equipped
with two imagers (microscopic and thermal) and a probe
that will “measure the electron density at the lunar surface,”
among other instruments.187 Rashid is slated to be the
smallest rover yet: coming in at around “20 inches long

TRENDS ACROSS PLANNED MISSIONS

Trends
across
Planned
Missions
There is a flurry of activity planned for cislunar orbit tation missions make up the second-most common
or to pass through cislunar space on the way to the type of mission, which is key for achieving sustainable
Moon’s surface. Nations and companies alike see long-term cislunar and lunar projects, such as the Lunar
potential for new science, technology, and commerce. The Gateway or lunar bases. The transportation category
“big three” space nations—China, Russia, and the United includes lunar landers, satellite busses for cislunar
States—certainly have ambitious plans for cislunar space payloads, and launch vehicles or spacecraft specifically
and the Moon. ESA also has a plethora of ongoing research designed for lunar or cislunar missions. Rovers follow
and development projects dedicated to cislunar or lunar as the third-most popular type of mission, with 15 lunar
missions. Because ESA is funded by several nations and rovers planned to launch in the next decade. These
able to leverage the collective wealth and expertise of its missions often include a secondary mission dedicated
members, it is no surprise that many European nations to science and data collection.
view ESA as the best way to achieve national civil space
Surprisingly, there is a lack of situational awareness and
goals. Independently, there are many missions planned,
communications missions planned. With so many lunar
including several highly capable programs from India,
landers, rovers, and cislunar missions in development,
Japan, and the United Arab Emirates. The United Arab
nations will likely need more robust infrastructure for
Emirates, in particular, has an ambitious plan to have
understanding the environment of cislunar space, as
1,000 people live and work on the Moon by 2040. There
well as the ability to consistently communicate with
are also many new endeavors from nontraditional space
assets in orbit around or on the Moon. Currently, China
nations, such as Mexico, Thailand, and Turkey. is operating the only communications relay satellite on
the far side of the Moon, which supports China’s ongoing
After a survey of the 106 cislunar and lunar activities
Chang’e lunar missions. The U.S.-led Lunar Gateway will
from 19 nations and one multilateral governmental
also provide significant communications capabilities in
organization (ESA), it is clear that the current missions
cislunar space. However, it is unclear if national efforts
planned are to be the first of many, and therefore focus
such as these will allow commercial missions or other
on gathering more information and data to support future
nations to access communications capabilities.
missions. However, the data presented does not wholly
capture the amount of cislunar and lunar missions and There is a longstanding history of allowing commercial
technologies currently planned. Data labeling was often access to government-operated space infrastructure in
based off the prioritization of one of several capabilities near-Earth orbits, such as GPS for navigation and position-
of a mission. For example, a lunar lander mission may ing. Creating commercial access to the communications,
also have a rover onboard or a secondary payload to navigation, and space domain awareness (SDA) capabilities
gather regolith or drill for ice. necessary for cislunar space might be the next evolution of
Science-gathering missions are the most common, with Figure 2: Cislunar and Space Missions
12 dedicated to the search for water and ice. Transpor- Source: Author’s own research and analysis.

10 12

4 5 5

S
DA
Technology
Test
ISR
U Habitation
Co
m
munications Science Logistics Rover Transportation ISR
PRIMARY OBJECTIVE

Kaitlyn
Johnson
COUNTRY TYPE NAME DATE
Russia Government Luna 25 2022
India Government Chandrayaan-3 2022
United States Government CLPS 2022
United States Government Lunar Icecube 2022
United States Commercial LunaH-Map 2022

United States Commercial Nova-C 2022
United States Government ShadowCam 2022
Australia Commercial Seven Sisters 2023
United States Government VIPER 2023
China Government Chang’e-7 2024
ESA Government European Prospect Drill 2025
United States Commercial Lunar Trailblazer 2025
Russia Government Luna 27/Luna Resurs 2026
government-supported space infrastructure. SDA is critical Table 2: Lunar and Cislunar Missions Focused on Water and Ice
in near-Earth orbits, and the cislunar and low-lunar orbits Source: Author’s own research and analysis.
require unique infrastructure and a new framework for
understanding and evaluating where objects are located bodies should begin to consider ways to protect the
in space. Currently, for near-Earth orbits, satellites are cislunar domain and the Moon, as well as coordinating
given positions based on their relative position to Earth. activities to avoid accidents. Near-Earth orbits are facing
This current Earth-based structure will be less effective in difficult challenges with the sustainability of the domain
cislunar orbits, so a new internationally recognized data and the growing amount of debris in valuable orbits.
schema should be determined.191 Serious conversations in multinational forums, such as
the United Nations’ Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Commercial companies are leading several lunar and
Outer Space, should address and establish best practices
cislunar missions, working to capitalize on the demand
and rules for operating in cislunar space sooner rather
signal from interested governments. NASA, CSA, ESA,
than later. Without this, the unsustainable pattern of
and others are contracting with industry or purchasing
behavior experienced in LEO, MEO, and GEO could be
their launch vehicles, lunar landers, or rovers to deliver
replicated in cislunar orbit.
national capability to cislunar space or the Moon. Of the
106 missions surveyed, 24 are led by commercial indus-
Similarly, a clear, technically informed definition of cis-
try. Notably, some countries are not pursuing a national
lunar space should be determined and accepted by the
lunar or cislunar capability, such as Israel and Ukraine,
international community. Since cislunar capabilities
and commercial companies are leading the way for those
are nascent, the lack of definition is not a major issue at
nations to claim access to the Moon.
present. However, in the future, if cislunar space is highly
Overall, trends indicate more focus and investment in utilized by commercial and national capabilities alike, a
cislunar and lunar space activities by a wide range of commonly accepted definition of what is and is not con-
governments and private companies. With little inter- sidered cislunar space will allow the space community
national law and regulation governing cislunar space to establish and maintain best practices or rules of the
or the Moon, international conversations in governing road for operating in this regime.

China, Russia, and the United States are leading the that cislunar space and the Moon are perhaps once
way in cislunar and lunar development and in creating again the finish line. This is a mischaracterization of the
a sustainable presence. Many of the nations surveyed current plans and missions dedicated to this space. No
in this assessment are conducting cislunar and lunar missions are directly countering one another, and there
research and development in coordination with major is no evidence that mission timelines have shifted or
civil space program efforts from one of these three leading changed in order to “beat” another nation to the Moon.
space powers. ESA, for example, is working with all three This assessment finds that the cislunar and lunar missions
nations to further space exploration and technology. As of other nations are led by national civil space agencies
cislunar and lunar plans further develop, most of the or by entrepreneurial new space companies, and many
larger missions with greater infrastructure needs (e.g., of these efforts are tied to ongoing cislunar missions by
communications, SSA, and navigation and timing) will China, Russia, or the United States.
be in partnership with at least one of the larger multina-
International partnerships are critical to the future of cis-
tional efforts led by China, Russia, or the United States.
lunar and lunar missions and, as seen in this assessment,
Notably, China and Russia recently announced a search for
often preferred. China, Russia, and the United States are all
partners for a joint lunar base.192 After close collaboration
spearheading lunar or cislunar programs that involve several
on other cislunar and lunar missions, a Russian-Chinese
international partners. The United States, in particular, is
partnership with ESA is not difficult to foresee. As cislu-
prioritizing leadership of an international coalition for a
nar and lunar missions become more complex and last
more robust and sustainable lunar architecture through
for longer durations, future missions will likely build on
the Artemis Accords and Artemis program. Cooperation
ongoing efforts and partnerships.
on the Lunar Gateway and the multiple internationally
While China, Russia, and the United States may be look- sponsored payloads or projects that will join NASA-led
ing at cislunar space and the Moon for national security missions also showcase this priority. By working with
gains, other nations have not stated or announced any allies and partners to set best practices and international
similar plans or ideas. There is also a growing rhetoric standards, the United States will be able to influence and
in U.S. media that a new space race is beginning and set favorable precedents for operating in cislunar space
and on the Moon for decades to come.
However, international partnership amongst the “big
three” global space powers is unlikely. Historical prec-
edent proves that space cooperation can transcend
global conflict, as was the case during the Cold War with
partnership between the Soviet Union and the United
States. Years of disagreement and refusal to compromise
within multi-lateral fora, like the United Nations, does
A clear, technically not indicate a willingness to partner on space missions.
Furthermore, policies like the Wolf Amendment restrict
informed definition NASA from cooperating with Chinese space programs
and organizations.193 Despite the great potential for
of cislunar interstellar global cooperation, the geopolitical tension,

technological competition, and unwillingness to trust
space should be and compromise, will deter any substantial near-future
partnerships between China, Russia, and the United States.
determined and
International partnerships, and partnerships between
accepted by the companies and governments, are leading this renewed
pursuit to the Moon and into cislunar space. There appear
international to be three separating lines of effort, with some cross-pol-
lution: the United States with allies and partners; China;
community. and Russia. Organizations like ESA work with all three
efforts, and the beginnings of a larger alliance between
Trends
across
Planned
Missions

Kaitlyn
Johnson
China and Russia may emerge with the collaboration
on a sustainable lunar presence. Policymakers should
be aware that the first to set expectations or behaviors
on the Moon or in cislunar space does not necessarily
indicate these will become the rules, standards, or norms.
Instead, policymakers worldwide should focus on con-
sensual rules, standards, and norms from all space and
emerging space nations, rather than risk a dichotomy of
international governance in space.

No missions are
directly countering
one another, and
there is no evidence
that mission
timelines have
shifted or changed
in order to “beat”
another nation
to the Moon.

Fly
Me
to
the
Moon
About the Author
Kaitlyn Johnson is deputy director and fellow of the Aerospace Security
Project at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. Ms. Johnson
supports the team’s strategic planning and research agenda. Her research
specializes in topics such as space security, military space systems, and com-
mercial and civil space policy. Ms. Johnson has written on national security
space reorganization, threats against space assets, the commercialization of
space, escalation and deterrence dynamics, and defense acquisition trends.
She is also a cohost of the CSIS podcast Tech Unmanned, which features
guests with both policy expertise and technical expertise in order to break
through the national security jargon and technology hand-waving to get to
the core of the technical realities of these emerging capabilities, benefits to
development, and the barriers to success. Ms. Johnson holds an MA from
American University in U.S. foreign policy and national security studies, with
a concentration in defense and space security, and a BS from the Georgia
Institute of Technology in international affairs.

Kaitlyn
Johnson
Endnotes
Introduction
1 Spencer Kaplan, Eyes on the Prize: The Strategic Implications of Cislunar Space and the
Moon (Washington, DC: Aerospace Security Project, ), 
org/eyes-on-the-prize/.
2 Stephe Kostes, “The Future on Hold: America’s Need to Redefine Its Space Paradigm,”
Space Review, September 8, 2020, 
3 Kaplan, Eyes on the Prize.

Defining Cislunar
4 Matthew L. Lohmeier, The Better Mind of Space (Montgomery, AL: Air Command
and Staff College, ), Wright Flyer Papers no. 79, 23, 
airuniversity.af.edu/Portals/10/AUPress/Papers/WF_0079_LOHMEIER_THE_BET-
TER_MIND_OF_SPACE.PDF; and Marianne R. Bobskil and Mark L. Lupisella, “The Role of
Cis-Lunar Space in Future Global Space Exploration” (paper presented at Global Space
Exploration Conference, Washington, DC, May 22–24, 2012), 
citations/20120009459.
5 Keith W. Crane et al., Assessment of the Utility of a Government Strategic Investment
Fund for Space (Washington, DC: Institute for Defense Analyses, ), 9, https://

ment-strategic-investment-fund-for-space/d-10616.ashx. Cislunar space can be defined
as the volume of the sphere formed by rotating the Moon’s orbit around Earth (i.e., any
part of space between the Earth and the Moon). Some volumes within that sphere, such
as LEO, are distinguished by other names. Practically, cislunar space is a useful label
for the volume between GEO and the Moon’s orbit, including the Earth-Moon Lagrange
points (L4 and L5).
6 Kaplan, Eyes on the Prize; and Claudio Maccone, The Lunar Farside Radio Lab Study of
the IAA (Tourino, Italy: ResearchGate, August 1, 2018), 2, figure 1, 
gate.net/figure/Locations-of-the-five-Earth-Moon-Lagrangianpoints-namely-where-the-
Earth-and-Moon_fig1_228781180.
7 Oliver Montenbruck and Eberhard Gill, Satellite Orbits: Models, Methods, and Applica-
tions (Berlin, Germany: Springer Science & Business Media, 2000), 55, figure 3.1, https://
books.google.com/books?id=hABRnDlDkyQC&pg=PA55#v=onepage&q&f=false; and
C. Channing Chow et al., “Cislunar Periodic Orbit Families and Expected Observational
Features” (paper presented at Advanced Maui Optical and Space Surveillance Tech-
nologies Conference, Maui, Hawaii, September 12–18, 2020), 
TechnicalPapers/2020/Astrodynamics/Chow.pdf.
Europe and Russia
8 “Luna,” European Space Agency (ESA), 
man_and_Robotic_Exploration/Exploration/Luna; and “Luna 25,” NASA, 
gsfc.nasa.gov/nmc/spacecraft/display.action?id=LUNA-25.
9 “Luna-26 Orbiter,” Luna-26 Orbiter, 
10 “Luna,” ESA.
11 “Introducing space 4.0,” ESA, November 15, 2017, 
dia/Videos/2017/10/Introducing_space_4.0.
12 Jan Woerner, “Moon Village: A Vision for Global Cooperation and Space 4.0,” ESA, http://

13 Ibid.

14 Andrew Jones, “ESA, CNSA Heads Discuss Future Space Plans,” SpaceNews, April 7,
2021, 
15 Andrew Jones, “China Sets Sights on Moon’s South Pole, with ESA Collaboration Talks
Ongoing,” SpaceNews, May 6, 2018, 
moons-south-pole-with-esa-collaboration-talks-ongoing/.
16 “Lunar Satellites,” ESA, 
grated_Applications/Lunar_satellites.
17 Hannah Somerville, “One Giant Leap: ESA Wants Satellites Around the Moon to
Make Manned Missions Easier,” Euronews, August 20, 2021, 
com/2021/05/21/esa-wants-satellites-around-the-moon-to-create-lunar-telecoms-and-
navigation-system.
18 Ibid.
19 “European Service Module,” ESA, 
and_Robotic_Exploration/Orion/European_Service_Module.
20 Airbus, “Fly Me to the Moon: Airbus Wins ESA Contract for Three More European Service
Modules for NASA’s Orion Spacecraft,” Press release, February 2, 2021, 
airbus.com/newsroom/press-releases/en/2021/01/fly-me-to-the-moon-airbus-wins-
esa-contract-for-three-more-european-service-modules-for-nasas-orion-spacecraft.
html.
21 “Orion ESM,” Airbus, 
html.
22 Airbus, “To the Moon! Airbus Delivers Second European Service Module for NASA’s
Orion Spacecraft,” Press release, October 6, 2021, 
press-releases/en/2021/10/to-the-moon-airbus-delivers-second-european-ser-
vice-module-for-nasas-orion-spacecraft.html.
23 Airbus, “Airbus Selected for ESA’s Moon Lander Study,” Press release, October 14, 2020,

esas-moon-lander-study.html; and Thales Group, “Thales Alenia Space to Provide the
Study for European Space Agency’s Cis-Lunar Transfer Vehicle - CLTV ,” Press release,
January 29, 2021, 
thales-alenia-space-provide-study-european-space-agencys-cis-lunar.
24 Airbus, “Airbus studies ‘Moon Cruiser’ Concept for ESA’s Cis-Lunar Transfer Vehicle,”
Press release, January 28, 2021, 
en/2021/01/airbus-studies-moon-cruiser-concept-for-esas-cislunar-transfer-vehicle.
html; and Markus Payer, “Airbus Develops Moon Cruiser for ESA for 2027,” SpaceWatch.
Global, January 29, 2021, 
cruiser-for-esa-for-2027/.
25 Markus Payer, “ESA Asks Airbus to Develop Large Logistic Moon Lander,” SpaceWatch.
Global, October 15, 2020, 
velop-large-logistic-moon-lander/; and “Get Your Ticket to the Moon: Europe’s First
Ever Lunar Lander,” ESA, May 29, 2020, 030
man_and_Robotic_Exploration/Get_your_ticket_to_the_Moon_Europe_s_lunar_land-
er_for_science_and_more.
26 Thales Group, “Thales Alenia Space to Provide the Study.”
27 Andrew Parsonson, “German-Led Team Proposes Spherical Probe to Explore Lunar
Caves,” Rocket Rundown, March 28, 2021, 
team-proposes-spherical-probe-to-explore-lunar-caves/.
28 Thales Group, “Thales Alenia Space on its Way to Reach the Moon,” Press release,
October 14, 2020, 
thales-alenia-space-its-way-reach-moon.
Fly
Me
to
the
Moon

Kaitlyn
Johnson
29 “Thales Alenia Space: At the Heart of Lunar Industrial Challenges,” Thales Group,
January 7, 2021, 
nia-space-heart-lunar-industrial-challenges.
30 CNES, Press Relations Office, “State Visit of President Macron to China—In 2023,
Chang’e-6 Will Deploy the French DORN Instrument on the Moon to Study the Lunar Exo-
sphere,” Press release, November 6, 2019, 
macron-china-2023-change-6-will-deploy-french-dorn-instrument-moon-study-lunar.
31 “DORN, the French Instrument of the Chang’e 6 Lunar Mission,” Laboratoire Na-
tional Henri Becquerel, 
ment-of-the-change-6-lunar-mission/; and “China Aims to Launch Chang’e-6
Lunar Probe Around 2024,” Xinhua, April 24, 2021, 
glish/2021-04/24/c_139903600.htm. 031
32 The author could find no public statements or indications of such plans.
33 The author could find no public statements or indications of such plans.
34 “First Measurements of Radiation Levels on the Moon,” Kiel University, September 25,
2020, For more
on the Chang’e-4 mission, see .
35 “Plus Ultra,” Plus Ultra Space, 
36 Plus Ultra Space, “First Lunar Constellation Satellite to Travel to the Moon in 2023,”
Press release, October 28, 2021, 
rocket-factory-augsburg-sign-agreement-for-launch-to-moon-in-2023.
37 Gunter D. Krebs, “ArgoMoon,” Gunter’s Space Page, 
sdat/argomoon.htm. Orion is SLS’s crewed spacecraft, which is critical for the Artemis
program.
38 Kim Henry, “Getting to Know You, Rocket Edition: Interim Cryogenic Propulsion Stage,”
NASA, October 30, 2014, 
stage_141030.html.
39 Valerio Di Tana, Carlo Fiori, Simone Simonetti, and S. Pirrotta, “ArgoMoon, a Multipur-
pose CubeSat Platform for Missions in Moon Vicinity and Orbit” (paper presented at Eu-
ropean Planetary Science Congress, Berlin Germany, September 16–21, 2018), https://
meetingorganizer.copernicus.org/EPSC2018/EPSC2018-1181.pdf.
40 “ArgoMoon,” ESA Earth Observation Portal, 
tal/satellite-missions/content/-/article/argomo-2.
41 Krebs, “ArgoMoon.”
42 Jeff Foust, “NASA Signs Agreement with Italy to Cooperate on Artemis,” SpaceNews,
September 25, 2020, 
erate-on-artemis/.
43 Thales Group, “Thales Alenia Space on its Way.”
44 “Halo: First Component of Gateway Cislunar Space Station Takes Shape,” Thales Group,
February 15, 2021, 
component-gateway-cislunar-space-station-takes-shape.
45 Andrew Parsonson, “Thales Alenia Space Given €296 Million Contract to Build European
Gateway Module,” SpaceNews, January 8, 2021, 
space-given-e296-million-contract-to-build-european-gateway-module/.
46 “Thales Alenia Space: At the Heart,” Thales Group.
47 Parsonson, “Thales Alenia Space Given €296 Million.”
48 “SpaceResources.LU Initiative,” Luxembourg Space Agency, 
public.lu/en/space-resources/the-initiative.html.

49 “Frequently Asked Questions,” Luxembourg Space Agency, 
lu/en/space-resources/faq.html.
50 Senjuti Mallick and Rajeswari Pillai Rajagopalan, “If Space is ‘the Province of Mankind’,
Who Owns its Resources?: An Examination of the Potential of Space Mining and its Legal
Implications,” Observer Research Foundation, ORF Occasional Paper no. 182, , 
owns-its-resources-47561/.
51 Clive Cookson, “Luxembourg Space Programme to Work with NASA on Moon Mining,”
Financial Times, February 16, 2021, 
bce4-66f01e16ade4.
52 Anatoly Zak, “Luna-26 Orbiter,” RussionSpaceWeb.com, 
com/luna_glob_orbiter.html.
53 TASS “Luna 25,” NASA; and “Launch of Luna-25 Moon Mission May Be Postponed by
Another Year, Scientist Says,” Press release, October 10, 2019, 
ence/1082394.
54 Zak, “Luna-26 Orbiter”; and “Luna,” ESA.
55 Jamie Carter, “A Soviet-Era ‘Moon Digger’ Program Is Being Revived to Hunt for Water at
the Moon’s South Pole,” Forbes, July 26, 2019, 
tereurope/2019/07/26/what-is-luna-27-a-soviet-era-moon-digger-revived-to-hunt-for-
water-at-the-moons-south-pole/.
56 Anatoly Zak, “Luna-Resurs (Luna-27) Lander,” RussionSpaceWeb.com, 
russianspaceweb.com/luna_resurs_lander.html; and “Luna,” ESA.
57 Igor Mitrofanov, Lev Zelenyi, and Vladislav Tretyakov, “Luna-28 Mission for Polar Sam-
ples Return, As the Key Element of the Initial Stage of Russian Lunar Program” (paper
presented at the 22nd EGU General Assembly, online, May 4–8, 2020), 
gorganizer.copernicus.org/EGU2020/EGU2020-8739.html?pdf; and TASS, “Launch of
Luna-25,”.
58 TASS, “Russia’s Sample Mission to Moon Scheduled for 2026–2027,” Press release,
October 8, 2019, 
59 Ibid.
60 TASS, “Russia’s Oryol New Spacecraft to Make Crewed Flight Around Moon in 2029,”
Press release, January 28, 2020, 
61 TASS, “Russian Tech Firm Experimentally Confirms Future Oryol Spacecraft’s Engine
Characteristics,” Press release, April 12, 2021, 
62 TASS, “Russia’s Oryol New Spacecraft.”
63 TASS, “Roscosmos, NASA Look at Possible Docking of Russian Orel Spacecraft to U.S.
Lunar Gateway,” Press release, October 26, 2021, 
64 TASS, “Russia to Send More Spacecraft to New National Orbital Station Than to ISS,”
Press release, November 29, 2021, 032
65 “Russia Announces Plans to Establish Moon Colony by 2040,” Moscow Times, November
29, 2018, 
establish-moon-colony-by-2040-a63557.
66 “China and Russia Sign a Memorandum of Understanding Regarding Cooperation for
the Construction of the International Lunar Research Station,” China National Space
Administration, March 9, 2021, 
c6811380/content.html.
67 “First Ukrainian Mission to Moon to Be Carried Out in 2022,” Ukrinform, August 30, 2021,

be-carried-out-in-2022.html.
Fly
Me
to
the
Moon

Kaitlyn
Johnson
68 The author could find no public statements or indications of such plans. Furthermore,
Brexit does not affect the United Kingdom’s participation in ESA, as ESA is not an EU
entity.
69 “ULA Vulcan Rocket Debut Slips To 2022,” Aviation Week Network, June 18, 2021,

70 “The Walking Rover,” Spacebit, 
71 Tom Fish, “Moon Mission: British Firm to Make Two Moon Missions in 2021 with Walking
Lunar Base Rover,” Express, December 10, 2020, 
ence/1370797/moon-mission-uk-walking-moon-rover-launch-2021-brilliantly-british-
evg.

72 “Lunar Pathfinder,” SSTL, 
build/2021/lunar-pathfinder; and “Lunar Pathfinder,” Earth Observation ESA, https://
directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/l/lunar-pathfinder.
73 Ibid.; and “Lunar Pathfinder,” SSTL.
74 “Moon Probe Initial Explorer (MoonPIE),” TCT Aerospace, 
com/moonpie.
Indo-Pacific
75 Australian Space Agency, “Australia and the First Moon Landing,” Australian Govern-
ment, Department of Industry, Science, Energy, and Resources, July 18, 2019, https://

76 Australian Space Agency, “Moon to Mars: Opportunities for Australian Businesses,” Aus-
tralian Government, Department of Industry, Science, Energy, and Resources, https://

lian-businesses.
77 “NASA, Australia Sign Agreement to Add Rover to Future Moon Mission,” NASA, October
12, 2021, 
to-future-moon-mission.
78 The author could find no public statements or indications of such plans.
79 “Australia’s Mission of Discovery for Earth, the Moon, and Mars,” Seven Sisters, https://

80 “Seven Sisters—Australia’s First Lunar Exploration Mission,” Space Industry Association
of Australia, December 17, 2020, 
tralias-first-lunar-exploration-mission/.
81 “Australian Industry Rallies to Develop a Bold Unifying Space Mission,” Lunar Ascent,
Press release, December 6, 2020, 
and Lunar Ascent, “Space Machines Company to Build Australian Spacecraft in Sydney
as First Customer Signs On for Lunar Ascent Rideshare to the Moon,” Press release,
December 23, 2020, 
82 Rachel S. Cohen, “Emerging Lunar Intelligence Field to Shape Space Ops,” Air Force
Magazine, April 21, 2020, 
field-to-shape-space-ops/.
83 “Chang’e-4 Far Side Moon-Landing Mission of China,” ESA Earth Observation Portal,

84 “Chang’e-4 and Yutu-2, China’s Mission to the Moon’s Far Side,” Planetary Society,

85 “Chang’e 5,” NASA, 
tion?id=2020-087A.

86 Andrew Jones, “China’s Chang’e 6 Mission Will Collect Lunar Samples from the Far Side
of the Moon by 2024,” Space.com, July 8, 2021, 
6-moon-sample-return-preparations; and “China Aims to Launch Chang’e-6,” Xinhua.
87 Lin Xu, Zhaoyu Pei, Yongliao Zou, and Chi Wang, “China’s Lunar and Deep Space Explo-
ration Program for the Next Decade (2020-2030),” Chinese Journal of Space Science 40,
no. 5 (): 615–617, doi:10.11728/cjss2020.05.615.
88 “Chang’e 7,” NASA, 
tion?id=CHANG-E-7.
89 “Future Chinese Lunar Missions,” NASA, 
cnsa_moon_future.html.
90 Xu, Pei, Zou, and Wang, “China’s Lunar and Deep Space Exploration Program.”
91 “China and Russia sign a Memorandum of Understanding,” China National Space
Administration.
92 Nitin J. Ticku, “France May Join Russia, China In Lunar Space Station Project – Roscos-
mos,” EurAsian Times, June 9, 2021, 
china-in-lunar-space-station-project-roscosmos/.
93 Andrew Jones, “China Is Aiming to Attract Partners for an International Lunar Research
Station,” SpaceNews, August 21, 2020, 
tract-partners-for-an-international-lunar-research-station/.
94 Andrew Jones, “China Displays Crewed Moon Landing Mission Elements,” SpaceNews,
September 30, 2021, 
ing-mission-elements/.
95 Andrew Jones, “China Outlines Architecture for Future Crewed Moon Landings,” Spa-
ceNews, October 30, 2020, 
ture-crewed-moon-landings/.
96 “Exploiting Earth-Moon Space: China’s Ambition After Space Station,” China Daily, March
8, 2016, 
97 Kenneth Chang, “A Billion Pixels and the Search for India’s Crashed Moon Lander,” New
York Times, December 6, 2019, 
moon-mission-vikram-found.html.
98 Indian Space Research Organization, “Chandrayaan 2,” Government of India, Depart-
ment of Space, 
99 Andrew Jones, “India Revises Gaganyaan Human Spaceflight Plan, Delays Chan-
drayaan-3,” SpaceNews, February 23, 2021, 
ganyaan-human-spaceflight-plan-delays-chandrayaan-3/.
100 Ibid.
101 India Today Web Desk, “ISRO, Japanese Agency Review Cooperation on 2024 Joint
Lunar Mission,” India Today, March 13, 2021, 
isro-jaxa-2024-joint-lunar-polar-satellite-mission-1778755-2021-03-13. 034
102 Deyana Goh, “Japan’s Plans for the Moon,” SpaceTech Asia, October 13, 2020, https://

103 India Today Web Desk, “ISRO, Japanese Agency Review Cooperation.”
104 Takeshi Hoshino et al., “Progress of Lunar Polar Exploration Mission” (paper presented
at 71st International Astronautical Congress, online, October 12–14, 2020), 2, https://
iafastro.directory/iac/paper/id/55917/abstract-pdf/IAC-20,A3,2B,9,x55917.brief.pdf.
105 “EQUULEUS and OMOTENASHI,” ESA Earth Observation Portal, 
tal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/e/equuleus.
106 Ibid.
Fly
Me
to
the
Moon

Kaitlyn
Johnson
107 Gunter D. Krebs, “OMOTENASHI,” Gunter’s Space Page, 
doc_sdat/omotenashi.htm; and Onur Çelik et al., “Overview of Japanese Lunar CubeSats
OMOTENASHI & EQUULEUS” (presentation at the UN/South Africa Symposium on Basic
Space Technology, Stellenbosch, South Africa, December 11–15, 2017), 
unoosa.org/documents/pdf/psa/activities/2017/SouthAfrica/slides/Presentation21.pdf.
108 “Smart Lander for Investigating Moon (SLIM),” JAXA, 
sions/spacecraft/developing/slim.html.
109 Ibid.
110 Gunter D. Krebs, “SLIM,” Gunter’s Space Page, 
slim.htm.

111 Hiroshi Sasaki, “JAXA’s Lunar Exploration Activities” (presentation at the 62nd Session of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Vienna, Austria, June 12–21, 2019),
 and
“HTV-X Mission,” JAXA, 
112 Gunter D. Krebs, “HTV-X 1, 2, 3 (Kotonotori 1, 2, 3),” Gunter’s Space Page, 
skyrocket.de/doc_sdat/htv-x.htm.
113 Sasaki, “JAXA’s Lunar Exploration Activities.”
114 Goh, “Japan’s Plans for the Moon.”
115 “Space Exploration Innovation Hub Center,” JAXA, 
english/.
116 Mike Wall, “Japanese ispace Lander to Carry UAE Moon Rover to Lunar Surface in
2022,” Space.com, April 14, 2021, 
lander-2022; and “What is HAKUTO-R?,” ispace, 
about/.
117 “Project,” ispace, 
118 Toyota, “JAXA and Toyota Announce ‘LUNAR CRUISER’ As Nickname for Manned
Pressurized Rover,” Press release, August 28, 2020, 
corporate/33208872.html.
119 Samantha Mathewson, “NASA Selects 9 Scientists to Join 2022 Korea Pathfinder Lunar
Orbiter Mission,” Space.com, April 5, 2021, 
rea-pathfinder-lunar-orbiter.
120 Gunter D. Krebs, “KPLO,” Gunter’s Space Page, accessed January 17, 2022, https://
space.skyrocket.de/doc_sdat/kplo.htm.
121 “Delay/Disruption Tolerant Networking Overview,” NASA, November 19, 2020, https://

networking_overview; and Gwanghyeok Ju, “Korean Pathfinder Lunar Orbiter (KPLO)
Status Update” (presentation at The 2017 Annual Meeting of the Lunar Exploration
Analysis Group, Columbia, Maryland, October 10–12, 2017), 11, 
edu/meetings/leag2017/presentations/tuesday/ju.pdf.
122 “Remarks by President Moon Jae-in at Space Strategy Presentation for Korea Following
Nuri Thrust Engine Combustion Test,” Republic of Korea Government, March 25, 2021,

123 Thana Boonlert, “For All Mankind: Proposed Law Will Accelerate Thailand’s Space
Programme, Paving the Way for the Kingdom to Explore Outside Earth’s Atmosphere,”
Bangkok Post, August 4, 2021, 
style/2159731/for-all-mankind.
124 Nattanon Dungsunenarn, “Thailand Announces Its first multi-billion Lunar and Deep
Space mission,” Spaceth.co, January 20, 2021, 
its-first-multi-billion-lunar-and-deep-space-mission/.

125 Boonlert, “For All Mankind: Proposed Law Will Accelerate Thailand’s Space Programme.”
Americas
126 “About the Lunar Exploration Accelerator Program,” Government of Canada, https://

127 Ibid.
128 “Contracts Awarded under LEAP,” Government of Canada, 
eng/funding-programs/programs/leap/contracts-awarded.asp.
129 “Opportunities at the Canadian Space Agency,” Government of Canada, 
asc-csa.gc.ca/eng/funding-programs/funding-opportunities/default.asp?filter=lunar.
130 “ULA Vulcan Rocket Debut Slips To 2022,” Aviation Week Network.
131 “COLMENA, the Mexican Mission That Will Take Robots to the Moon,” Yucatan Times,
August 29, 2019, 
mission-that-will-take-robots-to-the-moon/.
132 Ibid.; and “UNAM to Send 9 Microrobots to the Moon in 2021,” El Universal, August 28,
2019, 
133 The White House, United States Space Priorities Framework (Washington, DC: De-
cember 2021), 5, 
ed-States-Space-Priorities-Framework-_-December-1-2021.pdf.
134 NASA, Public Communications Office, “NASA’s SOFIA Discovers Water on Sunlit Surface
of Moon,” Press release, October 26, 2020, 
sofia-discovers-water-on-sunlit-surface-of-moon.
135 “Laser Beams Reflected Between Earth and Moon Boost Science,” NASA, August 10,
2020, 
earth-and-moon-boost-science.
136 “Artemis,” NASA, 
137 NASA, Public Communications Office, “NASA Outlines Challenges, Progress for Artemis
Moon Missions,” Press release, November 9, 2021, 
nasa-outlines-challenges-progress-for-artemis-moon-missions; Meghan Bartels,
“NASA’s Artemis 1 moon mission slips to spring 2022 after engine issue,” Space.com, De-
cember 20, 2021, 
issue; and Loren Grush (@lorengrush), “NASA is about to give an update on its Artemis
program—everyone’s on the lookout for timeline changes ahead,” Twitter post, Novem-
ber 9, 2021, 3:00 p.m., 
138 Jeff Foust, “NASA foresees gap in lunar landings after Artemis 3,” SpaceNews, January
20, 2022, 
139 NASA, The Artemis Accords: Principles for Cooperation in the Civil Exploration and Use
of the Moon, Mars, Comets, and Asteroids for Peaceful Purposes (Washington, DC:
), 

cords-signed-13Oct2020.pdf.
140 Guoyu Wang, “NASA’s Artemis Accords: The Path to a United Space Law or a Divided
One?,” Space Review, August 24, 2020, 
and “Russia Compares Trump’s Space Mining Order to Colonialism,” Moscow
Times, April 7, 2020, 
pares-trumps-space-mining-order-to-colonialism-a69901.
141 NASA, NASA’s Lunar Exploration Program Overview (Washington, DC: ), 14,

142 “Gateway,” NASA, 
Fly
Me
to
the
Moon

Kaitlyn
Johnson
143 “Commercial Lunar Payload Services Overview,” NASA, 
tent/commercial-lunar-payload-services-overview; and “Polar Resources Ice Mining
Experiment-1 (PRIME-1),” NASA, October 16, 2020, 
spacetech/game_changing_development/projects/PRIME-1.
144 Ibid.
145 “VIPER,” NASA, 
146 Jeff Foust, “Astrobotic Selects Falcon Heavy to Launch NASA’s VIPER Lunar Rov-
er,” SpaceNews, April 13, 2021, 
con-heavy-to-launch-nasas-viper-lunar-rover/.
147 NASA, Public Communications Office, “As Artemis Moves Forward, NASA Picks SpaceX

to Land Next Americans on Moon,” Press release, April 16, 2021, 
press-release/as-artemis-moves-forward-nasa-picks-spacex-to-land-next-americans-
on-moon; and “More About the Human Landing System Program,” NASA, 
nasa.gov/content/more-about-the-human-landing-system-program.
148 NASA, NASA’s Lunar Exploration Program Overview, 10.
149 “CAPSTONE’s CubeSat Prepares for Lunar Flight,” NASA, August 6, 2021, 
nasa.gov/feature/ames/capstone-s-cubesat-prepares-for-lunar-flight; and Jeff Foust,
“CAPSTONE Launch Delayed to ,” SpaceNews, October 13, 2021, 
cenews.com/capstone-launch-delayed-to-march-2022/.
150 “Mission to the Moon,” Rocket Lab, 
151 Matt Williams, “NASA Has Decided to Start Building the Lunar Gateway Using the Falcon
Heavy,” Universe Today, February 14, 2021, 
nasa-has-decided-to-start-building-the-lunar-gateway-using-the-falcon-heavy/.
152 “Lunar Ice Cube,” NASA, 
action?id=L-ICECUBE; and Miriam Kramer, “Debut Flight of NASA’s Next Big Rocket
Delayed Until 2022,” Axios, October 22, 2021, 
tem-launch-2022-0a7f223a-1b7f-4460-87e6-ae7eb1486557.html.
153 “Lunar Flashlight,” ESA Earth Observation Portal, 
eoportal/satellite-missions/l/lunar-flashlight.
154 “Lunar InfraRed Imaging (LunIR),” NASA, 
display.action?id=LUNIR.
155 “LunaH-Map,” NASA, 
NAH-MAP; and “LunaH-Map Spacecraft,” Arizona State University, 
asu.edu/.
156 “SIMPLEx Small Satellite Concept Finalists Target Moon, Mars and Beyond,” NASA, June
19, 2019, 
mars-and-beyond.
157 “Getting to the Moon,” Caltech, 
158 NASA, NASA’s Lunar Exploration Program Overview, 10.
159 cmwarner, “Lunar Living: NASA’s Artemis Base Camp Concept,” NASA (blog), Octo-
ber 28, 2020, 
mis-base-camp-concept/.
160 Kaplan, Eyes on the Prize; and Brien Flewelling, “Securing Cislunar Space: A Vision for
U.S. Leadership,” SpaceNews, November 9, 2020, 
ing-cislunar-space-a-vision-for-u-s-leadership/.
161 “Memorandum of Understanding between the National Aeronautics and Space Ad-
ministration, and the United States Space Force,” NASA, , 
nasa.gov/sites/default/files/atoms/files/nasa_ussf_mou_21_sep_20.pdf.

162 Ibid.
163 David Buehler et al., “Posturing Space Forces for Operations Beyond GEO,” Space
Force Journal, January 31, 2021, 
es-for-operations-beyond-geo/.
164 “Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of
Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (1967),” United Nations
Office of Outer Space Affairs, Article IV, 
spacelaw/treaties/outerspacetreaty.html.
165 Ibid.
166 United States Space Force, Space Capstone Publication, Spacepower: Doctrine for Space
Forces (Washington, DC: United States Space Force, ), 14, 
force.mil/Portals/1/Space%20Capstone%20Publication_10%20Aug%202020.pdf.
167 Melissa Maday, “Rhea Space Activity Advances US Ability to Gather Intelligence in Cis-
lunar Space,” SpaceWatch.Global, April 10, 2020, 
rhea-space-activity-advances-us-ability-to-gather-intelligence-in-cislunar-space; and
Aditya Jadhav, “USAF Awards Rhea Space Activity with LUNINT Contract,” Janes, April
24, 2020, 
activity-with-lunint-contract.
168 Sandra Erwin, “Rhea Space Activity to Develop Cislunar Space ‘Dashboard’ for U.S. Air
Force,” SpaceNews, October 20, 2021, 
develop-cislunar-space-dashboard-for-u-s-air-force/.
169 M. J. Holzinger, C. C. Chow, and P. Garretson, A Primer on Cislunar Space (Wright-Patter-
son AFB, Ohio: Air Force Research Laboratory, ), 
tals/90/Documents/RV/A%20Primer%20on%20Cislunar%20Space_Dist%20A_PA2021-
1271.pdf.
170 Theresa Hitchens, “AFRL Satellite To Track Up To The Moon; Space Force-NASA Tout
Cooperation,” Breaking Defense, September 21, 2020, 
com/2020/09/afrl-satellite-to-track-up-to-the-moon-space-force-nasa-tout-coopera-
tion/.
171 Theresa Hitchens, “Space Force, AFRL to Demo Mobile Lunar Spy Sat,” Breaking De-
fense, November 30, 2020, 
demo-mobile-lunar-spy-sat/.
172 DARPA, “Orbital Construction: DARPA Pursues Plan for Robust Manufacturing in Space,”
Press release, February 5, 2021, 
173 Ibid.
174 Theresa Hitchens, “DARPA Nuke Sat To Target Cislunar Monitoring Mission,” Breaking
Defense, April 19, 2021, 
get-cislunar-monitoring-mission/; and DARPA, “DARPA Selects Performers for Phase 1 of
Demonstration Rocket for Agile Cislunar Operations (DRACO) Program,” Press release,
April 12, 2021, 

175 Elizabeth Howell, “US Military Picks 3 Companies to Test Nuclear Propulsion in Cislunar
Space,” Space.com, April 20, 2021, 
ar-propulsion-cislunar-space.
176 Chris Bergin, “ULA Laying the Foundations for an Econosphere in CisLunar Space,”
NASASpaceFlight.com, March 22, 2018, 
ula-laying-foundations-econosphere-cislunar-space/.
177 U.S. Congress, Senate, “Testimony of Salvatore T. ‘Tory’ Bruno President and Chief
Executive Officer United Launch Alliance, LLC,” Before the Subcommittee on Space,
Science, and Competitiveness Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation,
115th Cong., 2nd sess., July 25, 2018, 
default-document-library/ula-bruno-mars-testimony-final.pdf.
Fly
Me
to
the
Moon

Kaitlyn
Johnson
178 “We’re the Moon Company,” Astrobotic, 
manifest/.
179 “Intuitive Machines,” Intuitive Machines, 
180 Jeff Foust, “Lunar Exploration as a Service: From Landers to Spacesuits, NASA Is Renting
Rather Than Owning,” SpaceNews, July 5, 2021, 
tion-as-a-service-from-landers-to-spacesuits-nasa-is-renting-rather-than-owning/.
181 “dearMoon,” dearMoon, and “The Moon,” SpaceX, https://

Middle East and Africa

182 “About SpaceIL,” SpaceIL, and “Beresheet2,” SpaceIL,

183 Kenneth Chang, “Can Israelis Put Two Landers on the Moon at Once?,” New York
Times, December 9, 2020, 
el-moon-beresheet-2.html.
184 Elizabeth Howell, “Israel Will Aim for the Moon Again in 2024 with Beresheet 2
mission,” Space.com, December 12, 2020, 
es-beresheet-2-moon-mission-2024.
185 Jerusalem Post Staff, “Israeli and Japanese Companies Join Forces in Lunar Industry,”
Jerusalem Post, July 20, 2021, 
nese-companies-join-forces-in-lunar-industry-674367.
186 Suzan Fraser, “Turkey Unveils Space Program Including 2023 Moon Mission,” Asso-
ciated Press, February 9, 2021, 
dogan-moon-spacex-europe-a763414e402eb70e78ae2c2a89134f33; Markus Payer,
“Turkey Wants to Go to the Moon in 2023 and 2028,” SpaceWatch.Global, February 11,
2021, 
and-2028/; and Tereza Pultarova, “Turkey Aims to Send Rocket to Moon in Three Years,
Land Lunar Rover by 2030,” Space.com, June 18, 2021, 
moon-rover-rocket-plans.
187 Sarwat Nasir, “UAE Reveals Long-Term Moon Exploration Plan at Global Space Confer-
ence,” The National, June 17, 2021, 
uae-reveals-long-term-moon-exploration-plan-at-global-space-conference-1.1242597;
and Jeff Foust, “UAE to Develop Small Lunar Rover,” SpaceNews, October 6, 2020,

188 Ana De Oliva, “The UAE’s Tiny Lunar Rover Will Face Big Challenges on the Moon,” CNN,
April 1, 2021, 
spc-intl-scn/index.html.
189 Wall, “Japanese ispace Lander to Carry UAE Moon Rover.”
190 Nasir, “UAE Reveals Long-Term Moon Exploration Plan.”
Trends across Planned Missions
191 Jesse Greaves and Daniel Scheeres, “Maneuver Detection for Cislunar Vehicles Using
Optical Measurements” (paper presented at Advanced Maui Optical and Space Surveil-
lance Technologies Conference, Maui, Hawaii, September 12–18, 2020), 
tech.com/TechnicalPapers/2020/Cislunar-SSA/Greaves.pdf.
192 TASS, “Russia, China Send Invitations to Partners to Joint Lunar Research Station Proj-
ect,” Press release, May 27, 2021, 
193 Makena Young, Bad Idea: The Wolf Amendment (Limiting Collaboration with China in
Space), CSIS, Defense360, December 4, 2019, 
wolf-amendment-limiting-collaboration-with-china-in-space/.

COVER PHOTO NASA
1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202 887 0200 |