December 19, 2019
Photo by: SpaceX
Congress approved the Space Force. Now What?
BY Kaitlyn Johnson
HERE WE ARE, at the beginning of what will likely be a by the Department of Defense, the NDAA language from
long and winding road for the Space Force. And it’s the Senate, and the accompanying language from the
exciting! Whether or not you thought the Space Force House of Representatives. The main items of contention
were:
was the right organizational structure, or if this is the
1. Title 10 authorities;
right time for a change, the Space Force is moving
2. The name of the new service and what to call its
forward with the passing of the Fiscal Year 2020 National
senior military leader; and
Defense Authorization Act (NDAA). The best next step is
3. How space acquisition would be structured.
to support the servicemembers launching the new
military service. While discussing important aspects of
What was authorized in the Fiscal Year 2020 NDAA?
the new service, like culture, acquisition structure, and
interoperability, will likely be overshadowed in the
First and foremost, the U.S. Armed Forces will create a
media by the less-important aspects (e.g., Netflix’s
new military service for space with the full Title 10
Space Force series, rank structure, and uniforms), we
authorities that give the legal backing for the new
first need to understand what the Congress agreed on ‒
and what has been left out. Kaitlyn Johnson is the Associate Director of the
Aerospace Security Project at the Center for Strategic
Earlier this year, I wrote about the similarities and
and International Studies in Washington, D.C.
differences between the legislative proposal submitted
AEROSPACE.CSIS.ORG | 1

service to organize, train, and equip. Title 10 authority concern on keeping the costs minimal for the Space
writes into law the legal responsibilities and Force.
organization of the services.1 The U.S. Space Force will
Unique to the Space Force will be the Space Force
be the sixth armed force, and it will be under the
Acquisition Council. Created by Congress and not in the
Department of the Air Force, much like how the U.S.
original DoD proposal, this is a clear attempt to sort out
Marine Corps is within the Department of the Navy.
the complicated decision-making authorities in space
However, the Space Force is not being created from acquisitions. The Council will be located within the
scratch. The already-existing Air Force Space Command Office of the Secretary of the Air Force and include: the
‒ which includes “more than 26,000 space professionals Under Secretary of the Air Force; the Assistant Secretary
world-wide” ‒ will be redesignated as the U.S. Space of the Air Force for Space Acquisition and Integration
Force and then elevated in its authorities and (whom will act as the chair of the Council), the Assistant
responsibilities through Title 10.2 The NDAA details that Secretary of Defense for Space Policy (an existing
the Space Force shall provide “freedom of operation for position that has been elevated with this NDAA), the
the United States in, from, and to space; and prompt Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, the Chief
and sustained space operations.”3 Furthermore, its core of Space Operations, and the Commander of U.S. Space
duties will be to “protect the interests of the United Command. However, this council is eerily reminiscent of
States in space; deter aggression in, from, and to space; previous space council constructs, and it remains to be
and conduct space operations.”4 seen if adding an oversight board will help coordinate or
further confuse military space acquisitions.
The Space Force will be led by the Chief of Space
Operations, a four-star military servicemember who will, The Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Space
after the first year, permanently sit on the Joint Chiefs of Acquisition and Integration position is also a
Staff. Like the other service chiefs, this military general redesignation of an already-existing position. This
will be appointed by the President and approved by the position will oversee (with direction from the Council)
Senate. The Chief of Space Operations will serve under the Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC), the Space
the leadership and direction of the Secretary of the Air Rapid Capabilities Office (SpRCO), and the newly-
Force. created Space Development Agency (SDA). Likely a
contested decision, this NDAA requires the transition of
Notably, there is a provision in the bill allowing for the
the SDA out from under the Under Secretary of Defense
current Commander of U.S. Space Command, General
for Research and Engineering (USD R&D) and into the
Jay Raymond, to serve as interim-Chief of Staff of Space
Space Force. Initial funding and activities will remain
Operations for the first year.
under USD R&E until FY 2022, when the organization will
Since the Space Force is being created from an already- complete the transition into the Space Force. Eventually
existing organization in the Air Force and remains within this position will serve as the Service Acquisition
the Department of the Air Force, the current Secretary of Executive of the Department of the Air Force for Space
the Air Force, Barbara Barrett, is charged with the Systems and Programs. This position is a Senate-
responsibility of assigning members from the Air Force confirmed role. These changes in acquisition oversight
to the Space Force. However, the Secretary is not favor the original Senate bill language, as the House bill
authorized to create new military billets (positions) did not provide a similar provision.
within the Space Force. This is likely due to Congress’
2 | JOHNSON | Congress approved the Space Force. Now What?

Importantly, the NDAA gives the Space Force acquisition In the table below, it is clear that the final NDAA
independence. A key leader in the Air Force, Assistant language walked the line between the Senate and the
Secretary of the Air Force for Acquisition, Technology House desires for the Space Force. While the decision on
and Logistics Will Roper, argued strongly to keep space Title 10 authorities favored the House, many of the
acquisitions within the Air Force.5 However, Congress details of implementation favored the Senate, including
decided that the Space Force should be allowed to the name of the new service and how space acquisition
direct and manage its own space acquisition programs would be structured.
and have a separate acquisition executive focused
exclusively on space systems.
DoD Legislative SASC FY20 HASC FY20 Final FY 2020 NDAA
Proposal NDAA NDAA
Creates a new No No No No
military department?
Creates a new service Yes Yes* Yes Yes
within the Air Force?
Creates a new civilian Yes, Under No No No, but it elevates an
Secretary of the Air already-existing position
space position in the
Force for Space as Assistant Secretary of
Air Force the Air Force for Space
Acquisition and
Integration
Senior OSD civilian No Elevates Deputy No Yes, Elevates Deputy
Assistant Secretary Assistant Secretary of
position
of Defense (DASD) Defense (DASD) for Space
for Space to be to be Assistant Secretary
Assistant Secretary of Defense (ASD) for Space
of Defense (ASD) Policy
for Space Policy
Military leadership Chief of Staff and Commander and Commandant Chief of Space
Vice Chief of Staff Vice Commander Operations**
Representation on the Yes Yes Yes Yes, after first year
Joint Chiefs of Staff
| 3

New civil service Yes and gives No, transfers No, transfers existing Not addressed
greater flexibility existing billets billets
positions
for recruiting,
hiring, and pay for
civilians in the
Space Force
New military positions Yes, allows the No, transfers No, transfers existing No, transfers existing
Secretary of existing billets billets billets
Defense to
authorize new
military positions
for the Space Force
Includes NRO and No No No No
other intelligence
agencies?
Includes Army and Yes No Not immediately but No, but does not prohibit
requires DoD to it in the future
Navy space
submit a report to
components? Congress advising
necessity
Includes National Included associated Yes Not addressed Not addressed
reservists, but left
Guard and Reserve
out the National
Components? Guard
Mentions the SDA? No, but it Yes Yes Yes, moves SDA from
established the SDA USD/R&E to the Space
in parallel under Force by FY 2022
USD/R&E
Estimated Budget Gives DoD authority Intended to be Requires a report on Authorizes $72.4M for
to transfer funds budget neutral the estimated establishment of the
and establish a funding Space Force***
headquarters for requirements to
the Space Force establish and
operate the Space
Corps through the
FYDP (2021-2025)
New Service 5 years from Not Addressed December 30, 2023 Variable
enactment
Transition Timeline
* Unlike DoD’s legislative proposal or HASC’s amendment, SASC’s NDAA markup does not overtly state that a new service is
being established under Title X within the Department of the Air Force.
** For the first year, the Commander of U.S. Space Command will also serve as the Commander of the U.S. Space Force.
***While $72.4M was authorized, the Appropriations Bill for Fiscal Year 2020 has only appropriated $40M for Space Force.
4 | JOHNSON | Congress approved the Space Force. Now What?

Notes About CSIS
1. Kaitlyn Johnson, “Space Force or Space Corps?” (Washington, D.C.: CSIS, Established in Washington, D.C., over 50 years ago, the Center
), for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan,
public/publication/190626_Johnson_SpaceForceLegislation_layout_v1. nonprofit policy research organization dedicated to providing
pdf.
strategic insights and policy solutions to help decisionmakers
2. “About Us” Air Force Space Command, 
chart a course toward a better world.
Us/.
3. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020, 116th Congress, In late 2015, Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the
1st Session, 904, CSIS Board of Trustees. Mr. Pritzker succeeded former U.S.
content/uploads/2019/12/FY20-NDAA-Conference-Report.pdf.
senator Sam Nunn (D-GA), who chaired the CSIS Board of
4. Ibid.
Trustees from 1999 to 2015. CSIS is led by John J. Hamre,
5. Sandra Erwin, “Air Force contends Space Force should not have separate
president and chief executive officer since .
acquisition office,” Space News, September 4, 2019,
 Founded in 1962 by David M. Abshire and Admiral Arleigh
have-a-separate-acquisition-office/. Burke, CSIS is one of the world’s preeminent international
6. The total Air Force budget includes both Air Force “blue” funding and the
policy institutions focused on defense and security; regional
pass-through funding that goes to other agencies.
study; and transnational challenges ranging from energy and
trade to global development and economic integration. For
the past eight years consecutively, CSIS has been named the
world’s number one think tank for international security by
the University of Pennsylvania’s “GoTo Think Tank Index.”
The Center’s over 220 full-time staff and large network of
affiliated scholars conduct research and analysis and develop
policy initiatives that look to the future and anticipate
change. CSIS is regularly called upon by Congress, the
executive branch, and the media to explain the day’s events
and offer bipartisan recommendations to improve U.S.
strategy.
CSIS does not take specific policy position; accordingly, all
views expressed herein should be understood to be solely
those of the author(s).
| 5