INTERNATIONAL LUNAR RESEARCH STATION
(ILRS）
2023-05
Deep Space Exploration Laboratory of CNSA

CONTENT
01 China Lunar Exploration
02 ILRS Concept
03 International Cooperation

1. China Lunar Exploration
1. The importance of Lunar Exploration
• Moon is the closest celestial object to the Earth, mankind has explored more than 120 times.
• Moon is the transit station towards farther deep space, is an important way to study the
"three origins" of life, solar system and the universe.
• Moon is the hot spot of international space science research, the development and
utilization of lunar resources is of great significance to the sustainable development of
mankind.

1. China Lunar Exploration
◼ 2. Three Steps of China Lunar Exploration
Chang'E-1 Chang'E-2 Chang'E-3 Chang'E-4 Chang'E-5
2007.10 2010.10 2013.12 2018.12 2020
Sample Return
Landing
Orbiting

1. China Lunar Exploration
◼ 3. Serve for Human Civilization
◼ Build a large-scale, long-term scientific research
platform for extraterrestrial objects and space
◼ Gather the strength of countries and the wisdom
of global scientists
◼ Improve the scientific research and technology
level of mankind on the moon and the universe
◼ Explore the unknown of the universe and serve
human civilization

CONTENT
01 China Lunar Exploration
02 ILRS Concept
03 International Cooperation

International Lunar Research Station (ILRS)
1. INTRODUCTION

2. ILRS Concept
2.1 Definition of ILRS
ILRS Concept
⚫ Proposed by China and jointly built by many
countries,
⚫ a scalable and maintainable comprehensive
scientific experiment facility.
⚫ operates autonomously on the lunar surface
and lunar orbit for a long time, with short-
term manned participation.
⚫ Has ability to support energy supply, central
control, communication& navigation,
space-earth round trip, lunar scientific
research and ground support,
⚫ continues to carry out multidisciplinary, multi-
target, large-scale scientific and technological
activities such as scientific exploration and
research, resource development and
utilization, and cutting-edge technology
verification.

2. ILRS Concept
2.2 Vision and Mission
Vision: Purpose: equality and mutual benefit, peaceful
use, inclusive development
⚫ Within 10-15 years, gather all human resources
of different countries, races and civilizations,
walk out of the cradle of the earth,
⚫ jointly build and share and operate the first
extraterrestrial home in the solar system,
serves the community of human destiny on the
surface of the moon, used for long-term
exploration and development of the universe,
and contributes Chinese wisdom and strength.
⚫ In the future, human beings will set off from
the moon again, rush to a wider universe, land
on Mars and more distant planets, and further
explore the mysteries of the solar system.

2. ILRS Concept
2.3 Overall Goal
⚫ Complete the construction of ILRS,
⚫ realize the development and exploration of the
material, environmental and location of the moon,
⚫ obtain a number of original world-class scientific
discoveries,
⚫ break through a number of strategic, cutting-
edge and basic key technologies,
⚫ create a group of top international talents in
science, technology and management, and
⚫ make pioneering contributions to the peaceful
use of space by mankind and the construction of
a community with a shared future for mankind.

2. ILRS Concept
2.4 Scientific Goals
Scientific Goal
Lunar Universe Sun-Earth Scientific Resource
archaeology survey relation experiments utilization
Solve the problem of How the Dark Ages Explore the nature of Lunar ecological and Resource development
the origin and and Dawn Ages of Earth-like living basic scientific and utilization: energy,
evolution of the moon the universe evolved environments experiments materials, construction

2. ILRS Concept
2.5 Engineering Goals
Engineering
Goals
platform for scientific Drive technology leaps Build an engineering
experiments across generations facility system
Build an international scientific Realize the cross-generation leap of key
For larger scale, more ways,
research public platform for moon- technologies such as flight control,
Laying the foundation for further space
based scientific experiments, energy security, communication and
lunar exploration, development and
development and utilization of lunar navigation, and operation of
utilization, and human activity facilities
resources, etc extraterrestrial object detection

2. ILRS Concept
2.6 Five Facilities
Long-term support facility on lunar surface
Lunar-EarthTransportationFacility
天文观测 科学实验
技术验证 资源利用
Ground Support and Application
Transportation and Operation Facility LunarScientific Facility
Facilities

2. ILRS Concept
2.7 Development Phases
......
2024 Basic 2028 Improved 2040 Utilization
model model model

2. ILRS Concept
2.5.1 Phases I--------Basic Model：CE-6/7/8
ILRS (basic Model)
CE-7 CE-8
CE-6
• Plan to launch on 2026 • Plan to launch on 2028
• Plan to launch on • Consists of a lander, a flyer, • Consists of a lander, a leaper,
• Achieve the first human and a Queqiao-2 relay a lunar rover and a lunar
sample return on the far side satellite. operation robot
of the moon. • Detailed investigation of the • Experimental verification of
environment and resources at lunar resource utilization.
the south pole of the moon.

2. ILRS Concept
2.5.2 Phases II--------Improved Model
ILRS-1 ILRS-2 ILRS-3
◼ Build and expand
infrastructure such as
communication base
stations, conduct multi-probe
inter-operation
◼ VLBI astronomy, In-situ
analysis, sample collection
◼ Deploy lunar relay satellite, ◼ Gather previously collected lunar
increase long-term energy supply samples, and return them to
modules on lunar surface Earth
◼ Geology investigation, multi-source ◼ Geological investigation by
particle detection, in-situ analysis, ground-penetration radars
sample collection

2. ILRS Concept
2.5.2 Phases II--------Improved Model
◼ Establish in-situ observation facilities
ILRS-4 and support long-term scientific
exploration and resource utilization
◼ Lunar-based astronomical observation,
Sun-Earth space environmental
investigation, other experiments
◼ Deliver long-term energy support
modules
◼ Sun-Earth-moon space physical
observation, Moon-based ILRS-5
biological science experiments

2. ILRS Concept
2.5.2 Phases II--------Improved Model:
• Build the Queqiao
comprehensive constellation
with the ability of
communication, navigation
and remote sensing in the
earth-moon space and far-
reaching space.
• Serve for manned lunar
landing, Mars, Venus and
other deep space exploration.
Concept of Qieqiao constellation

2. ILRS Concept
2.5.3 Phases III -------After 2040, from Moon to Mars.
◼ Experience in the
implementation of long-term
manned spaceflight activities
through orbital/lunar activities
◼ Validate technology and
capabilities for a manned
mission to Mars
◼ Add lunar science facilities and
related service modules
◼ multi-dimensional and continuous
◼ From a scientific research
scientific exploration and environmental
experimental station to a practical
monitoring of the moon
and multifunctional lunar base
◼ technical verification of utilization of
lunar resources
◼ Support follow-up lunar missions

CONTENT
01 China Lunar Exploration
02 ILRS Concept
03 International Cooperation

3. International Cooperation
3.1 Welcome all countries to participate
“International partners are welcome to participate in the demonstration and construction of the
International Lunar Research Station at all stages of the project and at all levels of the mission.”
——《China’s Space 2021》

3. International Cooperation
3.2 ILRS Cooperation Initiative
1. Peaceful exploitation
2. Joint discussion, building, sharing
3. Various cooperation form
4. Sharing scientific outcomes
5. Preserving Lunar Resources
6. Formation of cooperative organizations

3. International Cooperation
3.1 ILRS Cooperation domains
⚫ Development strategy
⚫ Orientation
Strategy ⚫ Plan
definition ⚫ Roadmap
⚫ Scientific objectives
⚫ Technological achievements
⚫ Engineering objectives Joint Proposal Data Sharing ⚫ Scientific data
⚫ Mission concept
⚫ Joint scientific research
⚫ Implement schedule
ILRS
⚫ Joint design Collaborative Joint ⚫ Coordination of launch site, TT&C
⚫ Joint simulation Design Operation ⚫ Joint operation
⚫ Joint test ⚫ Joint exploration
Technology
⚫ Technology exchange
Cooperation ⚫ Know-how technology transfer
⚫ Joint AIT

3. International Cooperation
Cooperation levels:
3.2 Opportunities for ILRS missions
A:
Space
mission
B:
Space
system
level
C:
Subsystem
level
D: Equipment
level
E: Ground and
application level

3. International Cooperation
3.7 ILRSCO
• Organization: participating countries establish a
International Lunar Research Station Cooperation
ILRSCO HQ
Organization (ILRSCO). and jointly build ILRS project,
jointly manage facilities, and share scientific research
results.
• Founders: The first signatories will enjoy more
favorable terms, more rights and more results as
founding members of ILRSCO.
• HQ: The HQ of ILRSCO will be located in Hefei Deep
Space Science City, China. Five centers will be built,
including design simulation, operation control, data
process, sample storage and research, and
international training centers.

3. International Cooperation
3.8 Timeline
⚫ ILRS and ILRSCO preparation timeline:
➢ By May, 2023, promote ILRS project, invite national space agencies, organizations to
participate;
➢ By , complete the signing of Agreement/MOU with the space agencies or
organizations of the first ILRSCO founding countries;
➢ Before the end of 2024, define ILRS task shares, sign and approve inter-governmental
agreement among founding countries of the ILRSCO.
2023.5 2023.10 2024.12
Task share with
ILRS Presentation ILRS Agreement
Intergovernmental
and Invitation /MOU
agreements

4. About DSEL
Deep Space Exploration Lab (DSEL) are co-founded by CNSA, Anhui government and
University of China Science and Technology on 2022.
Currently, DSEL is the major contractor for China Luner Exploration mission and
International Lunar Research Station (ILRS) project and cooperation.
Welcome all international partners to participate into this cooperation!

We welcome all countries with joint hands in the
International Lunar Research Station！
Contact: Zhongmin WANG DSEL cooperation@dsel.cc
Ruihong YANG CNSA-LESEC yangruihong@cnsa.gov.cn