UNITED NATIONS
OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
A Y E A R O F
T R A N S I T I O N
ANNUAL REPORT

UNITED NATIONS

Leadership statement iii
1 UNOOSA mission and mandate 1
Our mission/our vision 2
Secretariat 3
Capacity-builder 4
UNOOSA in action in 2023 5
UNOOSA in numbers 2023 6
UNITED NATIONS UNOOSA staff 2023 7
OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS CONTENTS
2 Engagement and impact 8
A YE AR OF Leadership engagement: at a glance 9
Summit of the Future 11
The United Nations space bridge:
TR ANSITION thought leadership, pragmatism, action 12
UNOOSA in focus: supporting the transition of
Kenya to a spacefaring nation, 2018–2023 13
ANNUAL REPORT
3 Our impact: 2023 highlights 16

Space sustainability 17
Space4ClimateAction 19
Space for the Sustainable Development Goals 20
Developing countries 21
Partnerships 22
United Nations Register of Objects Launched
into Outer Space 23
Regional Centres for Space Science and Technology
UNITED NATIONS Education (affiliated to the United Nations) 24
Vienna, 2024 Publications 25
4 COPUOS in 2023 26
Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space 27
On the cover: composite image Statements by the chairs 28
Credit: Victoria–stock.adobe.com/mimadeo–stock.adobe.com 2024 and beyond 31
ST/SPACE/90
© United Nations, . All rights reserved. 5 UNOOSA: funding, staffing and
communication 32
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply
the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations Financial resources overview 33
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or Staffing and funding 33
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Extrabudgetary contributions 34
Photos © UNOOSA, unless otherwise stated. Communications 35
This publication has not been formally edited.
Publishing production: Publishing Section, United Nations Office at Vienna.

UNOOSA diligently serves as
secretariat to COPUOS, which
despite the global geopolitical
UNOOSA is ideally positioned
context, continues to deliver
to lead the efforts in shaping a
results on space sustainability,
sustainable and inclusive
space for sustainable
future in space.
development, the legal aspects
of space resource utilization,
Driss El-Hadani
and much more.
Deputy Director/Senior Adviser
Aarti Holla-Maini
Director

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS iii
LEADERSHIP STATEMENT
In joining the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA) after a career in the private
sector, I have come to realize the pivotal role the Office has to play and the responsibility that falls
upon it as the only part of the Secretariat with a mandate entirely dedicated to space. The Office
truly is the custodian of Space4SDGs and against this background, I appreciate its work even more.
Space may seem invisible but its pervasive nature in It is the responsibility of the States Members of the Since joining in , I have had the
our daily lives means that it is a critical infrastructure Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space pleasure of meeting hundreds of representatives of
for the functioning of society. The global governance (COPUOS) with UNOOSA as its secretariat, to make Member States, industry figures, United Nations staff
of space is an unquestionable necessity. The trea- sure this does not happen. This requires Member members and space experts, and come to greatly
ties, principles, guidelines and resolutions collec- States to rise above their competitive and political appreciate the work of UNOOSA, with its 35 staff
tively represent a set of “rules of the road” for how interests and remind themselves of the camaraderie members and a $5 million budget. Punching above
Member States and industry use space safely and and spirit that existed when the Outer Space our weight, we have launched and transformed the
sustainably, and their implementation are critical to Treaty was adopted in 1967, at the height of the space economies of entire nations by helping them
our continued reliance on space technology, data and cold war. If collaboration was possible back then, deploy their very first satellites and by providing
services to help achieve the Sustainable Development it is surely possible now, especially if we put people certainty for investments through the development
Goals (SDGs). and progress at the centre. of national space legislation. UNOOSA diligently
serves as secretariat to COPUOS, which despite
Without space, many applications that play an intrin- In , I launched the United Nations the global geopolitical context, continues to deliver
sic role in our daily lives would cease to function. Space Bridge, as a platform through which UNOOSA results on space sustainability, space for sustainable
Live coverage of disasters, elections and other world can provide thought leadership by asking the right development, the legal aspects of space resource uti-
events, and our reliance on in-car navigation sys- questions and convening the right stakeholders, be lization, and more new areas that are emerging from
tems, weather forecasting, Internet access on ships they public, private or from civil society, to identify developments in this fast-paced sector.
and planes, and using ATMs regardless of location solutions and establish partnerships for the benefit
would all become a thing of the past, not to mention of humanity. I am pleased that space is being addressed at the And 2023 was just the start …
the monitoring of climate change, which to a large highest level of the United Nations. In ,
extent can only be done from space. As the Earth’s Under my leadership, UNOOSA is rising to the chal- Secretary-General António Guterres recognized the Aarti Holla-Maini
orbits become increasingly congested, the risk of lenge of ensuring that the international community growing importance of space in policy brief 7: For all Director, UNOOSA
collision in space is also growing. This is not science and the United Nations system leverage space to humanity – the future of outer space governance. This
fiction but a real and possibly even imminent sce- address the critical challenges of our time: from using initiative, arising from the seventy-fifth session of the
nario, one which could wipe out our ability to benefit space safely and sustainably to the achievement of General Assembly and the launch of “Our Common
from space services in the manner in which we have the SDGs, and from democratizing access to space Agenda”, aims to bolster the role of COPUOS and
become accustomed. data and solutions for the benefit of all countries to enhance the global governance of space to ensure its
addressing climate change and lunar governance. safe, secure and sustainable use.

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS iv
LEADERSHIP STATEMENT
In an era characterized by rapid and significant transformations in the space sector,
UNOOSA stands at the forefront of navigating the accompanying challenges and seizing
the emerging opportunities.
The current pace of innovation and expansion in Additionally, in our commitment to space sustainabil- efforts in shaping a sustainable and inclusive future
space activities marks an extraordinary period in his- ity, the leadership of UNOOSA is dedicated to giving in space. This is a future that not only respects the
tory. However, it also underscores the critical need a voice to all countries, allowing them to contribute domain of space but also maximizes its potential for
for robust international space governance to ensure meaningfully to the debate on space sustainability. the betterment of humanity.
the safety and sustainability of space for all nations This inclusive approach ensures that diverse perspec-
and entities. tives and needs are considered in shaping the future Together, we are charting a course towards a future
of space governance. where space is not only a frontier for exploration
The past year has been pivotal for UNOOSA. Under but also a domain of cooperation, development and
dynamic new leadership, we embarked on a trans- At UNOOSA, we acknowledge that the challenges of shared benefit for all of humanity.
formative journey, formulating and adopting a vision- today’s space sector are intertwined with substantial
ary strategy to enhance our impact and relevance opportunities. Our dedicated team is actively working
significantly. This strategic shift is not only elevating to develop and implement innovative mechanisms
our role but is also strengthening the Committee on and programmes aimed at building the capacity of Driss El-Hadani
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS), posi- Member States. This includes capacity-building on the Deputy Director and Senior Adviser, UNOOSA
tioning UNOOSA as a more influential player in the implementation of long-term sustainability guidelines,
global space arena. making space data and services not only accessible
and affordable but also widely used across all Member
Moreover, as we advance on this journey, we must States. We are committed to scaling operational solu-
also consider how to enforce internationally agreed tions from local levels to the global stage, catering
rules and regulations effectively. Developing rules and to a diverse range of stakeholders that include com-
regulations is a delicate balance. We must ensure that mercial entities and political organizations.
we do not stifle innovation and new enterprises with
unnecessary red tape. Space law must preserve the As we forge ahead, I am personally thrilled to be part
freedom to generate new ideas and implement new of this dynamic and evolving field. The road ahead is
applications, while also supporting countries and the indeed filled with challenges, but with the unwaver-
United Nations system, to implement the Sustainable ing commitment of our team and a clear strategic
Development Goals. direction, UNOOSA is ideally positioned to lead the

Chapter 1.
UNOOSA mission
and mandate
OUR MISSION
SECRETARIAT
CAPACITY-BUILDER
OUR STAFF IN 2023

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
1. UNOOSA miSSiON ANd mANdAte 2
OUR MISSION
The mandate of UNOOSA focuses on the peaceful uses of outer space. The Office
promotes international cooperation, the implementation of space law, access to space
science and technology for sustainable development, particularly for the benefit of
developing countries, and supports COPUOS in developing the global governance of
outer space activities.
OUR VISION
A world that fully Where policymakers Supported by a
captures the benefits of progress towards coordinated United
space technology, data achieving the SDGs and Nations system with an
and services improve the state of adequately resourced
the world by leveraging
Office in charge of space
space solutions and
expertise

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
1. UNOOSA miSSiON ANd mANdAte 3
SECRETARIAT
The Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS) is the intergovernmental body
responsible for developing the global governance of outer space. COPUOS has two subsidiary
bodies, both established in 1961:
The Scientific and Technical Subcommittee (STSC) continues to lead inter- The Legal Subcommittee (LSC) addresses the legal aspects of space resources,
national negotiations on the long-term sustainability of outer space activities, the definition and delimitation of outer space, and clarifies and reviews the
the use of nuclear power sources in outer space and the use of space science applicability of the outer space treaties.
and technology for sustainable development.
Operating by consensus, UNOOSA also maintains The International Committee The Space Mission Planning UNOOSA also cooperates UNOOSA leads the Inter-
COPUOS reports to the Fourth the United Nations Register of on Global Navigation Satellite Advisory Group (SMPAG) con- with the International Asteroid Agency Meeting on Outer
Committee of the General Objects Launched into Outer Systems (ICG) brings together nects the world’s space agencies Warning Network (IAWN) in Space Activities (UN-Space), a
Assembly, which adopts an Space on behalf of the Secretary- global navigation satellite system active in the domain of planetary strengthening international coor- United Nations-wide endeavour
annual “omnibus” resolution on General. The Register was first (GNSS) providers to improve tech- defence. SMPAG is responsible dination and cooperation in the that examines the contribution
inter national cooperation in the created in 1961 at the request of nology, compatibility and inter- for preparing an international case of near-Earth object impact of space science and technol-
peaceful uses of outer space. Member States and is a treaty- operability, and the use of GNSS response to a near-Earth object hazards. ogy and their applications to the
based transparency mechanism for sustainable development. threat through the exchange of work of the organization and the
that identifies the State responsi- information, the development of achievement of the Sustainable
ble for each space object. collaborative research and mission Development Goals. Through the
opportunities, and by conducting breadth of its activities, UNOOSA
By , 2,588 satel- planning activities to mitigate addresses all stages and aspects of
lites, a 25 per cent increase in such threats. space applications, space law and
registrations on 2022 (2,055), had space policy, helping all countries
been registered with UNOOSA. leverage the benefits of space for
Since the start of the space age, sustainable development.
over 89 per cent of all opera-
tional space objects have been
registered.

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
1. UNOOSA miSSiON ANd mANdAte 4
CAPACITY-BUILDER
As a capacity-builder, UNOOSA supports developing countries
in the use of space data, services and technology, and develops
national space laws and policies, so that they can promote their
own space industry and achieve the SDGs.
Space is a fast lane tool for
emerging countries. Supporting
nations to navigate global and
Through the Programme on Space Via the United Nations Platform for UNOOSA works closely with the six Space Law for New Space Actors was
national challenges through the
Applications (PSA), UNOOSA helps Space-based Information for Disaster Regional Centres for Space Science established in 2019 to help countries
countries build capacity in space sci- Management and Emergency and Technology Education affiliated increase their capacity to draft or revise use of space technology and
ence, technologies and their applica- Response (UN-SPIDER) programme, with the United Nations to reinforce national space law and policy in line diplomacy is an exciting part of
tions in areas such as global health, UNOOSA helps countries use space space-related education globally. The with existing international normative my job.
disaster and climate change manage- data and technologies, such as satellite Centres provide unique training and frameworks, such as the five United
ment, water and environmental monitor- imagery, to reduce the risks of disaster education programmes, especially for Nations treaties on outer space, the Jorge Del Rio Vera
ing, and natural resources management. and respond to disasters when they nurturing talent in developing countries. Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines Scientific Affairs Officer
occur. UN-SPIDER has offices in Beijing, and the Guidelines for the Long-term (Space Technology)
Bonn and Vienna. UNOOSA also implements a series of Sustainability of Outer Space Activities
extrabudgetary projects focused on the of COPUOS.
space economy, Space4Women and
Space Law for New Space Actors, and
ensures the application of the Guidelines
for the Long-term Sustainability of Outer
Space Activities.
Tentang Surya Satellite-1 Amazon River, Copernicus Sentinel data (2019), UNOOSA Director speaking at the Sixty-second session of the Legal Subcommittee
Credit: Surya University, Indonesia processed by ESA Space4Women expert event in Ottawa, of COPUOS in Vienna, 2023
Credit: ©ESA Credit: UNIS
Credit: Canadian Space Agency

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
1. UNOOSA miSSiON ANd mANdAte 5
UNOOSA IN ACTION IN 2023
Space4Youth essay competition winners at the NASA Space Camp UNOOSA director and attendees at the United Nations/iAF director speaking at a Young Professionals event at the 2023 iAC influencer Camille Bergin, @thegalacticgal, with the UNOOSA
in Huntsville, Alabama, United States workshop pose for a selfie in Baku director and UNOOSA partnership expert Allison Areias
Behind-the-scenes picture of participants at the United Nations/iAC UNOOSA director meets Rodrigo Olsen Olivares, the new itU/World Radiocommunication Conference 2023 (WRC-23) in UNOOSA director addressing the press at COP 28, United Nations
workshop, Baku Permanent Representative of Chile to the United Nations in Vienna dubai, United Arab emirates, 2023 Credit: itU Climate Change Conference in dubai, United Arab emirates
delegates at the sixty-second session of the Legal Subcommitttee UNOOSA staff at end-of-year celebrations in the Rotunda of the Light display involving drones in the shape of a satellite
Space4Youth participants at the NASA Space Camp
of COPUOS, 20–31 , Vienna Credit: UNiS Vienna international Centre at itU WRC in dubai, United Arab emirates

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
1. UNOOSA miSSiON ANd mANdAte 6
UNOOSA IN NUMBERS 2023
$4.27m
regular budget

staff members
$1.75m
extrabudgetary and
in-kind contributions

days of briefings,
seminars, workshops and
training events

UN-SPideR capacity-
building missions
2,350
COPUOS
attendees
2 ,588
satellites registered
103,000
social media
followers

member States received
targeted support on 322
parliamentary
the international legal
documents released
regime governing outer
space activities

publications
produced

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
1. UNOOSA miSSiON ANd mANdAte 77
Office of the Director
Natercia Rodrigues Rodrigo Lordelo de Santana
markus Woltran daniel Nikbakht UNOOSA STAFF 2023
Aarti Holla-Maini, Director
Allison Areias Francesco de Bellis
Driss El-Hadani, Deputy Director and Senior Adviser
Veronica Cesco Robert Wickramatunga Christopher Sto. Domingo, Front Office
Andrew Peebles
Committee, Policy
and Legal Affairs Section
Aygul duysenhanova
Rosanna Hoffmann
tanya Keusen
Romana Kofler
michael Newman
Yukiko Okumura
Hinata Oshima
Kurian maniyanipurathu
matej Siget
International Committee
on GNSS
Sharafat Gadimova
Patrick Gindler
UN-SPIDER Vienna
Lorant Czaran
Jumpei takami
UN-SPIDER Bonn
Juan-Carlos Villagran de Leon
martin Hilljegerdes
UN-SPIDER Beijing
Gao Yuan
Qu Yumiao
tang tong
Space Applications Section
Luc St-Pierre Office of the Director
Xing Yi Ang
Jorge del Rio Vera Director
Anne-Claire Grossias Committee, Policy and Legal Affairs
Nina Kickinger
Li Hongqing
International Committee on GNSS
Nathalie Ricard
Ahmed Osman
Deputy Director and
Hazuki mori UN-SPIDER Vienna • Bonn • Beijing
Senior Adviser
Space Applications Section

Chapter 2.
Engagement
and impact
LEADERSHIP ENGAGEMENT: AT A GLANCE
SUMMIT OF THE FUTURE
THE UNITED NATIONS SPACE BRIDGE
UNOOSA IN FOCUS: SUPPORTING THE TRANSITION OF KENYA
TO A SPACEFARING NATION, 2018–2023

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
2. eNGAGemeNt ANd imPACt 9
LEADERSHIP ENGAGEMENT: AT A GLANCE
2023 was a year of transition for the senior leadership of UNOOSA with Acting Director
Niklas Hedman retiring in August, and Director Aarti Holla-Maini and Deputy Director/Senior Adviser
Driss El-Hadani assuming their duties in September. This new leadership team brings with it a wealth
of experience from the space industry, remote sensing and national administration.
Between September and , the Director organizations. These bilateral meetings further The following are some of the key events that
met with Secretary-General António Guterres, Heads informed the Office’s understanding of the key pri- have taken place under the new leadership of
of State, heads of space agencies and international orities of Member States and our partners, as well as UNOOSA.
organizations, ministers, Permanent Representatives our impact, effectiveness and added value. All of this
of diplomatic missions to the United Nations in Vienna, will contribute to the development of a 2024–2030
industry leaders, journalists and non-governmental vision and strategy document.
The Fourth Committee The International
of the General Assembly, Astronautical Congress
New York 2023 in Baku
Director Aarti Holla-Maini travelled to New York for UNOOSA attended the seventy-fourth International
courtesy meetings with Secretary-General António Astronautical Congress (IAC) from the 2–6 October
Guterres, other senior United Nations officials and in Baku. As one of the world’s largest and most
Permanent Representatives of Member States. pre-eminent space conferences, IAC allowed the
These meetings underscored the value of the work Director to formally meet heads of space agen-
of COPUOS and UNOOSA, and coincided with the cies, industry leaders and other international enti-
adoption of draft resolution A/C.4/78/L.8 on inter- ties, including youth-focused organizations. The
national cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer Director’s outreach at IAC spurred new collabora-
space by the Fourth Committee of the General tive activities with Member States and other exter-
Assembly. nal stakeholders, as well as further informing the
space sector as to the UNOOSA mission and man-
date. These meetings provided the Director with a
clearer picture of how the space sector perceives
UNOOSA and seeks further engagement.

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
2. eNGAGemeNt ANd imPACt 10
First Global Monitoring for
Environment and Security and Africa
(GMES and Africa) Support Programme
Phase 2 Forum, Sharm Al Sheikh, Egypt
the GmeS and Africa Continental Forum, held in Sharm el
Sheikh, egypt, focused on earth observation for resilience
and innovation in Africa. the deputy director attended this
International Telecommunications Union COP28 United Nations Climate Change
Forum and delivered a keynote speech on strengthening
2023 World Radiocommunication Conference in Dubai, United Arab
engagement with regional and national institutions for the
Conference in Dubai, United Arab Emirates Emirates
use of earth observation where he highlighted UNOOSA
activities in Africa, including UN-SPideR technical advisory
the month-long World Radiocommunication Conference the 2023 Conference of the Parties in dubai, United
missions and capacity-building initiatives to aid national dis-
(WRC), held every three to four years, brings together up to Arab emirates, parts of which the director attended from
aster management agencies in accessing and utilizing space
Space4Women Expert Meeting,
4,000 delegates to review and revise, if necessary, the radio 29 November to 5 december, brought together climate
data during disasters.
Montreal, Canada
regulations that govern the use of the radio-frequency spec- experts, activists and policymakers from around the world
trum and the geostationary-satellite and non-geostationary- to address the pressing challenge of climate change. the
An important meeting with African Union representatives
satellite orbits. the director made an intervention in the director’s speaking engagements and outreach focused on the 2023 Space4Women expert meeting took place in
focused on advancing space activities and applications in
fifth plenary session, highlighting the role of UNOOSA and demonstrating the critical role of space and space-based Canada from 30 October to 3 November and was jointly
Africa. Strategic activities identified include aligning with
COPUOS in space governance, sustainability and capacity- assets in combating climate change, as well as UNOOSA organized by UNOOSA and the Canadian Space Agency.
the African space policy and strategy, implementing the
building. in particular, she underscored the need to preserve actions to ensure developing countries have access to these it was here that the decision was taken to draw up a gender
“Space2030” Agenda, developing policy and regulatory
specific radio frequencies used for disaster management and technologies and data. meetings at the Conference of the mainstreaming toolkit, based on the expertise of the United
frameworks, focusing on disaster risk reduction, emergency
emergency services, which remain vital in an era of increased Parties developed into future collaborative events scheduled Nations, the Canadian Space Agency and the participants
response, and leveraging space-based solutions for sustain-
climate change-related severe weather events. for early 2024. at the expert meeting.
able development and health applications. these activities
mark the Office’s strategic objective of prioritizing coopera-
tion with Africa, aiming to bolster the continent’s resilience
and innovative use of earth observation technologies.
2 0 2 3
World Space Forum, Vienna
the World Space Forum 2023 took place in Vienna under the Key themes emerged, including the need for inclusive par-
WORLD
banner of “Space for Our Common Future.” it served as a ticipation, the critical role of international bodies such as
SPACE
pivotal platform for stakeholders to discuss space governance COPUOS, and the transformative potential of space technolo- FORUM
issues, emphasizing the need for multilateral efforts to ensure gies in achieving the SdGs by 2030. the Forum set a precedent
the peaceful and sustainable use of outer space. Guided by for future discussions on space sustainability, underscoring
foundational documents such as the Secretary-General’s policy the need for a cooperative and inclusive approach to harness
brief entitled “For all humanity – the future of outer space gov- space for global good. As the international community looks
ernance,” participants reaffirmed their commitment to charting towards the Summit of the Future, the Forum’s insights will
a cooperative and inclusive course towards a transparent and undoubtedly shape the future governance of space activities,
sustainable space environment. fostering greater cooperation and coordination for a more
peaceful and prosperous future in space exploration and
utilization.

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
2. eNGAGemeNt ANd imPACt 11
SUMMIT OF THE FUTURE
Following the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly and the launch of “Our Common Agenda”,
which proposed a Summit of the Future to renew multilateralism and accelerate the implementation of
existing commitments, Secretary-General António Guterres published policy brief 7: For all humanity –
the future of outer space governance in .
The policy brief aimed to identify gaps in international govern- The policy brief proposes:
ance and proposed recommendations for Member States to
reinforce the role of COPUOS and promote the safe, secure and A strategic framework focusing on the sustainability of
sustainable use of outer space. outer space, advocating for COPUOS to develop either
a unified regime or specific governance frameworks to
As part of UNOOSA commitment to facilitating constructive dis- Our Common Agenda tackle issues such as space traffic management, debris
Policy Brief 7
course, one preparatory virtual symposium was organized from removal and space resource activities
For All Humanity –
27–29 , focusing on technical challenges and
the Future of
policy considerations. This symposium provided a robust foun- The need for increased collaboration among United
Outer Space
dation for deliberations on critical themes such as space traffic Governance Nations entities through the Inter-Agency Meeting on
management, space resources and space debris. Outer Space Activities (UN-Space), to expedite the use
of space assets in achieving the SDGs

Inclusive governance approaches, urging Member
States to facilitate the involvement of commercial
actors, civil society and other stakeholders in outer
space-related processes. Member States will continue
to discuss the proposals for the Pact of the Future, which
will be negotiated at the General Assembly in New York
in 
available in all six official languages
of the United Nations

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
2. eNGAGemeNt ANd imPACt 12
THE UNITED NATIONS SPACE BRIDGE:
THOUGHT LEADERSHIP, PRAGMATISM, ACTION
Director Holla-Maini launched the United Nations Space Bridge (USB) in .
The objective is to promote global dialogue to enable local action using space solutions.
This action will be achieved by convening policymakers and key USB will also help scale national or local solutions that empower
stakeholders through dedicated round tables aimed at enhancing international policymakers to advance space sustainability and
international expertise, asking the right questions and breaking leverage space for the SDGs.
down silos.
UNOOSA is the only part of the United Nations
with a mandate entirely dedicated to space. As
such, we carry the responsibility of ensuring
that every Member State can contribute to and
benefit from space technology, data and
services. USB will enhance our capacity-
building activities to ensure that space
solutions can be scaled where needed to drive
transformational change, build resilience and
enhance global sustainability.
Aarti Holla-Maini
Director

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
2. eNGAGemeNt ANd imPACt 13
UNOOSA IN FOCUS: SUPPORTING THE TRANSITION
OF KENYA TO A SPACEFARING NATION, 2018–2023
UNOOSA continues to engage with Member States across all areas of space policy, science and
technology. We take pride in our recent partnerships with Kenya, where we have supported the country
in her spacefaring journey on Earth, through parliament and into orbit. These projects have also allowed
UNOOSA to strategically support countries to implement international commitments stemming from
COPUOS for the benefit of their citizens.
Kenya deploys its Registration of 1KUNS-PF
first satellite from the
The registration of objects launched into outer space
International Space Station
helps to understand the basic question of “who owns
what in space?”, and it is an obligation for both States
1KUNS-PF was the first satellite deployed by Kenya, as Parties to the Registration Convention and Member
well as the first satellite ever developed and deployed States of the United Nations mandated by General
under the auspices of the United Nations. Named Assembly resolution 1721(B) of 1961.
“1KUNS-PF”, or the “First Kenyan University Nano
Satellite-Precursor Flight”, it was developed by a team Following the successful deployment of 1KUNS-PF, Kenya
at the University of Nairobi after they were selected for demonstrated itself to be a responsible actor by reg-
the first round of KiboCUBE in 2016. KiboCUBE is a coop- istering it with the United Nations Register of Objects
eration programme between UNOOSA and the Japan Launched into Outer Space that UNOOSA maintains on
Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) offering devel- behalf of the Secretary-General.
oping countries the opportunity to develop and deploy
1KUNS-PF (Kenya) and irazu (Costa Rica), deployed their own cube satellite (CubeSat) from the Japanese
at the same time, from iSS Experiment Module “Kibo” on the International Space
Credit: JAXA UNOOSA and Airbus pick African team to fly “free” climate
Station.
Supporting Africa’s climate monitoring payload on the international Space Station
Credit: Airbus
mission
The team from Kenya deployed 1KUNS-PF on
11 and had the opportunity to test technolo-
gies for the future launch of a larger Earth observation
satellite, as well as acquiring additional data that allows In 2021, a consortium team from the space agencies ClimCam will be attached to Bartolomeo, the Airbus
Kenya to monitor agriculture and coastal areas. The suc- of Egypt and Kenya and the Ugandan National Space external payload hosting platform on board the
cessful deployment of 1KUNS-PF proved to be a catalyst Programme was selected by UNOOSA and Airbus International Space Station for one year. The institu-
for the creation of the Kenya Space Agency. Defence and Space and awarded the opportunity tions have agreed to an open data policy, sharing
to jointly develop a remote sensing camera system information and images acquired from the project
to monitor weather, floods and impacts of climate to guide climate change mitigation efforts across the
change in East Africa. entire region.

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
2. eNGAGemeNt ANd imPACt 14
From telescopes to The Kenya space bill:
asteroid warning a robust regulatory
framework
UNOOSA and the Keldysh Institute of Applied
Mathematics of the Russian Academy of Sciences
(KIAM RAS) have announced the winners of their joint Prior to a tailor-made space law technical advisory
opportunity ISONscope. The Kenya Space Agency mission in 2023, Kenya participated online in an intro-
and the Nigeria Centre for Basic Space Science of the ductory regional space law technical advisory mission
National Space Research and Development Agency in 2020 and an in-person regional mission for African
will receive two small wide field-of-view telescopes countries in 2022.
as a prize.
In , the same week that Kenya launched its
It is foreseen that the provision of such telescopes first indigenously produced and operational satellite, Chairperson of the Kenya Space Agency
Board (KSAB), James Aruasa, Ambassador
could allow Kenya and Nigeria to contribute to Taifa-1, UNOOSA delivered a tailor-made technical Harriet Nduma, deputy Permanent
the mission of the International Asteroid Warning advisory mission in Nairobi, in partnership with the Representative of Kenya to the United
Nations in Vienna, and Chief executive
Network (IAWN) by broadening global asteroid Kenya Space Agency. This technical advisory mission Officer of the Kenya Space Agency
Brig. Hillary Kipkosgey
detection capabilities. was conducted under the auspices of the UNOOSA
Credit: A. Peebles/UNOOSA
Space Law for New Space Actors project, and funded
with the generous support of France.
This mission focused on the review of the draft Kenya
space bill. Specific areas addressed were authoriza-
tion, licensing and continuous supervision of space
activities; liability and insurance; international and
national registration requirements; safety considera-
tions; Earth observation legal regimes; satellite data
security; and the legal aspects of spaceports.
The mission established a whole-of-government
approach to developing space law and engaged
academia and the private sector to understand the
national space landscape. In , Kenya
initiated public consultations on the draft national
Kenya Space Law Project
space bill, showcasing the country’s commitment to
Credit: A. Peebles/UNOOSA
establishing a comprehensive legal and policy frame-
work to govern its space sector.
taifa-1 Sat is Kenya’s first operational earth
observation satellite
Credit: Kenya Space Agency

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
2. eNGAGemeNt ANd imPACt 15
Towards the future:
Universities, the Avio Vega-C launcher
and the China Space Station
There remain further opportunities for Kenya and deep space, and conducting Earth observation with
UNOOSA to partner. The University of Nairobi was a level of at least 10-metre resolution.
recently chosen as the first round awardee for the
UNOOSA Vega-C opportunity, which is another Machakos University in Kenya is also part of a con-
free of charge U3 CubeSat satellite slot using the sortium of La Sapienza Università di Roma and the
Avio Vega-C rocket. The nanosat “NaSPUoN – Italian firm In-Quattro s.r.l. established to test fluid
0GPM2030” will be developed by a consortium physics and combustion in microgravity on board the
involving the University of Nairobi, the University of China Space Station, which is a recent opportunity
Arizona and Space Trust, a non-profit based in the under the UNOOSA Access to Space for All initiative.
United Kingdom. The project’s two objectives involve The experiment is currently being developed.
transmitting a voice recording of world leaders into
UNOOSA lives true to its clarion Access to
Space for All initiative. Through its technical
assistance programmes aimed at
democratizing space, UNOOSA has given
aspiring spacefaring nations such as Kenya
“real wings to fly into space.” UNOOSA has
supported Kenya through impactful capacity-
building projects targeted at space systems
engineering, harnessing space-derived data for
decision support, and providing technical
support in instituting a sound policy, legal and
regulatory framework for sustainable national
space activities.
Brig. Hillary Kipkosgey,
African mosaic composed of Ag. Director General/Chief Executive Officer,
Copernicus Sentinel data (2016), Kenya Space Agency
processed by Brockmann Consult/
Université catholique de Louvain
as part of the eSA Climate Change
initiative Land Cover project
Credit: ©eSA

Chapter 3.
Our impact:
2023 highlights
SPACE SUSTAINABILITY UNITED NATIONS REGISTER OF OBJECTS
LAUNCHED INTO OUTER SPACE
SPACE4CLIMATEACTION
R EGIONAL CENTRES FOR SPACE SCIENCE
S PACE FOR THE SUSTAINABLE
AND TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION
DEVELOPMENT GOALS
(AFFILIATED TO THE UNITED NATIONS)
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
PUBLICATIONS
PARTNERSHIPS
*

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
3. OUR imPACt: 2023 HiGHLiGHtS 17
SPACE SUSTAINABILITY
Ensuring the safe and sustainable use of space, through the
Accessing Space Treaty
implementation of COPUOS commitments and the Resources Online (ASTRO)
development of global space governance, preserving it for database
future generations
Robust regulation and national
space laws can attract economic
investment, ensuring
Space Law for New Space In June, the Office welcomed representatives from six predictability and that space
Actors, promoting the APSCO member States to the Vienna International exploration is equitable and
Centre for a customized in-person technical work-
sustainable. At UNOOSA,
implementation of
shop, specifically China, Mongolia, Pakistan, Peru,
contributing to space
COPUOS commitments Thailand and Türkiye. Experts provided insights on
sustainability is fulfilling. Our
a wide array of subjects, including the application
“Space Law for New Space
of international space law, authorization, licensing, Space Law for New Space Actors technical advisory mission to
Actors” project educates and Costa Rica, 
In 2023, the Office provided technical advisory continuous supervision of space activities, liability
guides States in the safe and Credit: Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica
services to 11 governmental entities that included and registration requirements.
sustainable use of outer space,
regional technical advisory missions to member
grounded in the fundamental
States of the Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation UNOOSA also delivered a series of lectures to stu- With the financial support of Luxembourg, UNOOSA
Organization (APSCO), as well as tailor-made events dents enrolled in the Space Engineering International legal principles established by developed the ASTRO database, which was launched
for the national authorities of Chile, Costa Rica and Course at the Kyushu Institute of Technology in the Outer Space Treaty. in . ASTRO is a collection of international
Kenya. Japan on space law and policy that also focused on and national instruments on space activities and
the importance of responsible and sustainable use Rosanna Hoffmann includes a depiction of the current country ratifica-
of the space environment. Associate Legal Officer tion status of the five United Nations treaties on outer
space. The database includes national instruments on
the Space Law for New Space Actors
space activities, including laws and policies, which are
project is generously supported by the
Governments of Belgium, Chile, France, continuously collected and uploaded to share best
italy, Japan, and APSCO, Kyutech and
practices and foster the development of national
the Secure World Foundation
space-related legislation and policies.
Project page
Astro database
Technical advisory mission for APSCO member States (Focus 5a)
Credit: APSCO

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
3. OUR imPACt: 2023 HiGHLiGHtS 18
SPACE SUSTAINABILITY
The registration project: Awareness-raising and
understanding “who owns capacity-building related
what in space?” to the implementation of
the Guidelines for the
Underpinning our role in maintaining the United You would of course register Long-term Sustainability
Nations Register of Objects Launched into Outer your new car with the local of Outer Space Activities
Space, and thanks to the generous support of the driving authority. Registering
United Kingdom Space Agency, we conducted a space objects answers the
stakeholder study of 47 Member States and ESA on question of “who owns what in The Office continues to prioritize its work on space
their registration practices and implementation of the space?” It is a critical sustainability. In 2023, the Office implemented phase
Registration Convention. The study identified how: three of its multi-year project: “Awareness-raising
transparency mechanism and
and capacity-building related to the implementation
will become increasingly
States are determining “the State of Registry”
of the Guidelines for the Long-term Sustainability
important with the onset of new
of a launched object in an era of joint launches
of Outer Space Activities (LTS Guidelines)”. Phase
and multinational space missions and novel space missions, large
three included the organization of a series of vir-
constellations and transfers of
The relevance of registration for new and novel tual events that engaged diverse experts in peer-
ownership.
space activities, such as active debris removal to-peer exchanges. The first event focused on policy
or in-orbit servicing and manufacturing and regulatory frameworks; the second event on The project also developed a new, free online course
Andrew Peebles the safety of space operations; the third on inter- on the long-term sustainability of outer space activi-
The study was strengthened by the first expert meet- Associate External Relations Officer national cooperation, capacity-building and aware- ties and the LTS Guidelines, which was launched in
ing of national focal points on registration, held in ness; and the last on scientific and technical research .
Vienna from 28–29 . Since the project and development. The four multi-stakeholder events
began, UNOOSA has received registrations pertain- allowed for the showcasing of good practices and All resources, including video recordings, implemen-
ing to legacy space objects and approximately 50 new possible models and tools to support the implemen- tation case studies and other activities carried out
or updated national focal points of registration. tation of the LTS Guidelines. through the Project are available at the dedicated
website.
the project is made possible through
financial support provided by the
United Kingdom.

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
3. OUR imPACt: 2023 HiGHLiGHtS 19
SPACE4CLIMATEACTION
Ensuring space technologies, data and services are utilized to UN-SPIDER training UN-SPIDER: major
address climate-related challenges, climate action, disaster- supporting the activation disasters, strengthening
of the International institutional capacity and
risk reduction and environmental sustainability
Charter on Space and a regional network
Major Disasters
UN-SPIDER carried out institutional strengthening
Since 2019, UN-SPIDER has been co-organizing missions to South Africa and Tonga and a scoping
UNOOSA signed the
training courses with the International Charter on mission to Tonga to continue promoting the use
charter on the Space and Major Disasters to train professionals from of solutions developed by the space community
developing countries on the procedures employed in disaster management applications. Following
establishment of the
by project managers and value-added providers in this, we welcomed the South African National
Space for Climate case of activations. In 2023, UN-SPIDER activated Space Agency (SANSA) as the newest Regional
the International Charter at the request of the Support Office. In this role, SANSA will work with
Space is part of our natural Observatory
national disaster management agencies of Ghana, UN-SPIDER in facilitating the use of space-based
capital. At UNOOSA we
Mozambique and Zambia following the serious floods information in disaster management applications in
contribute to raising global
The Space for Climate Observatory (SCO) is an that affected these countries. southern African countries.
awareness on the sustainable
international initiative defined by the charter on the
use of outer space and Earth
establishment of the Space for Climate Observatory. In 2023, UN-SPIDER and the International Charter UN-SPIDER organized three international training
observation to tackle climate
It is a collective effort devoid of legal personality, organized two training courses for professionals courses and three national training courses with
change proving that the sky is based on the best efforts of its 42 signatories, with from disaster management and space agencies of several partners. The international training courses
no longer the limit. UNOOSA signing the charter in . countries in Africa and Latin America on the use of allowed more than 50 professionals from national
the Charter Mapper. The training courses proved disaster management institutions, space agencies
Anne-Claire Grossias The objectives of SCO are to provide operational critical, as many of those participants were later and universities from developing countries to learn
Associate Programme Officer tools (SCO projects) and studies to help decision engaged as project managers or value-added pro- how to use specific procedures or tools developed by
makers to adapt to climate change. This will foster viders, generating maps of areas affected by floods the space community and by UN-SPIDER. The inter-
cooperation on the practical use of space technology and forest fires. For example, in Nigeria, a few days national training courses targeted professionals from
and build a network for space agencies and public after the training course, professionals from the Algeria, Argentina, Barbados, Bolivia (Plurinational
and private entities involved in the use of Earth National Space Research and Development Agency State of), Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Cook Islands, Costa
observation data for operational climate action. of Nigeria managed the activation in the wake of Rica, Ecuador, Eswatini, French Polynesia, Ghana,
the floods on the Benue River. In a similar fashion, Kiribati, Madagascar, Mexico, New Caledonia,
professionals from Algeria, Chile and Ecuador were Nigeria, Palau, Peru, Samoa, Solomon Islands, South
designated to manage activations in their countries Africa and Tonga. National training courses also tar-
a couple of months after the training courses as a geted more than 85 professionals from El Salvador,
result of forest fires or floods in these countries in Nepal and South Africa.
2023 and 2024.

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
3. OUR imPACt: 2023 HiGHLiGHtS 20
SPACE FOR THE SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT GOALS
Advancing the implementation of the SDGs through the use Health in the space age
of space technology, data and services
It is only a matter of time before the next health emer-
gency materializes. Preparedness is crucial and space
plays a key role. Satellites are used to identify malaria
GNSS is an invisible, critical
and dengue hotspots, and can connect remote areas
infrastructure that the
Space4Women: empower, Data availability and accessibility on women’s partici- to the Internet, thus enabling telemedicine. There are
planet relies on for
pation in the space sector is also limited. In the even actors researching the possibility of printing 3D
connect, grow
trade and seamless
absence of quantifiable data, it is difficult to have an body parts in zero gravity.
movement.
evidence-based perspective on measures to advance
Space4Women connects hundreds of women and gender equality. In 2023, with the support provided The General Assembly recognized the importance
girls, empowers them to pursue studies and careers in by the Republic of Korea, UNOOSA launched the of Space for Global Health in resolution 77/120. To Sharafat Gadimova
Scientific Affairs Officer
the space sector, and increase the capacity of organi- Landmark Study on Gender Equality and the Space put the resolution into action, in , a
zations to advance gender equality. In 2023, the third Sector. To be published in 2024, this study will pro- multidisciplinary international conference was organ-
edition of the mentorship programme was launched. vide key data on gender diversity and provide a base- ized to support the United Nations mandate of the
It included 94 mentors and 152 mentees from 67 line to track progress towards achieving SDG 5. Space and Global Health Network.
countries, including 32 from the Global South. As
International Committee
a result, mentees improved their skills, had access Work subsequently started on the preparation of an
to scholarship and internship opportunities, boosted action plan addressing three core needs: on GNSS (ICG)
their careers, developed new projects, gained self-
• Lack of multidisciplinary experts
confidence and became better equipped to navigate
Action: design of a curriculum for capacity-building
the space industry. Supported by the Government ICG is an important platform for communication and
on space and global health
of Israel, the mentorship programme empowered cooperation in the field of global navigation satellite
• Space data continuity and availability
women and girls globally. systems (GNSS). As new systems emerge, signal com-
Action: identification and description of space-
patibility and interoperability among the various GNSS
based essential health variables so new space
Organized jointly by UNOOSA and the Canadian and transparency in the provision of open civil services
missions could take them into account
Space Agency, the 2023 Space4Women Expert will be key factors in ensuring that civil users around
Meeting took place in Canada from 30 October to • Space and health interoperability the world receive the maximum benefit from GNSS
Action: advance organizational and technical inter-
3 November. The most tangible output of this meet- and their applications. One main challenge is to pro-
operability in the field of space and global health
ing is the agreement to develop a gender main- vide assistance and information for those countries
so that data can be shared and used where and
streaming toolkit. International experts from the seeking to integrate GNSS into their basic infrastruc-
Participants at the Space4Women expert event, montreal, Canada whenever needed
United Nations, the Canadian Space Agency and ture. In 2023, the European Commission organized
Credit: Canadian Space Agency
the participants at the expert meeting provided con- and hosted the seventeenth meeting of ICG in collabo-
crete measures and case studies that can assist space ration with the Spanish Presidency of the European
organizations in increasing the representation and Union. At this meeting, Algeria and Türkiye were
retention of women in the space sector. recognized as new members of ICG.

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
3. OUR imPACt: 2023 HiGHLiGHtS 21
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Ensuring developing countries can contribute to, and benefit Unlocking hypergravity
from, space tech, data and services experiments for all:
the HyperGES Fellowship
The HyperGES Fellowship programme is a joint ini-
Enabling access to space tiative between UNOOSA and the European Space
Agency (ESA) providing selected research teams from
for all with KiboCUBE:
developing countries with access to the ESA Large
successful deployment of
Diameter Centrifuge facility to conduct hypergravity
the first CubeSat from experiments. From September to ,
three teams selected in the past two rounds of the
Indonesia
HyperGES carried out their hypergravity experiment
series at the largest ESA site, the European Space
Since 2018, UNOOSA has supported the launch of Research and Technology Centre in Noordwijk, the
satellites from Kenya, Guatemala, Mauritius and the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The team from Mahidol
Republic of Moldova. These activities have been the University, Thailand, had the opportunity to study
catalysts for the creation of space economies and the effect of hypergravity on watermeal, the smallest the team from mahidol University, thailand, had the opportunity
to study the effect of hypergravity on watermeal
agencies, and have helped Member States register and fastest-growing flowering plant on Earth. This
Credit: mahidol University, thailand
space objects for the first time. research holds great potential for helping unlock vari-
ous possibilities for the future application of the plant
As the awardee of the third round of the programme, as a food and oxygen source for space exploration as
the student team from Surya University in Indonesia well as on other planets where gravity may be higher
received technical advice and support from JAXA that than on Earth.
allowed them to build the Surya Satellite-1 (SS-1).
The all-female team from the Universidad Católica
SS-1 was the fifth CubeSat deployed into space under Boliviana San Pablo of Bolivia (Plurinational State
KiboCUBE. Working closely with the JAXA teams, the of) examined how hypergravity affects the break-
first CubeSat designed and manufactured by under- up of human red blood cells to improve the under-
graduate students of Indonesia was deployed from the standing of anaemia in space. Along with showcasing
International Space Station (ISS) on 6 , the efforts of Bolivian women in the space field, this
with the mission of testing communication between an Jem Small Satellite Orbital deployer (J-SSOd) research may provide invaluable insights to advance
Automatic Package Reporting System payload and the Credit: JAXA/NASA medicine both in space and on Earth. the second round awardee of HyperGeS from the Universidad
Católica Boliviana of the Plurinational State of Bolivia conducted
ground using amateur radio frequency. The develop- experiments in hypergravity conditions
ment and operation of SS-1 will serve to disseminate Finally, the team from the University of Science and Credit: ©eSA
nanosatellite technology in Indonesia, especially to Technology of Macao, China, analysed the medical
students and universities, and further develop national and biotechnological potential of fungi for future
capacities. space exploration, opening an additional door to
the future of outer space activities.

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
3. OUR imPACt: 2023 HiGHLiGHtS 22
PARTNERSHIPS
Matchmaking: UN-Space
United Nations/
International Astronautical The Inter-Agency Meeting on
Outer Space Activities, now
Federation workshop
called UN-Space, has been the
inter-agency mechanism coordi-
Prior to the formal opening of the 2023 International nating efforts related to the use
Astronautical Congress (IAC) in Baku, UNOOSA, of space technology and appli-
Azercosmos and the International Astronautical cations in the work of United
Federation (IAF) co-hosted the thirtieth United Nations entities since the mid-
Nations/IAF workshop on space technology for 1970s. The Office is the secre-
Participants of the eighth iAA Planetary defence Conference in Vienna
socioe conomic benefits: “Challenges and Capacity- tariat for UN-Space.
Credit: Max Alexander
building Opportunities for Emerging Space Nations”.
Part of the UNOOSA capacity-building mandate is In 2023, UN-Space partnered with the Working
to encourage and facilitate more capacity-building Group on Capacity-building and Data Democracy The International Academy
efforts by the private sector for the benefit of emerg- of the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites asteroids and comets and possible defensive action in
of Astronautics Planetary
ing spacefaring ecosystems, bringing benefits to (CEOS). The joint meeting was devoted to the iden- the event of a collision course with Earth.
both capacity-building providers and beneficiar- tification of the needs of Member States and United Defence Conference,
ies and paving the way for future partnerships and Nations entities for capacity-building in the use of The highlight of the 2023 PDC was the hypothetical
3–7 , Vienna
commercial relationships. To this end, UNOOSA space-based observations. asteroid impact threat exercise, which for the first
held a special matching session during the United time examined the possibility of a large asteroid on
Nations/IAF workshop at IAC in 2023, where In , UN-Space held meetings in Brindisi, Planetary defence, the activity of defending the a collision course with Earth. Deflection of the hypo-
capacity-building providers or experts connected Italy in collaboration with the Service for Geospatial, planet Earth from asteroids and comets, constitutes a thetical threat was based on an asteroid estimated to
with capacity-building beneficiaries to discuss how Information and Telecommunications Technologies challenge combining the knowledge of astronomers, measure between 220 to 660 metres in diameter at
better to develop partnerships and identify barriers at the United Nations Global Service Centre. For the ingenuity of engineers and global cooperative discovery, with a potential impact in several African
to further collaboration. The session was particularly its forty-second closed session, the Office again efforts to pull resources together in the case of an countries.
well received, with requests for similar sessions at partnered with CEOS and representatives of space asteroid impact threat.
future workshops and at other venues, and a recog- agencies and partners providing a full day of demon- As the key biennial global conference in this area
nition that, globally, more opportunities are needed strations of technologies and training on tools cover- The eighth Planetary Defence Conference (PDC) since 2009, the 2023 IAA PDC examined the topics
to bring these two communities together. ing identified needs. of the International Academy of Astronautics (IAA) of near-Earth object discovery and characterization,
organized with the support of UNOOSA, ESA and the planetary defence missions, asteroid deflection tech-
Geosciences Commission of the Austrian Academy niques, public communications and media relations,
of Sciences brought together world experts to dis- disaster preparedness, and space policy and legal
cuss human knowledge about potentially hazardous implications.

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
3. OUR imPACt: 2023 HiGHLiGHtS 23
UNITED NATIONS REGISTER OF OBJECTS
LAUNCHED INTO OUTER SPACE
The transformative power of space assets keeps Assembly resolution 1721B (XVI) or as a treaty obli- to amplify in the years to come. First-time regis- the development of global communication satel-
driving new and novel space missions and new actors gation under the 1975 Convention on Registration trations were received from Djibouti and Uganda. lite systems and the construction of ISS. However, a
entering the space sector. The increased number of of Objects Launched into Outer Space. The UNOOSA registration project also saw over 50 decade ago, the number of satellites launched into
launch services and the number of functional objects Member States nominate new or update national orbit began to increase at an exponential rate, from
being deployed into space is one metric to measure In 2023, 33 Member States and one international focal points for registration. 210 (2013), to 600 (2019), to 1,200 (2020) and, most
this and determine ownership and liability for space intergovernmental organization submitted registra- recently, to 2,588 in 2023.
objects. Last year, the international space community tions on 2,588 satellites, a 25 per cent increase in From 1957 to 2012, the number of satellites launched
broke the record both for annual rocket launches, registrations on 2022 (2,055). Registrations of mega- into outer space remained remarkably consistent,
satellites reaching orbit and objects registered constellation satellites continued to be the driving at approximately 150 each year. This includes the
with the United Nations voluntarily under General force behind this growth and the trend is expected eras of human flight to Earth orbit and to the Moon,
nosneB
nnelG/ASAN
:tiderC
3 000
2,588
2 750
2 500 2,055
2 250
2 000
1 750
1 500
1 250 1,200
1 000

1957 1960 1963 1966 1969 1972 1975 1978 1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011 2014 2017 2020 2023

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
3. OUR imPACt: 2023 HiGHLiGHtS 24
REGIONAL CENTRES FOR SPACE SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION
(AFFILIATED TO THE UNITED NATIONS)
The United Nations-affiliated Regional Centres researchers and scientists in practical, tailored and Delivering quality education requires a common These materials are open source, free of charge and
for Space Science and Technology Education are theoretical aspects of space science and technol- standard of teaching. Education curricula devel- available to other educational institutions.
instrumental in providing educational, research and ogy. This is achieved through comprehensive training oped by the Office focus on all major fields of space
practical application opportunities in space science involving theory, research, fieldwork and pilot pro- applications, including satellite meteor ology, climate,
and technology. These Centres aim to enhance the jects, all focused on leveraging space technology for satellite communications, space and atmospheric
expertise and capabilities of university educators, sustainable development in each country. science, remote sensing, as well as GIS and GNSS.
RCSSTEAP | China
date of creation: 2014
RCSSTEWA | Jordan Number of postgraduates: 223
Graduate participants in 2023: 42
date of creation: 2014 Beneficiary countries: 14
Number of postgraduates: 221
CRASTE-LF | Morocco
Graduate participants in 2023: 7
date of creation: 2000
Number of postgraduates: 513
Graduate participants in 2023: 15
Beneficiary countries: 22
ASIA
LATIN AMERICA AND
THE CARIBBEAN AFRICA CESSTAP | India
date of creation: 1995
Number of postgraduates: 196
ARCSTE-E | Nigeria Graduate participants in 2023: 39
CRECTEALC | Brazil/Mexico Beneficiary countries: 64
date of creation: 2001
date of creation: 2002 Number of postgraduates: 624
Number of postgraduates: 401 Graduate participants in 2023: 23
Graduate participants in 2023: 6 Beneficiary countries: 19
Beneficiary countries: 20

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
3. OUR imPACt: 2023 HiGHLiGHtS 25
PUBLICATIONS
UNOOSA 2022 the Space4Water Project: Sonification: A tool for the “Space2030” Agenda:
Annual Report Building bridges for research, outreach and Space as a driver of
knowledge exchange inclusion in space sciences Sustainable development
Online version
Online version Online version Online version
with thanks to
with thanks to with thanks to
Near-earth Objects
and Planetary defence
Contribution to the Stakeholder Study on Online version
“Space2030” Agenda: the Registration of Objects
eU Space – Supporting a Launched into Outer
World of 8 Billion People Space
Online version Online version

Chapter 4.
COPUOS in 2023
COMMITTEE ON THE PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE
STATEMENTS BY THE CHAIRS
2024 AND BEYOND

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
4. COPUOS iN 2023 27
COMMITTEE ON THE PEACEFUL USES
OF OUTER SPACE
COPUOS welcomed Guatemala and Uzbekistan as the newest members of the Committee as well as
two new international organizations with observer status with the Committee, taking the overall
membership of COPUOS to 102 Member States and 51 permanent observers (international and
regional organizations or international non-governmental organizations).
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee Legal Subcommittee
Reinforcing the commitment of States to space sus- The Working Group on the Use of Nuclear Power The Working Group on the Status and Application The Space and Global Health Network, estab-
tainability, the Working Group on the Long-term Sources in outer space agreed on a new, five-year of the five United Nations treaties on outer space lished by the resolution on space and global health
Sustainability of Outer Space Activities contin- workplan 2024–2028, to further work on the safety agreed to continue its work on the questionnaires (A/RES/77/120), which was developed under the
ued to address three core areas: (a) identifying and aspects of nuclear power sources in space applica- and advanced its work on recommendations to purview of COPUOS by the Working Group on
studying challenges and considering possible new tions, particularly nuclear fission reactors and new be addressed to States of registry to support the Space and Global Health, started its work on
guidelines for the long-term sustainability of outer types and uses of radioisotope power systems. enhancement of registration practices. greater coordination and cooperation among all
space activities; (b) sharing experiences, practices relevant actors in key space activities relevant to
and lessons learned from voluntary national imple- The Working Group on the Definition and global health, fostering the exchange of ideas and
mentation of the adopted Guidelines; and (c) rais- Delimitation of Outer Space Activities, which data between the space and health sectors.
ing awareness and building capacity, in particular convenes on a biennial basis, continued to consider
among emerging space nations and developing matters relating to the definition and delimitation
countries. of outer space.
The Working Group on Legal Aspects of Space
Resource Activities reached consensus on the
international conference on space resources to take
place in 2024.
COPUOS recalled significant advancements in space endeavours in 2023 – from getting the first images of early space from the James Webb Space Telescope to
the first changing of the orbit of an asteroid and the continuous robotic exploration of the Moon and Mars. This past year serves as a testament to humankind’s
desire to reach further. The year 2023 also marked the fifty-fifth anniversary of the first United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space (UNISPACE).

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
4. COPUOS iN 2023 28
STATEMENTS BY THE CHAIRS
Statement by the Chair of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
Dear Reader,
It has been in many ways a remarkable two years not Our efforts in streamlining the agendas of the
only for COPOUS but for the world which we spend Scientific and Technical Subcommittee and Legal
so much of our time trying to make a better home Subcommittee have resulted in an increase in the
for us all. The spectre of geopolitics has never been performance and efficiency of both. The introduc-
far from our deliberations and has provided us with tion of improved organizational arrangements and
a unique range of challenges, but also the oppor- working methods have also contributed greatly to
tunity to demonstrate how our focus on a higher this. Furthermore, I am pleased that COPUOS was
purpose can transcend the conflicts and even help also able to take concrete steps towards stream-
to mitigate catastrophes. lining its activities by merging several of its agenda
items. This decision improved its efficiency in a way
On a macro level, the maintenance of cordial and that allows COPUOS to continue to serve Member
constructive relationships within the Committee, States and maximize opportunities for multi lateral
and continuing our shared focus on progress dialogue.
and achievement, given the complexities of our
world over the past two years, has been at times Finally, I would like to extend my heartfelt thanks
frustratingly difficult but was ultimately a highly to my many colleagues at COPOUS and note that
rewarding task. It has undoubtedly been a huge they have made my task of chairing the Committee
benefit to be able to approach some of the more over the past two years truly a joy.
difficult discussions from a position of neutrality
Omran Sharaf and at times that has been critical to us in forging
consensus. Ultimately, our work together must
Assistant minister of Foreign Affairs and international necessarily remain cooperative and collaborative,
Cooperation for Advanced Science and technology
regardless of the short-term challenges we face.
United Arab emirates
Chair of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space
2022–2023

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
4. COPUOS iN 2023 29
STATEMENTS BY THE CHAIRS
Statement by the Chair of the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee of COPUOS
Dear Reader, We achieved consensus on the STSC Report during I was pleased to participate in various international
its sixtieth session, a testament of the science and forums, such as the United Nations/Spain/IAU
technology community to our commitment to col- Conference on Dark and Quiet Skies, the UN-Space
Serving as the Chair of the Scientific and Technical laborative dialogue and mutual understanding. session in Brindisi, Italy, and the 2023 United
Subcommittee (STSC) of the Committee on the Our successful advocacy for General Assembly Nations/Austria Symposium “Space for climate
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS) at the resolution 78/72 on “International cooperation action: space applications and technologies for sus-
United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs in the peaceful uses of outer space,” adopted in tainability on Earth” that took place in Graz, Austria.
(UNOOSA) from 2022 to 2023 has been a profound , underscores our role in foster- By working together with the Instituto Astrofísico
honour. As a scientist, I have always worked on ing global partnerships for space exploration and de Canarias on a proposal for a training course for
issues of biodiversity conservation, water resources utilization. In this regard, I would like to highlight young diplomats on science and technology space
management and pollution, so I have had the the support and close cooperation between the diplomacy, I am proud we have been able to further
pleasure of supporting the efforts of the different colleagues of the Diplomatic Corps in Vienna and foster a comprehensive approach to space govern-
working groups of this Subcommittee, which has our colleagues at United Nations Headquarters in ance for the benefit of future generations.
in turn, allowed me to see the enormous advances New York that allowed us to reach consensus and
of space applications in the study of environmen- approval at the General Assembly of the text pro- Looking ahead, my aspiration for COPUOS and the
tal and climate variables as well as in the study of posed by this presidency. broader space community is to continue expand-
space weather, space health and their applications ing our reach and impact. By embracing the spirit
towards achieving the SDGs. Our contributions to the Ministerial Declaration of cooperation, innovation and inclusivity, we can
of the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable ensure that the benefits of space exploration and
Throughout this period, the collective efforts of the Development in 2022, and the SDG Summit in 2023, technology are shared by all, paving the way for a
scientific and innovation community have signifi- highlight the relevance of COPOUS in integrating future where space continues to inspire and benefit
cantly advanced the peaceful use and exploration space technology with global development goals. By humanity on a global scale.
of outer space, marking several key achievements. promoting the Committee’s work among Member
Dr. Juan Francisco Facetti This time as Chair has also allowed me to work States, we have ensured greater participation and
with colleagues, especially from the Global South, awareness of the potential of space technologies in
Ambassador and Permanent Representative in disseminating knowledge about the benefits of addressing Earth’s most pressing challenges.
of the Republic of Paraguay
space applications as well as the importance of
participating in STSC.
Chair of the Scientific and technical Subcommittee
2022–2023

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
4. COPUOS iN 2023 30
STATEMENTS BY THE CHAIRS
Statement by the Chair of the Legal Subcommittee
of COPUOS
Dear Reader, During my tenure, it was extremely impressive to see science and technology for the benefit of their
the establishment of the Working Group on Legal respective citizens, to achieve economic prosperity
Aspects of Space Resource Activities, and support and sustainable development, and mitigate climate
It has been a great honour to serve the international intersessional work on space resources conferences change.
space community from 2022 to 2023. I have been to be held in Luxembourg and Vienna in 2024
guided by the lens of history and previous chairs and The importance of collaboration with other relevant
proponents of the space legal framework, which was It was also illuminating for me to lead and participate United Nations entities, such as ITU and ICAO, is
led by Professor Manfred Lachs of Poland. in the symposiums organized by the International critical and cannot be overemphasized. There are
Institute of Space Law and the European Centre various overlapping matters such as the use of geo-
I am equally thrilled to have represented the African for Space Law on the topics of legal models on the stationary orbit and the definition and the delimita-
continent, which is progressively moving towards potential activities in the exploration, exploitation tion of outer space to mention but a few. It is my
adopting space activities in their individual coun- and utilization of space resources and the legal firm conviction, however, that Member States will
tries and collectively tackling the socioeconomic aspects of dark and quiet skies, respectively, which come together on substance, fast track the work of
challenges facing them. brought together governments, academia and indus- COPUOS and reaffirm its mandate.
try, and non-governmental views. These key topics
The Legal Subcommittee of COPUOS has always reaffirm how COPUOS remains at the forefront of Capacity-building in space law and policy will remain
had a special and an important task in developing international space law, and the growing need for one of my major interests and priorities for Africa
space law and space governance, addressing criti- nations to coordinate and strongly commit to legis- since many countries are establishing their space
cal areas of concern, and promoting the implemen- lative efforts as well as non-binding guidelines and agencies and are getting involved in space activi-
tation of regulatory frameworks to ensure orderly, mechanisms. These are required to improve global ties. The efforts of the Legal Subcommittee and
peaceful and responsible operations in outer space. collaboration in space activities to the advantage of UNOOSA to promote capacity-building in space
The Outer Space Treaty, together with the other all nations, especially developing nations. law and policy is warmly welcomed. That said, there
core treaties and principles, form the legal order is still more to do to ensure all countries, particularly
Nomfuneko Majaja for today’s space activities. Despite this great fact, Looking towards the future, I will work hard to developing countries, can benefit from space.
the speed of new technological advancements will increase the membership of COPUOS and believe
Chief director, department of trade and industry require the Legal Subcommittee to step up and the work of the Subcommittee will be expanded. I
South Africa
meet the challenge; I have full confidence in the would invite all African States that are not yet mem-
combined expertise of the international community bers to join COPUOS. Membership will sensitize
Chair of the Legal Subcommittee
2022–2023 to do this. you to how other nations are using space policy,

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
4. COPUOS iN 2023 31
2024 AND BEYOND
A VISION AND
EXPANDING REINVIGORATING SPACE LAW,
STRATEGY SPACE UNITED NATIONS BREAKING PACT FOR THE
COPUOS THE REGIONAL SCIENCE AND
FOR UNOOSA, SUSTAINABILITY SPACE BRIDGE DOWN SILOS FUTURE
MEMBERSHIP CENTRES TECHNOLOGY
2024–2030
UNOOSA will UNOOSA will UNOOSA will UNOOSA will UNOOSA, along It has been said In the lead-up UNOOSA will
launch a strategy advocate for the convene round leverage our with the regional that space has a to the Summit leverage the
in 2024, which adoption and tables with the networks and centres, will be public relations of the Future in resources of
will build on implementation right expertise, ask engage Member updating the free- problem and 2024, UNOOSA partners to increase
our core niches, of the global the right questions States to increase to-access curricula, that the space and Portugal our capacity-
deliver impact governance of and scale the the membership embedding the community speaks will convene building initiatives,
and demonstrate outer space, as existing use of of COPUOS, activities of the too much to stakeholders to to ensure that
our relevance. developed by space applications promote the safe centres withing itself. We will be identify global all countries can
Our strategy aims COPUOS and to address global and sustainable the strategy of strengthening our consensus on the benefit from space
to drive global the landmark challenges. use of space and the Office and communications areas contained law, data, services
awareness of space Guidelines for ensure all countries establishing a related to the within the and technology
for sustainable the Long-term have a voice in regular dialogue relevance of Secretary-General’s for their own
development. Sustainability the negotiation of and cooperation space to ensure policy brief. socioeconomic
of Outer Space international space mechanism that policymakers This will inform development.
Activities. law. This is critical between the understand the negotiations on the
as the General networks. benefits of space. Summit’s outcome
Assembly approves document, the Pact
each annual for the Future.
omnibus resolution.

Chapter 5.
UNOOSA: funding, staffing
and communication
FINANCIAL RESOURCES OVERVIEW
STAFFING AND FUNDING
EXTRABUDGETARY CONTRIBUTIONS
COMMUNICATIONS

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
5. UNOOSA: FUNdiNG, StAFFiNG ANd COmmUNiCAtiON 33
This section presents data on the financial and human resources of UNOOSA covering the period through
31 . The Office acknowledges and wishes to express its gratitude to all Member States
that continuously support its activities, whether through an in-kind or a cash contribution. The data
reflected in this section represent cash contributions only.
The full list of in-kind contributors for 2023, can be found within the statement by Aarti Holla-maini,
Director of UNOOSA, at the sixty-first session of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Vienna, 29 January–9 .
FINANCIAL RESOURCES OVERVIEW
Regular budget overview since 2018
8 000
7 000 7 558.7
6 000
5 000
4 000 4 783.8
4 328.5 4 273.4 3 876.6 4 026.2 3 000
2 000
1 000

2018–2019a 2020 2021 2022 2023b 2024c
a Figure for 2018–2019 reflects a biennial budget.
b Expenditure, excluding year-end adjustments.
c As approved by the General Assembly in . Final appropriations may be impacted by liquidity constraints.
srallod
setatS
detinU
fo
sdnasuohT
STAFFING AND FUNDING

36 37 37
20c 20
18 18 18
6 6
5 5 5 5c 5 5
4 4
3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
2 2 2 2 2 2 2
1 1 1
2020 2021 2022 2023b 2024c
Regular budget Extrabudgetary Extrabudgetary
(Established positions) (Positions funded from voluntary cash contributions) (Positions funded through in-kind contributions)
Professional staff | General service staff Professional staff | General service staff | Temporary staff Non-reimbursable loan | Junior professional officers
Note: Not all positions are encumbered. Liquidity constraints presently impacts the filling of several established positions that are vacant.
a Excludes consultants, contractors and interns. b As at 31 .
c As at 30 .
2018–2019a 2020 2021 2022 2023b 2024c
Budget in thousands of
7 558.7 3 876.6 4 026.2 4 328.5 4 273.4 4 783.8
United States dollars
a Figure for 2018-2019 reflects a biennial budget.
b Expenditure, excluding year-end adjustments.
c As approved by the General Assembly in . Final appropriations may be impacted by liquidity constraints.
affats
latoT
Breakdown of UNOOSA staffing levels since 2020
Funding source 2020 2021 2022 2023a 2024b
Regular budget: 18 Professional staff 18 Professional staff 18 Professional staff 20 Professional staff 20 Professional staff
Established positions 5 General service staff 5 General service staff 5 General service staff 5 General service staff 5 General service staff
Extrabudgetary:
2 Professional staff 2 Professional staff 2 Professional staff 1 Professional staff 1 Professional staff
Positions funded
3 General service staff 3 General service staff 2 General service staff 2 General service staff 3 General service staff
from voluntary cash
3 Temporary staff 3 Temporary staff 1 Temporary staff 3 Temporary staff 3 Temporary staff
contributions
Extrabudgetary:
2 Non-reimbursable loan 3 Non-reimbursable loan 6 Non-reimbursable loan 5 Non-reimbursable loan 4 Non-reimbursable loan
Positions funded
3 Junior professional 3 Junior professional 2 Junior professional 4 Junior professional 6 Junior professional
through in-kind
officers officers officers officers officers
contributions
Total staffc 36 37 37 40 42
Note: Not all positions are encumbered. Liquidity constraints presently impact the filling of several established positions that are vacant.
a As at 31 .
b As at 30 .
c Excludes consultants, contractors and interns.

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
5. UNOOSA: FUNdiNG, StAFFiNG ANd COmmUNiCAtiON 34
EXTRABUDGETARY CONTRIBUTIONS
UNOOSA extrabudgetary donors, 2023
ecapS
dlroW muroF
emmargorP
ecapS
no
snoitacilppA lanoitanretnI
no
eettimmoC )GCI(
SSNG
ot
sseccA
llA
rof
ecapS
REDIPS-NU waL
ecapS ecapS
ytilibaniatsuS retaW4ecapS noitartsigeR
ecapS
ymoocE
nemoW4ecapS
yratenalP ecnefeD
ecnerefnoC( )GAPMS
dna
slatoT
UNOOSA would like to thank the following donors for their contributions:
UNDP Brazil Space Economy
$374 000 $374 000
United Kingdom Space Agency
Space Law $258 000 $277 000
PSIPW
$214 000 UNDP Brazil $374 000 $374 000
UN-SPIDER
$276 000 United
Kingdom $100 000 $158 000 $258 000
Space Agency
China
$185 000 PSIPW $214 000 $214 000
Space4Water China $20 000 $165 000 $185 000
$214 000
Japan Japan $117 000 $117 000
$117 000
Germany $111 000 $111 000
Registration
$ G 1 e 1 r 1 m 0 a 0 n 0 y $158 000 E C u o r m o m pe is a s n io n $108 000 $108 000
European Commission International Committee on GNSS (ICG) France $87 000 $87 000
$108 000 $108 000
ESA $33 000 $45 000 $78 000
France Space Sustainability
$87 000 $100 000 Austria $55 000 $55 000
ESA Republic of
$78 000 $55 000 | World Space Forum Korea $50 000 $50 000
Austria | $55 000 $50 000 | Space4Women APSCO $35 000 $35 000
Republic of Korea | $50 000 $45 000 | Planetary Defence Università
(Conference and SMPAG) La Sapienza, $29 000 $29 000
APSCO | $35 000 $33 000 | Programme on Space Applications Rome
Università La Sapienza, Rome | $29 000 $20 000 | Access to Space for All Kyushu
Institute of
Kyushu Institute of Technology, Japan | $9 000 Technology, $9 000 $9 000
Japan
Totals $55 000 $33 000 $108 000 $20 000 $276 000 $277 000 $100 000 $214 000 $158 000 $374 000 $50 000 $45 000 $1 709 000
Note: Figures rounded to the nearest thousand.
Note: Figures rounded to the nearest thousand.

A YEAR OF TRANSITION: UNOOSA ANNUAL REPORT 2023
5. UNOOSA: FUNdiNG, StAFFiNG ANd COmmUNiCAtiON 35
COMMUNICATIONS
Levels of traffic on the UNOOSA and Levels of traffic on the Space4ClimateAction, Space4Water, Space4Women
UN-SPIDER knowledge portal sites, 2019–2023 and Space Sustainability sites, 2019–2023
UN-SPIDER KNOWLEDGE PORTAL UNOOSA Space4ClimateAction Space4Water Space4Women Space Sustainability
550 000 100 000
514 883 90 000
500 000
489 495 487 102 80 000 78 065
469 514
70 000
450 000 446 531 67 138
60 000
400 000
407 752
50 000
389 983
40 000
37 623
350 000
30 000
300 000 305 632 308 597 20 000 14 641 16 130 19 975
290 306 10 000 8 642 5 859 7 345
250 000 0 1 023
2019* 2020* 2021* 2022* 2023* 2019* 2020* 2021* 2022* 2023*
*Visitors as of 31 December. *Visitors as of 31 December.
Visitors as of Visitors as of Visitors as of Visitors as of Visitors as of
Website
31 31 31 31 31 
UNOOSA 290 306 308 597 446 531 489 495 487 102
UN-SPIDER KNOWLEDGE PORTAL 305 632 407 752 514 883 469 514 389 983
Space4ClimateAction — — — — 7 345
Space4Water 1 023 14 641 37 623 67 138 78 065
Space4Women — 8 642 16 130 19 975 —
Space Sustainability — — — — 5 859

THE UNITED NATIONS OFFICE
FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS (UNOOSA)
IS RESPONSIBLE FOR ADVANCING INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN
THE PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE AND HELPS ALL COUNTRIES
USE SPACE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY TO ACHIEVE
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT.

BRINGING THE BENEFITS
OF SPACE TO HUMANKIND
WWW.UNOOSA.ORG