UNITED NATIONS
OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
G E N D E R
M A I N S T R E A M I N G
TO O LK I T FO R T H E
S PACE SEC TO R
UNITED NATIONS

Cover image: flashmovie, AdobeStock. Created with AI.
ST/SPACE/92
© United Nations, 2024. All rights reserved.
The designations employed and the presentation of
material in this publication do not imply the expression of
any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the
United Nations concerning the legal status of any country,
territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the
delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
This publication has not been formally edited.
Publishing production: Publishing Section, United Nations
Office at Vienna.

UNITED NATIONS
OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
GENDER
MAINSTREAMING
TOOLKIT
for the Space Sector
UNITED NATIONS
Vienna, 2024

Astronaut Christina Koch
reflected in the helmet of her
colleague Jessica Meir during an
all-female spacewalk outside of
the International Space Station
© NASA

CONTENTS
Foreword UNOOSA iv
Foreword CSA vi
Acknowledgements viii
Chapter 1. BACKGROUND 1
1.1 Purpose 1
1.2 Scope 2
1.3 Gender mainstreaming 2
Chapter 2. GENDER EQUALITY 5
2.1 Gender equality in the space sector 5
Chapter 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT 9
3.1 MEASURE ONE: Committing at all levels to advance gender equality 10
3.2 MEASURE TWO: Promoting equal opportunities within the organization 14
3.3 MEASURE THREE: Creating dedicated programming to empower all
women and girls 20
3.4 MEASURE FOUR: Measuring and reporting on gender equality outcomes 25
Annex: CHECKLIST 29
Additional resources 35
Abbreviations and acronyms 39
Endnotes 40
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS III

FOREWORD
For millenniums, space exploration was limited Only by fostering an inclusive environment can
to our sight and imagination. Today, we use we harness the full spectrum of talent, ideas
advanced technology to broaden our horizons and skills, so crucial in a frontier field with such
and understand our origins in the cosmos. And, transformative power.
looking down at Earth from orbit, we cherish
Through the Space4Women project led by the
our beautiful home with its beauty and fragility,
United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs
propelling us to seek solutions that improve
(UNOOSA), we confront this imbalance head
the well-being of all living things.
on. By empowering women around the world
However, amid the spectacular results of to actively participate in space-related activi-
modern technology, a glaring disparity persists. ties, this initiative demonstrates the significance
The gap in representation where the voices of gender equality in the space sector. Through
and contributions of women remain conspicu- networking and mentorship, and by nurturing
ously underrepresented holds us back as we talent, we are making a real difference.
seek to progress on global challenges.
We are now proud to present a Gender
Time and time again, empirical evidence has Mainstreaming Toolkit which we hope will
shown that we cannot treat gender equality inspire, equip and help navigate the path to
merely as a matter of fairness. At its core, it is driving necessary change. The Toolkit itself was
about much more than parity – it is a strategic born of the project and is based on valuable
imperative. Why? My message is simple – leav- expertise and insights from both established
ing women and girls behind leaves everyone and emerging professionals in the field.
behind and prevents us from reaching goals
and maximizing benefits for all that are well
within our reach.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
Iv UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

The 2023 Space4Women Expert Meeting that
we proudly co-hosted with the Canadian Space
Agency (CSA) was instrumental in the process.
We are grateful to our partner and all partici-
pants for their support in preparing this guide
towards rectifying the systemic inequalities that
have hindered progress for far too long.
The Toolkit is a comprehensive resource that Change is not an option, but a necessity. We
addresses a range of challenges, and its ulti- must act now – it is our shared responsibility to
mate goal is not inherently utopian – it is, in women around us and for future generations
the end, enshrined in the Charter of the United to come. May this guiding document shine as
Nations. We must tackle biases and obstacles a beacon of hope and inspiration for all those
that have created a problem that should have who strive to make the dream of space explo-
been overcome a long time ago. ration a reality for everyone.
Ms. Aarti Holla-Maini
Director,
United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS v

FOREWORD
Space has the unique ability to inspire people all around the world grows, it creates jobs,
around the world, across cultures and genera- opportunities and high demand for people with
tions. By channelling this inspiration into inno- the skills and talents to help advance human-
vation, we can leverage space technologies to ity’s future in space. To ensure that future is
help solve some of humanity’s biggest chal- more equitable, we urgently need women of
lenges. The potential is immense – from using all backgrounds to help seize the opportunities
satellite data to better understand and mitigate created by the space economy.
the effects of climate change, to improving
The Canadian Space Agency (CSA) is focused
food and health-care access through advances
on addressing the gender gap in the space
in technologies devised for space exploration.
workforce of Canada by encouraging and
Canada is proud to have co-hosted the 2023 supporting women and girls in their pursuit of
Space4Women Expert Meeting alongside education and careers in science, technology,
the United Nations, bringing global experts engineering and mathematics (STEM). CSA
together to review and prepare the space invests in youth STEM programmes so that
sector’s first Gender Mainstreaming Toolkit. students, including girls, can engage in space
We are grateful for the contributions from activities and be inspired to become part of a
each Expert Meeting participant and from more diverse space workforce.
supporting institutions, organizations and
From Dr. Roberta Bondar, the first Canadian
governments.
woman and the first neurologist in space, to Dr.
We need the knowledge of diverse groups of Jenni Gibbons, engineer and Canadian backup
people, including women and girls, to help crew member on the historic Artemis II mission
maximize the innovation potential of space. As to the Moon, and the thousands of women who
the importance of space to the lives of people work in the space sector nationwide, women in
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
vI UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

Canada have and continue to significantly con-
tribute to advancements in space. In Canada,
we also recognize the important ways of know-
ing and lived experiences of First Nations, Inuit
and Métis. Our understanding of the universe,
and of equity, is strengthened by working
closely with Indigenous peoples.
Building on this legacy, we must continue our CSA is honoured to have supported its crea-
collective work to better empower women and tion, to ensure that the benefits of space reach
girls everywhere, and to create a space work- everyone. When the space sector embraces
force that is more inclusive of the full range of diversity, we bring the greatest minds together,
human talent and potential. This Toolkit offers and we move confidently towards a brighter
a range of important measures that organiza- and more sustainable future on Earth.
tions are encouraged to adopt to help bring
about meaningful improvements for gender
Ms. Lisa Campbell
equality in the global space community.
President,
Canadian Space Agency
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS vII

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This Toolkit was developed by UNOOSA with the generous support of the Government of Canada.
UNOOSA wishes to thank CSA for their engagement and collective efforts. Sincere gratitude is
extended to the participants of the 2023 United Nations/Canada Space4Women Expert Meeting
for their important contribution to the development of this Toolkit.
Special thanks are also due to Aarti Holla-Maini, UNOOSA Director, and Lisa Campbell, President
of CSA, for their leadership and support.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
vIII UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

Chapter 1.
BACKGROUND
Space4Women is an initiative of the United of individuals and institutions to promote and
Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs advance gender equality and empower all
(UNOOSA) to advance gender equality in the women and girls in the space sector. This
space sector and in the STEM fields. The objec- Gender Mainstreaming Toolkit is the key
tives of Space4Women are to raise awareness output, made possible by combining expertise
about the importance of gender equality and of the United Nations, CSA and the partici-
women’s empowerment in the space sector; pants in the fourth Expert Meeting.
to strengthen and deliver targeted capacity-
building activities both at institutional and indi- 1.1 Purpose
vidual level; to encourage women and girls to
pursue space and STEM education and careers; This is the first Gender Mainstreaming Toolkit
and to contribute to achieving Sustainable for the space sector. It aims to:
Development Goal (SDG) 4 on quality educa-
• Strengthen the capacity of the global
tion and SDG 5 on gender equality. As part of
space community to undertake gender
its activities, UNOOSA co-hosts annual expert
mainstreaming efforts to address under-
meetings to advance the discussion around
lying systemic gender inequalities, at
gender equality at the global level.
various levels and contexts. This means
In 2023, UNOOSA and CSA hosted the supporting organizations taking meas-
fourth Space4Women Expert Meeting from ures to increase the representation of
30 October to 3 November in Montréal, women as well as creating enabling envi-
Canada. The theme was to build the capacity ronments where women can thrive.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 1

CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
• Provide simple and practical measures, 1.2 Scope
examples and tools to help people who
are not gender specialists adapt gender
Target institutions for this Toolkit include enti-
mainstreaming efforts to their unique
ties engaged in any space-related activities
situations.
such as:
For maximum impact, organizations are encour-
• Space agencies or other space-related
aged to follow up with institutional commit-
public organizations
ments, policies, data collection and reporting,
• Academia
and implementation plans. The responsibility
• Civil society organizations
for implementing gender mainstreaming also
• Industry, and
lies with the individuals involved in the space
• International and regional organizations
sector to amplify efforts and ensure that gender
biases and stereotypes are not perpetuated.
1.3 G ender
This Toolkit will help space-related institutions
mainstreaming
to:
• Better recruit and retain talent: Integrate At the fourth World Conference on Women
the perspectives and needs of all women that took place in Beijing in 1995, gender main-
in their work to achieve equal opportuni- streaming was reaffirmed by Member States of
ties and outcomes for everyone the United Nations as the fundamental strat-
• Understand and address underlying egy to achieve gender equality and women’s
systemic or structural causes of gender- empowerment.[1]
based inequality to create policies and
“Mainstreaming a gender perspective is
targeted interventions at international,
the process of assessing the implications for
national, regional and local levels that
women and men of any planned action, includ-
include everyone
ing legislation, policies, or programmes in all
• Develop adequate accountability mecha- areas and at all levels. It is a strategy for making
nisms to monitor progress at the man- women’s as well as men’s concerns and expe-
agement level riences an integral dimension of the design,
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
2 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of • Targeted approaches include the devel-
policies and programmes in all political, eco- opment of specific interventions or
nomic, and societal spheres so that women actions that have the primary goal of
and men benefit equally, and inequality is not gender equality
perpetuated. The ultimate goal is to achieve • Integrated approaches consider the regu-
gender equality.”[2] lar inclusion of gender equality issues as
part of programming, with the final goal
As mentioned in the UN-Women Gender
of making it gender responsive.[4] The
Mainstreaming Handbook on Gender Equality
primary goal relates to a specific pro-
Results, gender mainstreaming involves tar-
gramme or policy, but gender equality is
geted and fully integrated approaches to
considered a significant objective
addressing gender equality challenges, known
as the “twin track approach.”[3]
Gender mainstreaming is an approach to
achieving both programming and institutional
change. It is important to recognize that main-
streaming is not a final resolution, but instead a
strategy to achieve the goal of gender equality.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 3

Participants at the fourth Space4Women
Expert Meeting in 
posing with Canadian astronaut
Dr. Jenni Gibbons
© CSA

Chapter 2.
GENDER EQUALITY
Gender equality is a fundamental human right gross domestic product by 9.2 per cent on
and an important international, political and average across the Organisation for Economic
policy priority for fostering a peaceful, pros- Co-operation and Development (OECD) coun-
perous and sustainable world.[5] Despite many tries by 2060.[7] Various efforts to close the
efforts to advance gender equality, structural gender gap have been implemented across
and systemic discrimination against women and OECD countries from parental leave, flexible
girls persists around the world. According to a work hours and higher representation in lead-
report by UN-Women and the United Nations ership roles.[8] However, women continue to
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, face barriers to accessing quality education
without further investment, it could take close and good jobs, opportunities for entrepreneur-
to 300 years to achieve full gender equality.[6] ship and self-employment, equitable pay, and
paid care and equal housework.
Bold action is needed as gender balance in
the labour market has the potential to boost
2.1 G ender equality in the space sector
Although efforts are under way to include more potential while ensuring the benefits of space
women and girls in the space sector, it is still reach everyone.
largely male dominated, with men making up
most of the workforce globally.[9] By ensuring The nature of the space sector is highly inno-
women have access to quality education and vative and jobs in STEM are the backbone of
decent jobs, the space sector can reach its full the industry. Up to 90 per cent of future jobs
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 5

CHAPTER 2. GENDER EQUALITY
(beyond the space sector) will require some education they receive and the careers
degree of STEM-related skills, necessary for they pursue.[16]
solving the key global challenges, from health
• While women graduate in STEM pro-
equity to climate change and food security (see
grammes at faster rates than men,
box 1).[10] Although a number of countries are
research shows that many women do not
investing in STEM fields, women hold only one
pursue higher education or jobs in STEM
in five STEM jobs.[11] The absence of women
fields due to gender bias and discrimi-
in STEM fields can lead to developing tech-
nation. [17] For example, one study by
nological solutions that are not inclusive, fur-
UNESCO reported the barriers to STEM
ther deepening existing gender disparities.[12]
education and careers experienced by
Statistics show four key trends in this respect:
women. These include discrimination,
• Access to STEM-related education is pressure to marry early, expectations to
not available to everyone. According to take full responsibility for household and
UNICEF, 125 million girls in developing family duties, and “glass ceilings” that
countries are deprived of opportunities prevent women from accessing leader-
to access education, including STEM ship positions.[18]
fields.[13] While most girls begin primary
• For women who do pursue STEM careers,
education, fewer than half make it to the
barriers remain. Women are underrep-
upper secondary level where STEM skills
resented in leadership, managerial and
are solidified.[14]
technical positions – and these barriers
• More boys than girls between the ages are amplified for marginalized groups of
of 13 and 14 wish to pursue careers in women. According to the 2019 OECD
mathematics or science. [15] Girls’ con- Report on the Space Economy, the
fidence in mathematics and science can employment of women in space and/
be negatively impacted by peers, par- or aerospace manufacturing hovers
ents, teachers and educational materi- around 20 per cent in Europe and the
als that promote gender stereotypes in United States.[19] Human spaceflight,
STEM, which can influence the quality of the most symbolic of all space activities,
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
6 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

CHAPTER 2. GENDER EQUALITY
has historically been dominated by men. to space for all, and to “promote inclusive-
As of , men represent ness and gender equality in space activities,
89 per cent of all people who travelled including by strengthening the participation
to space, whereas women represent only of women in science, technology, engineering
11 per cent.[20] This imbalance has lim- and mathematics education.” [21] In 2023, in
ited our understanding of how an astro- the report entitled “Our Common Agenda”,
naut’s sex influences their health in space including policy brief 7 entitled “For all human-
and post-spaceflight. ity – the future of outer space governance”,
the Secretary-General highlighted the need to
While these trends show a limited participa-
“accelerate efforts to advance the equal par-
tion of women and girls in STEM and space
ticipation of women in the aerospace sector,
fields, the international community reaffirmed
including through programmes that promote
the importance of gender equality in these
STEM education for girls”. [22]
sectors in the “Space2030” Agenda. This is an
overarching document for strategy in the space
It is thus paramount that institutions and indi-
domain in support of Sustainable Development
viduals take action to create enabling environ-
Goals endorsed by the Committee on the
ments and uplift women and girls in the space
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and adopted
and STEM fields.
by the General Assembly in 2021. One of its
overarching objectives is to improve access
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 7

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
Box 1.
Gender equality in the space sector supports the broader United Nations
Sustainable Development Agenda
Women play a significant role in disaster manage- society (Goal 8 on decent work and economic
ment and response, agriculture and food security, growth and Goal 9 on industry, innovation and
and water resources management. Including infrastructure). The economic empowerment of
women and girls in the design, development and women in the space sector has broader impacts
delivery of space-enabled technologies that drive on the quality of life of women, men, children and
solutions that work for everyone, contributes to families overall, as higher income translates into
SDGs such as Goal 2 on zero hunger, Goal 6 on financial freedom and quality of life in general
water and sanitation, and Goal 13 on climate (Goal 5). Gender equality in the space sector can
action. In addition, gender equality in space can also foster inclusive institutions by challenging
tap into the diverse skills and talents of everyone, discriminatory practices and promoting equal
promoting inclusivity in entrepreneurial endeav- opportunities (Goal 16 on peace, justice and
ours and technological advancements that benefit strong institutions).
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
8 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

Chapter 3.
GENDER
MAINSTREAMING
TOOLKIT
This chapter will provide a series of measures A series of examples are presented through-
and submeasures for gender mainstreaming in out the text. More information about these
the space sector. Institutions are encouraged examples can be found in the links contained
to adopt these measures based on the context, in the references list. A checklist of the steps
size and maturity of their organization. These to implement the measures is provided in the
measures include: annex.
• Committing at all levels to advance
gender equality
• Promoting equal opportunities within the
organization
• Creating dedicated programming to
empower all women and girls
• Measuring and reporting on gender
equality outcomes
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 9

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
3.1 MEASURE ONE: Committing at all levels to
advance gender equality
To successfully implement gender mainstream- This policy can be developed in consultation
ing as a strategy to achieve gender equality in with all staff in the organization, as well as any
the space sector, active effort and participation existing networks that advance women or
is required from all leaders and staff at all levels diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) in STEM
within and across organizations. or the space sector.
While there may be international and national The existence of gender mainstreaming policies
policies and tools to support the integration can ensure that the contributions, perspectives
of gender mainstreaming in your country such and needs of women and marginalized groups
as gender budgeting or feminist foreign poli- are included at every aspect of the organization.
cies, it is important for each organization to Implementing and adhering to these policies will
create internal policies with gender equality
objectives specific to the space sector to guide
collective efforts and track progress.[23] Box 2.
Canadian Space Agency (CSA)
Establishing an organizational
Gender-based Analysis Plus
policy on gender
(GBA Plus) assessments
mainstreaming
All CSA initiatives (e.g. policies, programmes,
An organizational policy on gender main-
projects, grants and contributions, budget
streaming can help drive accountability for
proposals, etc.) that are new or which need
gender equality and should include objectives
re-approval are subject to the GBA Plus policy
(specific to the space sector), key requirements
of the Government of Canada, which seeks to
and roles and responsibilities on gender main-
ensure no adverse impacts of new initiatives
streaming for leaders and staff. The example
on diverse groups of people and, more gen-
in box 2 highlights the gender mainstreaming
erally, better results for all Canadians.
organizational policy of CSA.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
10 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
require buy-in from leaders and staff. Resistance leadership and resources for gender main-
could be encountered for many reasons, such as streaming are key indicators of the organiza-
maintaining the status quo, bias, misperceptions tion’s commitment to advance gender equality.
or individual attitudes. Therefore, dedicated Consider scaling up based on the size, capacity
leadership and resources can help overcome and context of your organization. The following
implementation barriers to ensure the success, table highlights a variety of approaches that
accountability and sustainability of policies that may be relevant depending on organizational
support and promote gender equality. size and context.
Regardless of the approach taken, it is important
Having dedicated leadership
to develop a workplace culture where gender
and resources
mainstreaming is considered a common respon-
Institutions are encouraged to reflect on the sibility of all employees and management. To
internal and external resources needed to enable this diffusion, identify and develop job
advance gender mainstreaming within their competency requirements on gender equal-
organization, including in areas such as gov- ity that translate into recruitment processes,
ernance, policy development/implementation, job descriptions, workplans and performance
awareness and training, and data collec- assessments as well as in criteria for promotion
tion, monitoring and reporting. Sustainable for all employees and management.[24]
Table. Approaches to advancing gender mainstreaming
Approach Organization size Description
Advisory Any size An advisory committee typically consists of external experts
committee who provide advice or recommendations to an organization
without having the formal authority and decision-making powers
of a board of directors. When forming an advisory committee,
consider individuals with diverse skills, backgrounds, and exper-
tise in gender equality.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 11

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
Table. Approaches to advancing gender mainstreaming (continued)
Approach Organization size Description
Gender Small to medium Small to medium organizations aiming to increase their capacity
equality in in gender mainstreaming can begin with integrating this role
existing job and responsibility in existing positions and job descriptions.
descriptions
Community Medium to large A community of practice (CoP) can include staff whose offi-
of practice cial responsibilities are gender mainstreaming as well as allies
and supporters of gender equality. A CoP helps ensure that
gender mainstreaming knowledge and skills are shared across
the organization and facilitates the exchange of lessons learned
and promising practices.
Dedicated Small to large Small, medium to large organizations with more resources can
gender create one or more gender adviser or focal point positions,
adviser or either on top of their existing responsibilities or as distinct roles.
focal point Eventually they could invest in an entire gender equality unit
or office. Where possible, dedicated and paid staff whose main
responsibility and expertise is gender mainstreaming should be
assigned such a role rather than volunteers working in an ad
hoc capacity or part-time.
Gender Medium to large An executive-level gender mainstreaming leader such as an
mainstream- ambassador or a champion can be identified to promote gender
ing leader equality efforts throughout the organization. Ideally, the leader
has both the capacity and commitment to inspire and make
decisions to enable gender mainstreaming. Having experiences,
expertise and the ability to provide financial support to gender
equality efforts can increase credibility.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
12 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
Delivering training for staff topics such as gender-sensitive programming,
and raising awareness gender analysis and gender mainstreaming
strategies and tools.[26] Publicly available and
To successfully implement gender mainstream-
free online learning exists such as the Asian
ing within and across an organization, the active
Development Bank’s Gender Mainstreaming
effort and participation of all staff is required.
course or Canada’s Gender-based Analysis Plus
Staff should be supported with gender main-
(GBA Plus) online learning.
streaming training, ranging from introductory
training to ensure they have a basic level of Raising awareness about gender mainstream-
understanding, to ongoing progressive and ing can include targeted campaigns, informal
targeted training for various occupational lunches and learning events aimed at promot-
groups and functional areas.[25] Depending on ing available resources such as gender main-
the size and complexity of the organization, streaming toolkits. Similarly, opportunities
training could be made specific to the staff’s could be explored to create mentorship oppor-
day-to-day activities such as programmes, tunities and networks for women and margin-
procurement, evaluation or communications. alized groups as tools to raise awareness and
Gender mainstreaming training can include foster organic learning about gender equality.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 13

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
3.2 MEASURE TWO: Promoting equal
opportunities within the organization
Challenges remain to achieving equal repre- Increasing representation of
sentation of women in the space sector, par- women at all levels
ticularly in leadership, managerial and technical
To achieve equal opportunities in larger organi-
positions. The historic underrepresentation of
zations, instruments such as equal opportunity
women at all levels of the space sector can
plans[28] or equity, diversity and inclusion action
be attributed to biases, both subconscious
plans[29] can facilitate a systemic approach
and conscious. For instance, biases related to
to achieving gender balance in staffing pat-
parental leave or gender norms such as domes-
terns and tracking progress. These plans can
tic and care work may influence the hiring
include clear objectives and planned measures
process such as decisions around “best fit” or
to achieve realistic targets.
during pay negotiations.[27]
Consider a workforce analysis which includes
Societal and structural norms, including the lack
the following general approach to increasing
of caregiving support can negatively impact
the representation of women and marginalized
women’s career progression and prospects for
groups in the workplace:
promotion.
• Understand the current composition of
Initiatives such as providing opportunities for
your workforce
women for career development and progres-
• Identify where representational gaps exist
sion, and supportive human resources practices
such as flexible working hours and considera- • Set realistic and incremental gender
tions regarding work-life balance can promote equality or equity, diversity and inclusion
equal opportunities within the space sector. targets
• Pursue sustainable actions to increase the
representation of women
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
14 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
Understanding the composition of the space women in the space workforce and track pro-
workforce is a starting point to identify the gress towards achieving gender equality.
baseline and track whether progress is being
made. While some spacefaring nations collect Establishing measures to recruit,
data on their workforce, data is not available retain and promote women
for many countries and often not comparable.
Efforts to recruit, retain and promote women
To address the lack of information and com-
in the space sector are ways to increase their
parability, UNOOSA has launched a Landmark
representation. Remember that it is important
Study on Gender Equality in the Space Sector
to improve the representation of women at all
(see box 3) to measure the participation of
levels, sectors and positions within the organi-
zation, including in the executive, managerial,
Box 3. scientific and technical, legal, policy, commu-
nications and administrative levels. Here are
Landmark Study on Gender
some examples of actions to promote women
Equality in the Space Sector
during the recruitment and hiring process:
Launched in 2024, the UNOOSA study on the • Internship, apprentice or mentorship
participation of women in the space sector opportunities to help young women
focuses on measuring gender representa- prepare for the workforce
tion across the functions and roles of differ-
• Increasing outreach to promote job
ent organizations at global level. It further
advertisements and use gender-inclusive
analyses policies or interventions that aim to
language
advance gender equality and looks at poten-
• Gender-neutral recruitment practices
tial correlations between such measures and
such as removing the name or photo of
higher or lower representation of women.
applicants when reviewing resumes and
It provides a baseline for countries to track
applications [30]
progress towards achieving gender equality
• Providing unconscious bias training to
in the space sector. The study and the survey
staff involved in HR decisions, and
can be consulted here as a starting point for
analysing their workforce. • Including women and marginalized
groups on interview panels
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 15

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
Box 4 highlights other examples implemented Box 4.
by the Kenya Space Agency to promote equal
Promoting equal opportunities
opportunities within the organization.
at Kenya Space Agency
Retention strategies are also needed to sustain
In 2020, the Kenya Space Agency (KSA)
gender equality efforts in the workplace such
adopted a gender mainstreaming policy
as addressing the gender pay gap. Whether
addressing all measures included in this
intentionally or unintentionally, the work of
Toolkit. KSA measures include:
women can be undervalued. Gender stereo-
• Encouraging applicants from marginalized
types exacerbate the issue as there is a belief
groups to apply for opportunities and
that women do not engage in salary nego-
shortlist them in line with affirmative action
tiations.[31] Measures such as including the
salary range or explicitly stating that salaries • Treating all its employees equally with
are negotiable in job advertisements can help regards to pay, benefits, transfers, train-
reduce the gender gap.[32] ing, promotion, growth and development
• Using affirmative action as a correc-
The workplace should also be set up for women
tive measure for gender imbalances
to thrive. A good practice is to establish net-
(…) including in recruitment, training,
works to promote the representation of women
development and promotion, particularly
in STEM fields, including the space domain.
in appointments of heads of sections,
These networks, typically known as employee
committees and governance units.
resource groups (ERGs), can provide support
personally and professionally, including training
and professional development opportunities newsletters, speaking engagements, outreach
to help women advance in their careers. For and role model opportunities. CSA has estab-
example, NASA has ERGs such as the Allies lished a Women in Science, Technology and
and Advocates for Women (A2W) and has Management Committee that focuses on con-
produced a guidance document on how to certed actions that help achieve better rep-
develop effective ERGs. In addition, these net- resentation of women in key roles across the
works can also help provide visibility to women Agency, working within the CSA GBA Plus and
who are working in these sectors through Employment Equity and Diversity frameworks.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
16 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
In addition, networks exist outside the work- Box 6.
place to strengthen connections among women
Job sharing at UK Space Agency
and have access to role models. An example
from New Zealand is highlighted in box 5. Dividing one full-time role is an innovative
way of pooling skills and experience while
All staff working in the space sector have a
fostering work-life balance. Sharing jobs at UK
role to play in uplifting women, including those
Space Agency creates new learning oppor-
who belong to marginalized groups. All women
tunities, and helps attract and retain staff,
deserve to be recognized for their unique
particularly those with caring responsibilities
experiences, and subsequently gain visibility
or returning to work after an absence such as
and equal opportunities for career progres-
maternity/paternity leave.
sion. Consider initiatives that can help women
increase their chances for promotion by having
equal access to professional development and
as well as opportunities related to leadership,
training, targeted mentorship and networking,
job sharing (see Box 6.), access to research
funding, including grants and contributions,
and publications. Consider developing a list
Box 5.
of women candidates that can be drawn upon
Women in Space Aotearoa for various opportunities, as they arise.
New Zealand (WISANZ)
Fostering an inclusive
WISANZ is a national professional and inclu-
workplace
sive network that aims to support and enable
women and gender minorities working in the
An inclusive workplace is critical to achieving
New Zealand space sector and those want-
gender equality as women of all backgrounds
ing to join the sector. Their “Space Up” pro-
are fully able to participate and contribute to a
gramme provides girls direct engagement
work environment that is free from harassment
with women role models and access to pro-
and discrimination. [33] Fostering an inclusive
files showcasing the different study and career
workplace calls on employers and leaders to
pathways of women space mentors.
balance:
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 17

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
• A sense of belonging among employees policies, including parental, medical or com-
where everyone is accepted just the way passionate leave and accommodations, can
they are, and enable staff to effectively balance personal,
family and professional commitments which
• Individuation where every person is seen,
arise throughout the span of an employee’s
heard and valued with the different
career. Common standards of conduct are
perspectives and backgrounds that they
also important to secure a harmonious and
bring to work.
discrimination-free workplace where employ-
Measures to foster an inclusive workplace ees feel safe and respected. Organizations
include the use of flexible working arrange- must take action to ensure a workplace culture
ments, family-friendly policies to support all where misconduct, including harassment and
employees, and common standards of con- discriminatory behaviour, is not tolerated. As
duct.[34] Flexible working arrangements are highlighted in box 7, the implementation of
mutually beneficial arrangements between awareness-raising campaigns or the establish-
staff and their managers to agree on when, ment of whistle-blowing systems are concrete
where and how work is completed (e.g. in- measures that organizations can implement.
person, remote, working hours). Staff-centric
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
18 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
Box 7.
OHB “Watch out” campaign
The Orbital- und Hydrotechnologie Bremen- campaign, initiated by the equal opportunities
System GmbH (OHB), a European space and officer, included posters, training for managers,
technology group headquartered in Germany, help/SOS toolkits, and guidelines for victims and
launched the “Watch out” campaign in 2022 to witnesses, among others. In addition, the OHB
raise awareness among employees of the issues Group instituted a whistle-blowing system avail-
of sexism and sexual harassment in the work- able to all employees as an additional channel to
place. The goal was to encourage employees to report severe violations including discrimination
look out for one another and maintain a positive or sexual harassment.
working environment at OHB. The “Watch out”
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 19

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
3.3 MEASURE THREE: Creating dedicated
programming to empower all women
and girls
Creating dedicated programming to empower society, career and life aspirations – including
all women and girls in the space sector is a their participation in the space sector.
targeted approach to gender mainstreaming
To address this barrier, mentorship opportu-
(see chapter I).
nities and programmes that encourage girls
Organizations can research, identify and through hands-on activities are very important.
address potential barriers to the access and For instance, international programmes such
participation of women in the space sector as the UNOOSA Space4Women Mentorship
to inform tangible dedicated programming.
Resources such as this Toolkit and data from Box 8.
the Space4Women project can offer guidance
UNOOSA Space4Women
on what actions to pursue to support women
Mentorship programme
and girls.
The Mentorship programme matches expe-
In addition, organizations can partner with
rienced mentors in the space sector with
other local, regional and international organi-
mentee women and girls who would like to
zations that reach out and support women in
pursue their studies or careers in space or
STEM and space to maximize efforts.
STEM-related subjects. Mentors are leaders
Inspiring all girls and young and professionals in the space industry and
represent a variety of fields and geographic
women to pursue STEM and
regions. Together, these mentors support
space education
women and girls around the world to culti-
vate their skills, knowledge and networks. In
As discussed, cultural and social norms and ste-
2023, the programme included 94 mentors
reotypes can influence the perceptions young
and 152 mentees from 67 countries.
women have regarding their abilities, roles in
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
20 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
programme inspire and support girls and young Box 10.
women from all over the world (see box 8).
Republic of Korea Female Space
Workforce Development
Many programmes also exist at national level.
programme
Examples are the She Space programme
(see box 9) or the Female Space Workforce
The Female Space Workforce Development
Development programme of the Republic of
programme was created by the Government
Korea (see box 10).
of the Republic of Korea to expand the nation’s
female space workforce. This programme
includes hands-on satellite remote sensing
Box 9.
education for high school girls, internships and
She Space International mentoring for female university students, and
capacity-building and leadership development
The She Space programme, initiated in Israel
activities for female researchers. It also sup-
in 2017, utilizes climate change as a research
ports networking events, conference sessions
topic, employing remote sensing technolo-
and workshops organized to promote women’s
gies to engage high school-age girls in STEM
participation in space. While the programme is
subjects free from gender stereotypes. Since
funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT and
2019, She Space has expanded internation-
managed by the Korean Aerospace Research
ally to include Brazil, Côte d’Ivoire, Germany,
Institute (KARI) Academy, much of the activity
Nigeria, Peru, the Republic of Korea, Spain,
and the development of the actual content of
Switzerland, Togo and the United States.
the programme itself is led by the members of
Mentored by faculty and graduate students,
the KARI Women’s Association.
participants explore academic research, space
industries and agencies in their countries,
gaining a global perspective. The programme
It is important to provide access to role models
aims to broaden horizons and inspire young
at a young age by connecting girls with estab-
women to pursue scientific careers, fostering
lished women professionals at primary to high
a constructive environment for exploration
schools or post-secondary institutions through
and learning in space sciences.
guest lectures by women in the space sector.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 21

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
In addition, awareness-raising campaigns that not, specification gaps in the designed prod-
target not only young women but also their ucts, services or solutions may occur. Whether
parents and/or guardians can help break in Earth science development and application
gender stereotypes. Collaborating with par- (see box 11), or spacesuit design (box 12),
ents, teachers and the overall education sector including and considering women in all stages
is critical to breaking down gender stereotypes. is necessary.[36]
Consider providing funding opportunities for
young women to attend space conferences or
training, scholarships to pursue STEM or space
Box 11.
education at post-secondary institutions, or
internships to access employment and expand SERvIR and Women in Earth
their professional networks. Science
Including women in the SERVIR, a joint initiative of NASA and USAID,
uses satellite data and geospatial technology
design phase and throughout
to address challenges such as climate change,
the project and programme
food security, disasters and air quality. The
life cycle
organization highlights the importance of
including women at all stages of developing
It is essential that women from all backgrounds
and applying Earth science. Women tend to
are represented throughout the life cycle of a
occupy fewer decision-making roles, and are
project or programme, including in the feasi-
not necessarily involved in deciding how to
bility, design, build, testing, deployment and
apply geospatial and Earth data to address
closure stages.[35]
agriculture-related concerns. In addition, due
In fact, gender considerations should be inte-
to gendered division of labour, women might
grated as early in the programme design as
farm different crops to men. Unless the factors
possible. Proactively considering gender dif-
above are addressed, crop monitoring data
ferences during early issue identification and
tools will be solely based on men’s realities,
research phases, as well as project team design
perpetuating inequities as such tools will not
would ensure that gender-specific needs and
apply to women’s farming needs.
requirements are planned from the outset. If
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
22 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
Box 12.
on all projects. Therefore, when possible, pro-
Inclusion through NASA
ject teams can consult directly with women and
spacesuit design
marginalized groups with lived experiences
or from organizations that partner or support
Since the first spacesuits designed in the early
them. This includes women in space-adjacent
1960s, NASA has developed groundbreak-
industries such as the STEM field and women-
ing spacesuit technology. While the number
led businesses. Organizations are also encour-
of women astronauts has increased, the first
aged to seek women’s perspectives through
NASA all-women spacewalk was postponed
data, secondary research and literature from
from 29 to 21 
sources such as those created by governments
(seven months later) because there were not
and not-for-profit organizations.
enough space suits that comfortably and safely
fit both participating women. As the space
Empowering women through
sector continues to become more inclusive,
space technologies and
the spacesuit prototype for the NASA Artemis
applications
III Moon Surface Mission, the AxEMU, will fit a
broad range of crew members, accommodat-
ing at least 90 per cent of the United States Another way to empower women is to have
male and female population. This exemplifies dedicated programming that encourages and
lessons learned through the adoption of uni- enables women to use space technologies and
versal design in efforts to be more inclusive. their applications to improve their lives and
those of their communities.
Space technologies connect remote and iso-
Considering various perspectives in all space
lated communities to services, education and
activities is important for keeping up with the
work opportunities. They increase the acces-
pace of technological innovation and advance-
sibility of educational resources and remote
ment in a dynamically changing sector.
learning, and support the delivery of health-care
However, given that women are currently under- services through telemedicine. Space assets are
represented in the space sector, it may not crucial for monitoring climate change, optimiz-
always be possible to achieve gender balance ing crop productivity, using land and water
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 23

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
resources efficiently, and supporting disaster as water providers and managers but make
management and response. up less than 20 per cent of the WASH (water,
sanitation and hygiene) labour force.[38] This
While such benefits apply across the entire
comparatively greater dependence on natural
population, women’s experiences need to be
resources makes women more vulnerable to
considered.
disaster risks, droughts or crop losses. It is thus
Globally, over 40 per cent of the agricultural important to empower women through space
workforce[37] are women, but in the least technologies, making them not only beneficiar-
developed economies two in three women ies but also active contributors to space solu-
work in this sector, often informally. In many tions. Box 13 presents how capacity-building
cultures, women are traditionally perceived initiatives empower women in Costa Rica.
Box 13.
Costa Rica Geospatial Technologies Rally
The Women’s Geospatial Technologies Rally techniques. Over 625 women have benefited
delivers capacity-building initiatives designed to from these rallies and the programme has
empower women, specifically those from rural expanded to other Central American countries,
communities in Costa Rica, through training and such as Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua.
technical guidance to propose and develop their The focus of the project is to find solutions related
own prototype solutions to community issues, to local issues, such as disaster risk prevention,
using geospatial technologies. The key compo- environmental conservation, water management
nents of these geospatial rallies include the use and agricultural systems management. More than
of accessible and cost-effective geospatial tech- 100 prototypes have been developed for the par-
nologies, such as popular geospatial applications, ticipants and most of them implemented in their
unmanned aerial systems, single-board micro- communities.
controllers and various spatial data collection
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
24 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
3.4 MEASURE FOUR: Measuring and reporting
on gender equality outcomes
Measuring and reporting on gender equal- various population groups.[40] For exam-
ity outcomes is critical for tracking progress ple, consider the intersection between
towards gender results.[39] Reporting on gender and Indigeneity which presents
gender equality outcomes can drive account- itself in data as information specifically
ability and inspire organizations and the sector about the Indigenous population, par-
to act. ticularly women. An example of disag-
gregated data collection is presented in
Collecting gender-related data box 14.
The establishment of data-collection plans • Qualitative data: Gender-related quali-
can help organizations understand what data tative information captures various
needs to be collected, when and how often perspectives and experiences through
(e.g., yearly, quarterly, etc.), from where, from surveys, observations, interviews or focus
whom, and how (e.g., online survey, adminis- groups. Collecting this type of data
trative data, etc.). Collecting gender-related provides deeper insights and a more
data, therefore, supports the establishment of comprehensive understanding of social
outcomes, indicators and targets necessary to relationships, power dynamics, gender
evaluate the impact of measures and review roles and behaviours.[41]
progress on advancing gender equality. Here
Where possible, this data should be collected
are some examples of how to collect gender-
directly from the individual through self-iden-
related data:
tification questionnaires with the option to not
• Quantitative data: Gender-related disag- respond (e.g., “prefer not to say”) to respect
gregated data is information that is cate- privacy.[42] Deciding not to engage in any data
gorized by gender and socio demographic collection of personal information should not
factors such as age, race/ethnicity or become a barrier to participation. A robust
geography, which allows for intersec- data-collection framework respects the con-
tional analysis of specific characteristics of fidentiality and privacy of individuals, includes
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 25

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
Box 14. Group on data privacy, ethics and protection
can inform data-collection efforts to enable
Disaggregated data collection at
monitoring and evaluation.
the South African National Space
Agency
Identifying gender-related
To better understand its workforce, the South outcomes, indicators and
African National Space Agency (SANSA) col- targets
lects disaggregated data categorized by
gender, race/ethnicity and ability. According Collecting data and identifying outcomes, indi-
to the 2023/2024 Annual Performance Plan, cators and targets based on available base-
the percentage of permanent female employ- line information and gender-related data are
ees increased from 38.2 per cent in 2011 to needed when measuring and reporting on
45.6 per cent in 2022. The largest underrep- gender equality outcomes. An example of
resentation of female employees is in pro- specific target setting is provided in box 15.
fessional and skilled categories. Seventy per
cent of senior and top management, including
board members, were females, with 54 per Box 15.
cent being African and Black females.
Setting targets at the Japan
Aerospace Exploration Agency
(JAXA)
safeguards for data protection, and clearly
communicates the purpose and use of their The Work-life Support and Diversity Office is
personal information. responsible for promoting diversity and work
style reform at JAXA, including the promotion
Organizations should also consider and address
of gender equality. Among others, JAXA offers
potential challenges such as overcollection of
childcare support. In its employer action plan,
data, data validity (e.g., not everyone chooses
JAXA set the target of achieving an 80 per cent
to share their gender due to confidentiality con-
satisfaction rate of employees who are eligible
cerns), small sample sizes and risk mitigation
for maternity and childcare leave and are using
for any data breaches. Guidance such as that
the JAXA childcare support system.
offered by the United Nations Development
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
26 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
Identifying gender outcomes and indicators individuals or systems involved in their delivery,
early on is critical in the planning phase of a the reach of the programme or project of the
policy or programme to be able to monitor target population, and the extent of their abil-
and evaluate its effectiveness later (see section ity to advance gender equality.[45] It is impor-
below on evaluation). Instruments such as the tant to keep in mind that monitoring is active,
SERVIR Gender Analysis Tool can help under- periodic and ongoing during the implemen-
stand what key data needs to be collected, tation phase of a project or programme.[46]
how to conduct stakeholder mapping, how to Observations and conclusions from monitoring
capture secondary data and to identify gaps efforts are used for effective management of
including gender-disaggregated data. a project or programme to maximize positive
gender results and minimize the risk of any
Although it is important to set realistic rep-
adverse results or impacts.
resentation targets, consider the aspirational
objective of pursuing gender parity as a poten- Evaluating progress on gender
tial ultimate outcome of your gender main-
equality outcomes
streaming efforts.
Gender-responsive evaluations inform decision-
Monitoring progress towards making, improve programme delivery, foster
gender equality outcomes innovation and demonstrate accountability
towards gender equality outcomes.[47] Gender-
To track the progress of a policy or programme responsive evaluation allows for a systematic
in achieving its objectives and to inform and impartial assessment of a programme,
decision-making by management,[43] it is policy, strategy or other interventions to deter-
important to monitor and analyse the gender mine their relevance, impact and effectiveness
data collected over the course of implementa- in advancing gender equality.[48] To maximize
tion. This process allows for understanding of effectiveness, gender equality issues can be
where programming is at in terms of planned explicitly included in evaluation objectives, pro-
gender equality results.[44] It typically empha- cesses, methodologies and reports, and in the
sizes the examination of processes, includ- dissemination and use of findings, conclusions
ing the timing and location of activities, the and recommendations.[49]
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 27

CHAPTER 3. GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT
There are two important elements in gender- Reporting on gender equality
responsive evaluations. The first focuses on impacts, opportunities and
the gender results achieved and the extent to challenges
which a programme has contributed to gender
equality. The second focuses more on the pro- Reporting is a step towards accountability
cess by evaluating the effectiveness of gender after completing data collection, monitoring
mainstreaming efforts and the lessons learned and evaluation.[51] When reporting on gender
– both challenges and constraints as well as equality outcomes in the space sector, it is bene-
effective approaches.[50] ficial to describe what was achieved, assess
actual results against expected or intended
results, identify promising practices and les-
sons learned, and make recommendations for
improvement. Consider inclusive and accessi-
ble communication to ensure that the report is
disseminated to all stakeholders, including the
main beneficiaries of the gender mainstream-
ing initiatives that were completed.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
28 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

Annex: CHECKLIST
STEPS COMPLETED
1. COMMITTING AT ALL LEVELS TO ADVANCE GENDER EQUALITY
Establishing an organizational policy on gender mainstreaming
Consult staff in the organization or any existing networks that advance women or
DEI to develop organizational policy
Identify objectives, key requirements, roles and responsibilities of leaders and staff,
and include them in organizational policy
Having dedicated leadership and resources
Identify one or more champions at executive level to promote gender equality
efforts throughout the organization
Set up an advisory committee to make recommendations on measures to advance
gender equality
Establish a gender focal point or unit to develop, implement and monitor gender
mainstreaming measures
Provide dedicated budget and necessary resources to implement gender
mainstreaming efforts
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 29

ANNEX: CHECKLIST
STEPS COMPLETED
Delivering training for staff and raising awareness
Organize gender mainstreaming training for staff and management
Provide introductory training and targeted training for various occupational groups
and functional areas
Raise awareness about gender mainstreaming through targeted campaigns, formal
or informal events
2. PROMOTING EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES WITHIN THE ORGANIZATION
Increasing representation of women at all levels
Undertake analysis to understand workforce composition and identify
representational gaps
Set realistic gender balance and gender equality targets to achieve a balanced
workforce at all levels
Set up an equal opportunity plan to measure gender representation and track
progress
Establishing measures to recruit, retain and promote women
Provide opportunities to women and girls through:
• Internships
• Targeted mentorship programmes
• Networking
• Professional development and training
Establish gender-neutral recruitment practices such as CV blind review and the use
of gender-inclusive language for job advertisements
Provide unconscious bias training to staff involved in human resources decisions
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
30 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

ANNEX: CHECKLIST
STEPS COMPLETED
Include women and representatives of marginalized groups on interview panels
Ensure equal pay and benefits
Establish or support the establishment of an employee network to support women
Fostering an inclusive work environment
Promote the use of flexible working arrangements
Establish family-friendly policies such as parental leave to support all employees
Set common standards of conduct to ensure an inclusive and discrimination-free
workplace
3. CREATING DEDICATED PROGRAMMING TO EMPOWER ALL WOMEN AND GIRLS
Inspiring all girls and young women to pursue STEM and space education
Create mentorship opportunities and programmes that encourage girls through
hands-on activities
Provide funding opportunities for young women to attend space conferences or
training
Support access to women role models for young girls
Including women in the design phase and throughout the project and programme
life cycle
Ensure gender representation balance in all projects and teams
Assess who is impacted by the project/programme and how, identifying differences
between groups of different gender
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 31

ANNEX: CHECKLIST
STEPS COMPLETED
Collect perspectives directly from women or seek information through secondary
research
Integrate gender considerations throughout the life cycle of a project or
programme, including:
• Feasibility
• Design
• Build
• Testing
• Deployment
• Closure stage
Empowering women through space technologies and applications
Assess needs of women and identify potential differences between groups of
different gender
Create dedicated programming that encourages and enables women to use space
technologies and their applications
Consider delivering capacity-building initiatives designed to empower women,
particularly those from remote and rural communities
4. MEASURING AND REPORTING ON GENDER EQUALITY OUTCOMES
Collecting gender-related data
Establish data-collection plans to identify data to be collected, source, frequency,
and collection and analysis method
Identifying gender-related outcomes, indicators and targets
Establish outcomes, indicators and targets necessary to evaluate the impact of
intervention and review progress
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
32 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

ANNEX: CHECKLIST
STEPS COMPLETED
Monitoring progress towards gender equality outcomes
Monitor and analyse the data collected over the course of implementation of an
intervention
Evaluating progress on gender equality outcomes
Conduct systematic and impartial assessment of interventions to evaluate
relevance, impact and effectiveness
Reporting on gender equality impacts, opportunities and challenges
Assess actual results against expected or intended results
Identify promising practices and lessons learned
Make recommendations for improvement and inform future decisions
Present results in a dedicated report or other accessible formats, and distribute to
stakeholders and beneficiaries of interventions
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 33

Pioneering software engineer,
Margaret Hamilton, poses beside the
guidance material she helped produce
for the NASA Apollo programme and
the historic moon landing of 1969
© MIT

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Publications • Gender Mainstreaming: A Guide to
Organisational Change, European Institute for
• “APEC gender-mainstreaming mentoring Gender Equality, 2016. Available at: https://
package”, Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation, eige.europa.eu/gender-mainstreaming/
2022. Available at: toolkits/gender-institutional-transformation/
default-source/publications/2022/2/apec-gender- gender-mainstreaming-guide-organisational-
mainstreaming-training-package-mentor%27s- change?language_content_entity=en
handbook/222_act_gender-mainstreaming- • Gender Mainstreaming Policy, Kenya
training-package_mentor%27s-handbook. Space Agency, 2020. Available at:
pdf?sfvrsn=d0eb6909_2 
• Artemis Generation Spacesuits: Educator Guide, GENDERMAINSTREAMINGPOLICY-
NASA, 2023. Available at: FINALAUG20201.pdf
gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/artemis-gener- • Joining Forces for Gender Equality: What is
ation-spacesuits-508.pdf Holding us Back?, OECD, 2023. Available at:
• Evaluation of the implementation of Gender- 
gender-equality-67d48024-en.htm
Based Analysis Plus at the Canadian Space
Agency, Canadian Space Agency, 2021. • Pay transparency tools to close the gender
Available at: wage gap, OECD, 2021. Available at: https://
lications/er-1920-0201.asp 
• The Future of Jobs Report, World Economic health/pay-transparency-tools-to-close-the-gen-
Forum, 2020. Available at: der-wage-gap_eba5b91d-en
rum.org/docs/WEF_Future_of_Jobs_2020.pdf • South Africa National Space Agency Annual
• Gender Analysis Tool, SERVIR, 2023. Performance Plan 2023/2024, 2023.
Available at: Available at: 
default/files/2023-06/IUCN-SERVIR-gender- content/uploads/2023/03/SANSA-Annual-
analysis-tool.pdf Performance-Plan-20232024.pdf
• “Gender Checklists”, Asian Development • The Space Economy in Figures 2019, OECD, 2019.
Bank, n.d. Available at: Available at: 
documents/series/gender-checklists space-economy-in-figures-c5996201-en.htm
• “Sustainability report 2022”, OHB, 2022.
Available at: 
ohb/Nachhaltigkeitsberichte/2022/OHB_SE_
Nachhaltigkeitsbericht_2022_E.pdf
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 35

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
United Nations resources • “Mapping gender equality in STEM from school
to work”, UNICEF, 2020. Available at: https://
• “Agreed Conclusions, 1997/2, excerpted from the 
Economic and Social Council for the year 1997”, der-equality-stem-school-work-report
A/52/3/Rev.1, United Nations, 1997. Available at: • Monitoring and Evaluation, UNDAF Campaign
 Guidance. Available at: 
%2F52%2F3%2FREV.1(SUPP)&Language=E&Devi sites/default/files/UNDG-UNDAF-Companion-
ceType=Desktop&LangRequested=False Pieces-6-Monitoring-And-Evaluation.pdf
• “Data privacy, ethics and protection guidance • “Progress on the Sustainable Development
note on big data for achievement of the 2030 Goals: the gender snapshot 2022”, UN Women,
agenda”, United Nations Development Group, 2022. Available at 
2017. Available at: publications/progress-sustainable-development-
default/files/UNDG_BigData_final_web.pdf goals-gender-snapshot-2022
• “Enabling environment guidelines”, United • “Progress on the Sustainable Development
Nations, 2019. Available at: Goals: the gender snapshot 2023”, UN DESA,
unwomen.org/sites/default/files/Headquarters/ 2023. Available at: 
Attachments/Sections/Library/Publications/2019/ sdgs/gender-snapshot/2023/#:~:text=The%20
Gender-parity-Enabling-environment- Progress%20on%20the%20Sustainable%20
guidelines-en.pdf Development%20Goals%3A%20The,the%20
• Gender Equality Glossary. UN Women Training journey%20towards%20achieving%20
Centre eLearning Campus. Available at: https:// gender%20equality%20by%202030.
trainingcentre.unwomen.org/mod/glossary/view. • “RESPECT Women: preventing violence against
php?id=36&mode&lang=en women – implementation package”, UN-Women,
• Gender Mainstreaming in Practice a Toolkit, 2020. Available at: 
UNDP Kyrgyzstan, 2014. Available at: https:// org/en/digital-library/publications/2020/07/
 respect-women-implementation-package.
toolkit-gender-mainstreaming-practice • STEM Education for Girls and Women.
• Gender mainstreaming. Strategy to promote Breaking Barriers and Exploring Gender
gender equality, United Nations, 2001. Available Inequality in Asia, UNESCO, 2020. Available
at: at: 
factsheet1.pdf pf0000375106?posInSet=4&queryId=7ebc
f2e8-68bf-4921-a0f4-e0f8737a4600
• Handbook on Gender Mainstreaming for
Gender Equality Results, UN-Women, 2022. • Sustainable Development Goal 5, Achieve
Available at: gender equality and empower women and girls,
default/files/2022-02/Handbook-on-gender- United Nations. Available at: 
mainstreaming-for-gender-equality-results-en.pdf org/gender-equality
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
36 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
• “Women in science – 2019”, UNESCO Institute • “Missing out on half of the world’s potential:
for Statistics, 2022. Available at: fewer female than male top achievers in mathe-
unesco.org/en/topic/women-science matics and science want a career in these fields”,
UNESCO, 2022. Available at: 
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000381324
Articles • “More women and girls in science equals better
science, UN chief declares”, United Nations,
• “2021–2024 Employment equity, diversity and 2023. Available at: 
inclusion action plan”, Canadian Space Agency, story/2023/02/1133367
2021. Available at: 
• “Over one hundred women involved in agri-
eng/publications/employment-equity-diversity-
culture and natural resource management
inclusion-action-plan-2021-2024.asp
in Costa Rica strengthened their digital and
• “Allies and advocates for women (A2W)”, NASA geospatial technology skills at IICA headquar-
Office of Diversity and Equal Opportunity, n.d. ters”, Inter-American Institute for Cooperation
Available at: on Agriculture, 2023. Available at: 
int/en/press/news/over-one-hundred-women-
• “Canadian employers failing mothers returning
involved-agriculture-and-natural-resource-man-
from parental leave: report”, Benefits Canada,
agement-costa-rica
2021. Available at: 
com/news/bencan/canadian-employers-failing- • “Power on: how we can supercharge an equita-
mothers-returning-from-parental-leave-report/ ble digital future”, UN-Women, 2023. Available
at: 
• “Diversity at work: making the most of increas-
explainer/2023/02/power-on-how-we-can-super-
ingly diverse societies”, OECD, 2020. Available
charge-an-equitable-digital-future.
at: 
policy-brief-2020.pdf • “Privacy implementation notice 2023-02: Personal
information for program monitoring, evalua-
• “Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency work-life
tion and reporting purposes”, Treasury Board of
support and diversity office”, n.d. Available at:
Canada Secretariat, 2023. Available at: https://

network.html
vices/access-information-privacy/access-informa-
• “JAXA general employers action plan integrated tion-privacy-notices/2023-02-evaluation.html
with the act on advancement of measures to
• “She Space”, Israel Space Agency, Ben-Gurion
support raising next-generation children and the
University of the Negev. Available at: https://
act on promotion of women’s participation and
in.bgu.ac.il/en/epif/Pages/She-Space.aspx
advancement in the workplace”, 2022. Available
at: 
pdf/7jisedai_3josei_en.pdf
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 37

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
• “Spacesuit for NASA’s Artemis III moon surface Courses and guides
mission debuts”, NASA, 2023. Available at:
 • Gender-based Analysis Plus course. Women and
suit-for-nasas-artemis-iii-moon-surface-mission- Gender Equality Canada, 2022. Available at:
debuts/ 
• “Space-up”, Women in Space Aotearoa gender-based-analysis-plus/take-course.html
New Zealand. Available at: • Gender Equality Training. Asian Development
womeninspace.co.nz/space-up Bank, n.d. Available at: 
• “Whistleblower system”, OHB, 2021. course/index.php?categoryid=26
Available at: • Gender Equality Training. European Institute
corporate-governance/whistleblower-system for Gender Equality, 2016. Available at: https://
• “Who we are”, SERVIR, n.d. Available at: https:// eige.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/
servirglobal.net/who-we-are mh0716093enn.pdf
• “Why gender equity matters in applied Earth • Guidance for Developing Effective Employee
science: a SERVIR miniseries”, 2023. Available Resource Groups (ERGs). NASA, 2018.
at: Available at: 
equity-matters-applied-earth-science-servir- uploads/2018/08/erg_guidance_7-17-13.pdf
miniseries
• “Work-life support and diversity office”, 2023
Available at: 
en/activity/goal.html
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
38 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

ABBREvIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ABBREvIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
CSA Canadian Space Agency
DEI Diversity, equity and inclusion
GBA Plus Gender-based Analysis Plus
ERGs Employee resource groups
JAXA Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency
KARI Korean Aerospace Research
KSA Kenya Space Agency
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration
OECD Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
SDG Sustainable Development Goals
STEM Science, technology, engineering, mathematics
UNESCO United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNICEF United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund
UNOOSA United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 39

ENDNOTES
ENDNOTES
1 “Progress on the Sustainable Development Goals: the gender snapshot 2022”, UN-Women, 2022. Available at

2 ”Agreed Conclusions, 1997/2”, excerpted from the Economic and Social Council for the year 1997, A/52/3/Rev.1,
United Nations, 1997. Available at: 
Language=E&DeviceType=Desktop&LangRequested=False
3 Handbook on Gender Mainstreaming for Gender Equality Results, 2022, UN-Women. Available at: 
org/sites/default/files/2022-02/Handbook-on-gender-mainstreaming-for-gender-equality-results-en.pdf.
4 Ibid.
5 “Progress on the Sustainable Development Goals: the gender snapshot 2022”, UN-Women, 2022. Available at

6 Ibid.
7 Ibid.
8 “All OECD countries need to step up efforts to boost gender equality“, OECD, 2023. Available at: 
social/all-oecd-countries-need-to-step-up-efforts-to-boost-gender-equality.htm
9 The Space Economy in Figures 2019, OECD, 2019. Available at: 
figures-c5996201-en.htm
10 The Future of Jobs Report, World Economic Forum, 2020. Available at: www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Future_of_
Jobs_2020.pdf
11 “Progress on the Sustainable Development Goals: the gender snapshot 2023”, UN DESA, 2023. Available at:

Development%20Goals%3A%20The,the%20journey%20towards%20achieving%20gender%20equality%20by%202030
12 Ibid.
13 “Mapping gender equality in STEM from school to work”, UNICEF, 2020. Available at: 
innocenti/reports/mapping-gender-equality-stem-school-work-report
14 The Future of Jobs Report, World Economic Forum, 2020. Available at: www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Future_of_
Jobs_2020.pdf
15 “Missing out on half of the world’s potential: fewer female than male top achievers in mathematics and science
want a career in these fields”, UNESCO, 2022. Available at: 
16 Ibid.
17 “Persistence and representation of women in STEM programs”, Statistics Canada, . Available at:
www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/75-006-x/2019001/article/00006-eng.htm; “Why Representation Matters for Girls
and Women in STEM”, United States Environmental Protection Agency, . Available at: 
perspectives/why-representation-matters-girls-and-women-stem
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
40 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

ENDNOTES
18 STEM Education for Girls and Women. Breaking Barriers and Exploring Gender Inequality in Asia, 2020,
UNESCO. Retrieved from: 
f2e8-68bf-4921-a0f4-e0f8737a4600
19 The Space Economy in Figures 2019, OECD, 2019. Available at: 
figures-c5996201-en.htm
20 “Astronaut/cosmonaut statistics”, Available at: 
21 A/RES/76/3 “The “Space2030” Agenda: space as a driver of sustainable development”, Available at: 
org/res/oosadoc/data/resolutions/2021/general_assembly_76th_session/ares763_html/A_RES_76_3_E.pdf
22 “Our Common Agenda: policy brief 7 – for all humanity – the future of outer space”, 2023.
Available at: 
agenda-policy-brief-outer-space-en.pdf
23 Evaluation of the implementation of Gender-Based Analysis Plus at the Canadian Space Agency, Canadian Space
Agency, 2021. Available at: 
24 Handbook on Gender Mainstreaming for Gender Equality Results, 2022, UN-Women. Available at: www.
unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2022-02/Handbook-on-gender-mainstreaming-for-gender-equality-results-en.pdf
25 Gender Mainstreaming: A Guide to Organisational Change, European Institute for Gender Equality, 2016.
Available at: 
gender-mainstreaming-guide-organisational-change?language_content_entity=en
26 See for example: Gender Mainstreaming Training Manual, UNDP, 2023. 
files/2023-03/Gender%20Mainstreaming%20Training%20Manual.pdf
27 “A gender analysis of the occupational pathways of stem graduates in Canada”, Statistics Canada; Government of
Canada. . Available at: www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/11f0019m/11f0019m2019017-eng.htm
28 Gender Mainstreaming: A Guide to Organisational Change, European Institute for Gender Equality, 2016.
Available at: 
gender-mainstreaming-guide-organisational-change?language_content_entity=en
29 “2021-2024 Employment Equity, Diversity and Inclusion Action Plan”, Canadian Space Agency, 2021. Available at:

30 See for example: “Guidelines for gender neutral recruitment, Government of South Australia”, 2022. 
forwomen.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0016/48112/Guidelines-Gender-Neutral-Recruitment-2022-04.pdf
31 “Now, Women Do Ask: A Call to Update Beliefs about the Gender Pay Gap”,Academy of Management, vol.10,
no. 1. L. Kray, J. Kennedy, and M. Lee, 2023. Available at; 
32 “Do Women Avoid Salary Negotiations? Evidence from a Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment”, Management
Science, vol. 61, no. 9. A. Leibbrandt and J. A. List, 2014. Available at: 
mnsc.2014.1994
33 “Diversity at work: making the most of increasingly diverse societies”, OECD, 2020. Available at: 
els/diversity-at-work-policy-brief-2020.pdf
34 “Enabling environment guidelines”, United Nations, 2019. Available at: 
default/files/Headquarters/Attachments/Sections/Library/Publications/2019/Gender-parity-Enabling-environment-
guidelines-en.pdf
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS 41

ENDNOTES
35 The Standard for Project Management and A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK®
GUIDE), 7th edition. Project Management Institute, 2021.
36 “Power on: how can we supercharge an equitable digital future”, UN-Women, 2023. Available at: 
org/en/news-stories/explainer/2023/02/power-on-how-we-can-supercharge-an-equitable-digital-future
37 “Recognizing the agricultural efforts of women”, CGIAR, 2021. Available at: 
cgiar-celebrates-international-womens-day-2021/
38 “Women are the secret weapon for better water management”, World Resource Institute, 2018.
Available at: 
39 Evaluation of UNDP Contribution to Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment, UNDP Independent Evaluation
Office, 2015. Available at: 
40 “Privacy Implementation Notice 2023-02: Personal information for program monitoring, evaluation and reporting
purposes”, Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat, 2023. Available at: 
services/access-information-privacy/access-information-privacy-notices/2023-02-evaluation.html
41 Ibid.
42 Ibid.
43 “RESPECT Women: Preventing violence against women - implementation package”, UN-Women, 2020. Available
at: 
44 “Monitoring and evaluation, UNDAF campaign guidance”, 
Companion-Pieces-6-Monitoring-And-Evaluation.pdf
45 “RESPECT Women: Preventing violence against women – implementation package”, UN-Women, 2020. Available
at: Handbook
on Gender Mainstreaming for Gender Equality Results, 2022, UN-Women. Available at: 
default/files/2022-02/Handbook-on-gender-mainstreaming-for-gender-equality-results-en.pdf
46 “Monitoring”, J. Hall, Better Evaluation, 2022. Available at: 
themes/monitoring#:~:text=Types%20of%20evaluation,the%20risk%20of%20adverse%20impacts
47 “Privacy Implementation Notice 2023-02: Personal information for program monitoring, evaluation and reporting
purposes”, Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat, 2023. Available at: 
services/access-information-privacy/access-information-privacy-notices/2023-02-evaluation.html
48 “Monitoring and evaluation, UNDAF campaign guidance”, 
Companion-Pieces-6-Monitoring-And-Evaluation.pdf
49 Handbook on Gender Mainstreaming for Gender Equality Results, 2022, UN-Women. Available at: www.
unwomen.org/sites/default/files/2022-02/Handbook-on-gender-mainstreaming-for-gender-equality-results-en.pdf
50 Ibid.
51 Ibid.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING TOOLKIT FOR THE SPACE SECTOR
42 UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS

WWW.UNOOSA.ORG

BRINGING THE BENEFITS
OF SPACE TO HUMANKIND
WWW.UNOOSA.ORG

THE UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS (OOSA)
IS RESPONSIBLE FOR PROMOTING INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN THE PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER
SPACE AND ASSISTING DEVELOPING COUNTRIES IN USING SPACE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY.