UNITED NATIONS
OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
CONTRIBUTION TO THE “SPACE2030” AGENDA
EU SPACE
SUPPORTING A WORLD OF
8 BILLION PEOPLE
UNITED NATIONS

Right: Original cover image
Europe has just endured its second warmest
winter on record. The image shows the impacts
of the drought on the Loire River.
Photo credit: contains modified Copernicus
Sentinel data (2021-23), processed by ESA,
CC BY-SA 3.0 IGO
© United Nations, 2023. All rights reserved.
The designations employed and the presentation of
material in this publication do not imply the expression of
any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the
United Nations concerning the legal status of any country,
territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the
delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
This publication has not been formally edited.
Publishing production: English, Publishing and Library
Section, United Nations Office at Vienna.
A very special thank you to the United Nations Office for
Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA) for its invaluable work in
promoting international cooperation in the peaceful uses
and exploration of space and in the utilisation of space
science and technology for sustainable development. In
particular, we would like to thank Sharafat Gadimova of
the ICG Executive Secretariat and Jorge Del Rio Vera of
the Committee, Policy and Legal Affairs Section for their
dedicated work and support.
Sincere thanks to the EU Agency for the Space Programme
(EUSPA) for its contribution to this joint report and in
particular to the Market Downstream and Innovation
Department for the valuable inputs to the publication.

| i
UNiTED NATiONS OFFiCE
FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAiRS
CONTRIBUTION TO THE
“SPACE203 0” AGEN DA
EU SPACE
SUPPORTING
A WORL D OF
8 BILLION PEOPLE
UNiTED NATiONS
Vienna, 2023

ii | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
FOREWORD BY THE ACTiNG
DiRECTOR OF THE OFFiCE
FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAiRS
Credit: UNIS
In 2022, humanity crossed a symbolic towards building a better future that policy and decision makers, the
milestone as the world’s population is sustainable and delivers equal public as well as the next generation.
reached 8 billion. Science has been opportunities to all.
among the main drivers of this growth, The 2018 report we produced on the
gradually increasing the human In this context, space tools have contributions of the European Global
lifespan thanks to advances in public undoubtedly become one of the Navigation Satellite System (EGNSS)
health, water, sanitation and hygiene, drivers of sustainable development. and Copernicus to the SDGs was
and nutrition, among many others. For 60 years, the infrastructure in very revealing and we are excited to
The increase in the population repre- space has expanded and today it offer our readers a new view on the
sents unique opportunities. There are benefits industries, services and contributions of space to tackling
8 billion stories, minds, bright ideas our daily activities. The reliance of societal challenges, from climate
and new perspectives, all waiting to modern society on these technolo- to food security passing through
leave their mark in improving life on gies is ever-growing. water management and urbanization
our cosmic spaceship – planet Earth. among others, through the lenses
To incentivize an even stronger of the United Nations Agenda for
However, we are also dealing with utilization and development of Space, the “Space2030” Agenda.
challenges such as growing inequal- space tools for a better future, the
ities and division. The pressures on General Assembly adopted the
natural resources mount and urban- “Space2030” Agenda in 2021. This
Niklas Hedman
ization poses the risk of intensifying forward-looking strategy reaffirms
Acting Director,
emission and waste generation and and strengthens the contribution of
United Nations Office
pollution. Demographic trends affect space activities and technologies to
for Outer Space Affairs
all the Sustainable Development the achievement of global agendas.
Goals (SDGs), and we collectively Awareness-raising plays an integral
need to capitalize on the advantages part. It is in fact the very first objec-
to shape the future of humanity while tive of the Agenda. Promoting the
mitigating the negative implications. sector and its outstanding achieve-
As much as technological advances ments not only in exploration but in
have proven transformative in enlarg- making the Earth a better place to
ing the human population, they are live is the means to harness support
crucial in maximizing our efforts and generate greater interest from

FOREWORD | iii
FOREWORD BY THE EXECUTiVE
DiRECTOR OF THE EUROPEAN UNiON
AGENCY FOR THE SPACE PROGRAMME
Credit: EUSPA
The world reached a significant I am therefore pleased to pres- Union frameworks such as the
milestone as the global population ent this joint study on the role European Union Green Deal.
hit 8 billion people. This remarkable of the European Union Space
achievement in human development Programme components, namely I would like to express my appreci-
is a result of gradual improvements Galileo, EGNOS, Copernicus and ation to the authors of this report
in public health, nutrition, personal GOVSATCOM, and their syner- for their dedicated efforts in putting
hygiene and medicine, which have gies in addressing the sustainable together this valuable resource. I
led to an increase in the human challenges facing an 8 billion world trust that it will serve as a useful
lifespan. However, with the latest today. This report also highlights how reference for policymakers, stake-
projections indicating that the popu- these components can pave the way holders and anyone interested
lation will reach 9 billion by 2037, we towards a sustainable transition to a in leveraging space technology,
must prepare for the challenges and near-future world with a population data and services for sustainable
opportunities that lie ahead. of 9 billion people. development.
The increase in population presents The report includes specific use Together, we can work towards a
both challenges and opportunities cases that demonstrate how EU sustainable future for all.
that must be addressed through Space and its synergies can actively
relevant frameworks and initiatives, contribute to tackling several
ensuring continued development sustainability challenges, including
Rodrigo da Costa
while considering the sustainability of food security, water management,
Executive Director,
human activities. With these chal- environmental impact and climate
European Union Agency for the
lenges in mind, the European Union change, disaster management and
Space Programme
Agency for the Space Programme emergency response, migration,
(EUSPA) and the United Nations urbanization and energy. Those use
Office for Outer Space Affairs cases support the implementation
(UNOOSA) signed a memorandum of the “Space2030” Agenda, and
of understanding in 2022 with the are underpinning the 2030 Agenda
common goal of promoting the for Sustainable Development, the
use of space technology, data and Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
services for achieving sustainable Reduction, the Paris Agreement, the
development. New Urban Agenda, and European

iV | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
LiST OF ABBREViATiONS
Ai Artificial Intelligence DG Directorates-General
AiS Automatic Identification System DiAS Data and Information access services
AOP Agroecological and organic practices DO Drought Observatory
APi Application Programming Interface DST Digital and space-based technologies
ASECNA A gency for the Safety of Air Navigation in EBPD Energy Performance of Buildings Directive
Africa and Madagascar
EC European Commission
B2B Business-to-business
ECMWF E uropean Centre for Medium-Range Weather
BiM Building Information Modelling Forecasts
CA Collision avoidance EDAS EGNOS Data Access Service
C3S Copernicus Climate Change Service EEA European Environment Agency
CAMS Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service EEAS European External Action Service
CAP Common Agricultural Policy EFAS European Flood Awareness Systems
CEAP Circular Economy Action Plan EFFiS European Forest Fire Information System
CEMS Copernicus Emergency Management Service EFTA European Free Trade Association
CHE CO2 Human Emissions EGMS European Ground Motion Service
CHiME C opernicus Hyperspectral Imaging Mission EGNOS E uropean Geostationary Navigation Overlay
for the Environment Service
CiMR Copernicus Imaging Microwave Radiometer EGNSS European Global Navigation Satellite System
CLMS Copernicus Land Monitoring Service EMSA European Maritime Safety Agency
CMS Copernicus Maritime Surveillance EO Earth observation
CMEMS C opernicus Marine Environment Monitoring EPBD Energy Performance for Buildings Directive
Service
ESA European Space Agency
CO2 Carbon dioxide
ESG Environmental, Social, Governance
COPUOS C ommittee on the Peaceful Uses of
ETS Emissions Trading System
Outer Space
EUMETSAT E uropean Organization for the Exploitation
CORiNE C oordination of information on the
of Meteorological Satellites
environment
EUSPA European Union Space Programme Agency
CSCDA C opernicus Space Component Data Access
System EWS Emergency Warning Service
CSS Copernicus Security Service FAO F ood and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations
DCN Digital Cellular Network
FFO Full, Free and Open
DEM Digital Elevation Model

LiST OF ABBREViATiONS | V
Authentication
FRONTEX European Border and Coast Guard Agency
PBN Performance-Based Navigation
GHG Greenhouse Gas
PM Particulate Matter
GHSL Global Human Settlement Layer
PMU Phasor measurement unit
GiS Geographic Information System
PNT Position, navigation and timing
GMDAC Global Migration Data Analysis Centre
PPP Precise point Positioning
GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System
PRS Public Regulated Service
GOVSATCOM Governmental Satellite Communications
PSTN Public Switched Telephone Network
GPS Global Positioning System
PVT Position, Velocity and Time
GSMC Galileo Security Monitoring Centre
RES Renewable energy sources
HAS High Accuracy Service
RLM Return Link Messages
HPCM High Priority Candidate Missions
RPAS Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
iEA International Energy Agency
RTK Real-Time Kinematic
iLO International Labour Organization
SAR Search and Rescue
iOM International Organization for Migration
SatCom Satellite Communication
ioT Internet of things
SBAS Satellite-Based Augmentation System
iPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
iRiS2 I nfrastructure for Resilience, Interconnectivity
and Security by Satellite SDG Sustainable Development Goal
iUU Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing SoL EGNOS Safety of Life Service
JAXA Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency SOx Sulphur Oxides
JRC Joint Research Centre SME Small to Medium Enterprise
LEO Low Earth Orbit SSA Space Situational Awareness
LiDAR Light Detection and Ranging SST Space Surveillance and Tracking
MEO Medium Earth Orbit STM Space Traffic Management
ML Machine Learning UNFCCC U nited Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change
NASA N ational Aeronautics and Space
Administration UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
NDVi Normalized difference vegetation index UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
NEO Near-Earth Objects monitoring UNOOSA United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs
OS Open Service WHO World Health Organization
OSNMA O pen Service Navigation Message WMO World Meteorological Organization

CONTENTS
Foreword by the Acting Director of the Office for Outer Space Affairs . . . . . . . . ii
Foreword by the Executive Director of the European Union Agency
for the Space Programme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii
List of abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv
EXECUTiVE SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iX
iNTRODUCTiON . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
The United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
The European Union Agency for the Space Programme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Objectives and methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1 . AN 8 BiLLiON WORLD AND THE GLOBAL AGENDAS . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1 .1 An 8 billion world . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1 .2 The “Space2030” Agenda and selected challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1 .3 Selected challenges and connection with the global agendas . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2 . DESCRiPTiON AND EVOLUTiON OF THE
EU SPACE COMPONENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2 .1 European GNSS (EGNSS .) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2 .2 Copernicus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2 .3 GOVSATCOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2 .4 IRIS2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2 .5 Space traffic management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

CONTENTS | Vii
3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED
SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3 .1 Introduction and methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3 .2 The food security challenge and the role of EU Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3 .3 The water management challenge and the role of EU Space data . . . . . . . . 44
3 .4 The environmental and climate change challenge
and the role of EU Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
3 .5 The disaster management and emergency response challenge
and the role of EU Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
3 .6 The migration challenge and the role of EU Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
3 .7 The urbanization challenge and the role of EU Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
3 .8 The energy challenge and the role of EU Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
4 . FiNAL REMARKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
ANNEX . DEFiNiTiON OF GNSS AND EARTH
OBSERVATiON APPLiCATiONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
BRINGING THE BENEFITS
OF SPACE TO HUMANKIND

Viii | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
Melting sea ice in the Arctic.
Photo credit: Alfred-Wegener-Institute, E. Horvath

EXECUTiVE SUMMARY
This report has been prepared following the Day of 8 Billion, and reducing existing disaster risks through the
designated by the United Nations as the day when the implementation of integrated and inclusive measures
world population reached 8 billion people, to showcase to prevent and reduce hazard exposure and vulnera-
how space technologies and its synergies can help to bility to disaster, increase preparedness for response
tackle the challenges of the world increasing population and recovery, and thus strengthen resilience
and complex societies while ensuring sustainable develop-
Ô Paris Agreement, a legally binding international
ment and bolster resilience, leveraging the guidance of the
treaty on climate change adopted in 2015 in Paris
“Space2030” Agenda and supporting the implementa-
and entered into force on 4 , aimed
tion of the global agendas.
at limiting global warming well below 2, preferably
to 1.5 degrees Celsius, compared to pre-industrial
On the one hand, such a milestone certainly constitutes
levels
a reason to celebrate the many human advancements in
the fields of health and poverty reduction. Just to put it in Ô New Urban Agenda (Habitat III), endorsed by the
perspective, the world population grew by 1 billion in just General Assembly in 2016 and reaffirming the
the last 11 years while it took hundreds of thousands of global commitment to sustainable urban develop-
years to reach 1 billion: this clearly reflects the exceptional ment as a critical step towards realizing sustainable
progress in human development in the last decades. On development
the other hand, this milestone also represents a motivation
To support these global agendas, the United Nations
for asking ourselves how such population dynamics will
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
impact the shape of our current and future communities.
(COPUOS), a unique intergovernmental platform that
A world more crowded than ever, indeed, exacerbates
since the early stages of the space era has promoted inter-
the long-standing effects of phenomena such as climate
national cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space,
change, urbanization, digitalization and globalization.
in 2021 finalized the “Space2030” Agenda: space as a
driver of sustainable development that Member States
Several United Nations global agendas have been, in fact,
adopted in the General Assembly resolution 76/3. as a
designed and endorsed to guide future developments:
forward-looking strategy for reaffirming and strengthening
the contribution of space activities and space tools to the
Ô 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, a
achievement of global agendas, addressing the long-term
resolution providing a set of goals, the Sustainable
sustainable development concerns of humankind.
Development Goals (SDGs), to be achieved until
2030 by all countries
Although these agendas have been developed at differ-
Ô Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, ent times, they contain commitments aimed at ensuring
adopted in 2015, with the goal of preventing new sustainable development and leaving a better world to
iX

X | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
future generations. Within this context, solutions and ser- GNSS and satellite communications, can support the
vices enabled by space can play a major role. In particular, tackling of the challenges facing an ‘’8 billion world’’.
this report considers the “Space2030” Agenda and its In the context of this report the contribution of those
overarching objective 2: Harness the potential of space technologies from the perspective of the EU Space com-
to solve everyday challenges and leverage space-related ponents (Galileo, EGNOS, Copernicus, GOVSATCOM)
innovation to improve the quality of life. This report links and its synergies will be analysed, as already today, they
the different areas of action mentioned under this objec- deliver services in a coordinated manner and on a daily
tive with selected challenges that humankind is facing basis to an 8 billion world.
today where space can make a key contribution, either in
monitoring or in contributing to the mitigation of some The methodology undertaken foresees a descriptive
aspects of the challenge, with the objective of raising assessment, enriched by tangible use cases, aimed at
awareness and promoting the use of space applications evaluating how the EU Space components and their
to tackle them in the context of an 8 billion world. synergies, contribute to the fulfilment of the seven chal-
lenges introduced above. Specifically, the following two
The present report has been conceived within the levels of analysis have been used:
cooperation agreement signed between UNOOSA and
EUSPA with the goal of promoting how the use of space Ô EU Space component level: Galileo and EGNOS,
technology, data and services can contribute to achieving Copernicus and GOVSATCOM, also including a
sustainable development in the context of an 8 billion deep dive into their specific services
world, and how the “Space2030” Agenda establishes the
Ô Application level: For Copernicus, Galileo and
priorities of Member States for the space community.
EGNOS, leveraging the market taxonomy provided
by the EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report1
Specifically, after analysing the objectives of the
“Space2030” Agenda, 8 challenges related to overarch-
The main outcomes of the study, as provided in
ing objective 2 have been distilled, namely:
chapter 3, include:
Ô Food security
Ô At space component level:
Ô Water management
• EGNSS and Copernicus support all seven identi-
Ô Environmental impact and climate change fied challenges, while GOVSATCOM contributes
to six challenges.
Ô Disaster management and emergency response
• Although each of the EU Space components can
Ô Migration
greatly contribute to the 8 billion world challenges
Ô Urbanization separately, the full potential is unleashed due to its
synergies and complementarity.
Ô Energy
Ô Health Ô At space components services level:
• Four services (Galileo Open Service, Copernicus
Since plenty of work has gone into challenge 8 (health)
C3S, CEMS and Copernicus data) contribute to
and numerous reports connecting space and health,
tackling all seven challenges.
including due to the pandemic, the contribution of EU
Space to the health challenge is summarized in the Final • 10 out of 17 EU Space services (>55 per cent)
remarks chapter while this report focuses on the other analysed support at least four challenges.
seven challenges above.
• More importantly, the joint use of the four EU
Space components services (synergies and com-
The goal of the report is to assess how the use of core
plementarity) contributes to all the challenges.
space-based technologies, namely Earth observation,
1 Application-level analyses only focus on EGNSS and Copernicus as only these two EU Space components were included in the EUSPA EO and GNSS
Market Report (2022).

EXECUTiVE SUMMARY | Xi
Ô At application level: constellation that will offer enhanced space-based secure
communication capabilities to governmental and commer-
• 118 out of the total 184 applications featured in
cial users, while ensuring high-speed Internet broadband
16 out of the 17 market domains included in the
to cope with connectivity dead zones.
EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report have been
identified as fit to support the identified sustaina-
To fully unlock the potential of space technologies in
ble challenges.
continents and countries, the cooperation at different
The report shows that the EU Space components provide levels between the systems (Earth observation, GNSS,
a unique set of data and services that complement each SATCOM, meteorology, etc.) and technologies (AI/ML,
other or work in synergies, thus underpinning its overall big data, HPC, etc.) stakeholders and between the organ-
contribution to 8 billion world challenges. In the context of izations (private and public partnerships, networks of
new EU Space flagship initiatives under development, the academia or entrepreneurs) is of paramount importance.
EU Space contribution to the challenges will be boosted To this end, EUSPA and UNOOSA will further strengthen
even further when adding the European Union Space their activities and ability to cooperate in order to accel-
Traffic Management with space situational awareness that erate the use of space technologies and their contribu-
ensures sustainable, safe and secure ‘’space’’, and the IRIS2 tion to addressing sustainability challenges.

Khurdopin Glacier, Shimshal Valley.
Photo credit: Nasa, Landsat 8 - OLI

iNTRODUCTiON
BACKGROUND
The United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of international law, for developing international space law,
Outer Space (COPUOS), permanently established in 1959, for fostering dialogue among spacefaring and emerging
has been at the centre of international cooperation in the space nations, and for promoting the increased involve-
peaceful uses of outer space and the global governance ment of all countries in space activities, including through
of outer space activities. Owing to its mandate, COPUOS capacity-building initiatives.
plays a key role in the organization of the United Nations
conferences on the exploration and peaceful uses of The “Space2030” Agenda emphasizes the relevance of
outer space and, in 2018, on the fiftieth anniversary of space tools for the attainment of global development
the first United Nations Conference on the Exploration agendas, in particular the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE+50), the Development and its goals and targets. These tools func-
international community gathered to reflect on more than tion either directly, as enablers and drivers of sustainable
50 years of achievement in space exploration and use, and development, or indirectly, by providing essential data
to strengthen global cooperation in outer space and the for the indicators used to monitor the progress towards
use of outer space for sustainable development. achieving the 2030 Agenda and the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 and the com-
Based on the results of the UNISPACE+50 process, the mitments by States parties to the Paris Agreement. The
General Assembly invited the Committee to develop, a fulfilment of these global agendas requires improved
“Space2030” Agenda and implementation plan and to access to space-based data, applications and space infra-
provide the General Assembly with the outcome of its structure, considering the particular needs of developing
work for consideration by the Assembly. countries. In particular, the “Space2030” Agenda con-
tains four overarching objectives, underpinned by actions
In , the General Assembly adopted the to be taken to realize the objectives.
“Space2030” Agenda: space as driver of sustainable
development,2 reaffirming the crucial role of COPUOS On 15 , the world’s population reached
and its subcommittees, supported by the United Nations 8 billion people, a milestone in human development.
Office for Outer Space Affairs, as unique platforms for This report examines the connections, opportunities
international cooperation in the exploration and use and challenges for Earth observation, Global Navigation
of outer space for peaceful purposes, for the global Satellite Systems (GNSS) and satellite communications
governance of outer space activities, consistent with from the perspective of the European Union systems:
2 A/RES/76/3, resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 25 , the “Space2030” Agenda: space as a driver of sustainable development.

2 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
Copernicus, European GNSS (EGNSS) and GOVSATCOM. to the challenges of an 8 billion world. This report
The report also establishes links between the different builds upon the “European Global Navigation Satellite
agendas referred to by the “Space2030” Agenda and, System and Copernicus: Supporting the Sustainable
to complement this view through the lens of population Development Goals – Building blocks towards the 2030
increase, brings in the New Urban Agenda. It is not the Agenda”3 published in 2018 by the United Nations Office
intention of this report to provide an extensive view of for Outer Space Affairs and the European Agency for the
the Copernicus, EGNSS and GOVSATCOM applications in Space Programme (formerly European Global Navigation
support of the “Space2030” Agenda and the other global Satellite Systems Agency (GSA)) but focuses on selected
agendas, but to raise awareness about space capabilities challenges rather than specific items of the agendas.
and provide an overview of how space can contribute
THE UNiTED NATiONS OFFiCE
FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAiRS
The United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs matters relating to international cooperation in the
(UNOOSA) manages and implements the Programme exploration and peaceful uses of outer space
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, which is aimed at
Ô Maintaining, on behalf of the Secretary-General, the
strengthening international cooperation in space activi-
Register of Objects Launched into Outer Space
ties and in the use of space science and technology for
achieving sustainable development. It represents the Ô Implementing the United Nations Programme on
United Nations in promoting international cooperation Space Applications
in the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space for
Ô Implementing the programme of the United
economic, social and scientific development, in particular
Nations Platform for Space-based Information for
for the benefit of developing countries.
Disaster Management and Emergency Response
The Office discharges these responsibilities by: (UN-SPIDER)
Ô Strengthening international cooperation in the Ô Acting as the executive secretariat of the
conduct of space activities for peaceful purposes International Committee on Global Navigation
and the use of space science and technology and Satellite Systems (ICG)
their applications towards the achievement of the
Ô Acting as the secretariat of the Space Mission
Sustainable Development Goals
Planning Advisory Group (SMPAG)
Ô Assisting the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
Ô Leading the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space
of Outer Space and its Scientific and Technical
Activities (UN-Space) in its work on the examina-
Subcommittee and its Legal Subcommittee in their
tion of how space science and technology and their
work and role as a unique platform at the global level
applications could contribute to the achievement of
for international cooperation in outer space activities
the Sustainable Development Goals
Ô Implementing General Assembly resolutions and deci-
Ô Facilitating cooperation in matters relating to the
sions on matters relating to international cooperation
peaceful exploration and use of outer space for the
in the peaceful use of outer space, including on trans-
benefit of humanity, considering the interests and
parency and confidence-building measures in outer
needs of developing countries, with and between
space activities, and capacity-building work in this area
governmental entities, including space agencies,
Ô Performing the functions, when required, of the intergovernmental and non-governmental organiza-
executive secretariat for global conferences on tions, and the private sector
3 ST/SPACE/71, European Global Navigation Satellite System and Copernicus: Supporting the Sustainable Development Goals. Building Blocks towards the
2030 Agenda”.

iNTRODUCTiON | 3
Ô Managing the resources of the trust fund in support This report has been prepared following the declaration
of the United Nations Programme on the Peaceful of the Day of 8 Billion, marked on 15 and
Uses of Outer Space to implement the cooperation designated by the United Nations, to provide context for
activities of the Office how space, in particular Earth observation, GNSS and sat-
ellite communications, can provide support to face some
UNOOSA serves as a conduit for promoting and facil- selected challenges of humankind. It was carried out
itating the use of space-based solutions, including in under the mandate of UNOOSA to implement activities
the implementation of the “Space2030” Agenda, and that promote the use of space-based applications and
should continue, within its mandate, functions and technologies, supporting Member States in meeting the
existing resources, to pursue partnerships with research objectives of the global development agendas. To that
institutions, academia, industry and the private sector, to end, this report makes the link between the “Space2030”
provide broader opportunities to access space for the pur- Agenda and four global agendas, namely the 2030
poses of science, innovation, research and development, Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Sendai
education and capacity-building. In that regard, the Office Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2020, the
should implement activities to promote the use of space- Paris Agreement and the New Urban Agenda, the latter
based applications and technologies to support Member incorporating other dimensions such as issues of popula-
States in meeting the objectives of the global develop- tion and urbanization.
ment agendas.
THE EUROPEAN UNiON AGENCY
FOR THE SPACE PROGRAMME
As a European Union Agency, the mission of EUSPA is committed to creating an EU Space Programme and
to implement the first integrated EU Space Programme infrastructure that is competitive, innovative and that
and multiply the benefits generated by space data and delivers real benefits to citizens and business alike.
services for citizens, businesses and governments. Building on these foundations, the EU Space Programme
has made great leaps forward in recent years, delivering
As a body of the European Union, the Agency contributes unique services in satellite navigation, Earth observation
to European Union priorities: green and digital transition, and telecommunications, and strengthening both the
the safety and security of the Union and its citizens, while upstream and downstream sectors.
reinforcing its autonomy and resilience.
As a result, space technology, data and services are indis-
The main tasks of EUSPA encompass: pensable to the daily lives of Europeans. They also play an
essential role in supporting the strategic interests of the
Ô Delivering safe, state-of-the-art, European satellite-
Union. Space-based services are used seamlessly by mobile
based services to a growing group of users in
phone users, many of whom do not realize that their data
Europe and around the world
is provided via satellite. Few people are aware that the
Ô Promoting the use of space data and services from weather forecasts, banking movements or directions that
EU Space programme components including Galileo, they receive via their smart phones are supported by space
EGNOS, Copernicus and GOVSATCOM assets. In addition, a growing number of industries and
entrepreneurs look to space data and services to develop
Ô Ensuring the safety and security of the EU Space
solutions to the challenges we face in society. Nevertheless,
Programme assets both in space and on the ground
the benefits that space can deliver are just starting to be
Ô Supporting innovation along the whole value chain unlocked and soon business and society will increasingly
of business development for companies, start-ups, look to space technology as the resource of the future.
entrepreneurs, innovators and academia
As the link between space and users, the ambition of EUSPA
Over the past 20 years, the European Union has been

4 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
is to become the reference point for all space-related To fully unlock the potential of EU Space beyond Europe,
needs in the European Union. EUSPA brings all space cooperation at different levels between space systems
stakeholders together, allowing them to leverage the (e.g., Earth observation, GNSS, SATCOM, meteorology),
synergies of the EU Space Programme’s individual compo- cutting-edge technologies (e.g., AI, big data, etc.) and
nents to deliver the greatest possible benefits to European organizations (e.g., private and public partnerships,
citizens and business. EUSPA plays a leading role in the network of academia, network of entrepreneurs, etc.) is
implementation of the EU Space Programme. It promotes essential. In this respect, EUSPA plays an essential role in
space-based scientific and technical progress and supports facilitating this international cooperation by supporting
the competitiveness and innovative capacity of space sector the development of a favourable ecosystem for space
industries within the Union, with a particular focus on market uptake, collaborating with international agencies
small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and start-ups. and entities and promoting industrial cooperation.
The EU Space Programme and the services and appli- This report aims to assess from a descriptive viewpoint
cations that it supports help to advance the European and by means of use cases how the use of EU Space
Union’s objectives and to achieve its key policy goals and (EGNSS, Copernicus, GOVSATCOM) can contribute
priorities. to the challenges related to an 8 billion people world,
paving the way to a sustainable future.
OBJECTiVES AND METHODOLOGY
This report takes stock of the “Space2030” Agenda To achieve this goal an analysis of the “Space2030”
and dives into the implementation of its overarching Agenda is undertaken to extract selected challenges,
objective 2: Harness the potential of space to solve which are then validated by their appearance in the four
everyday challenges and leverage space-related inno- global agendas considered in this report. It is worth
vation to improve the quality of life, linking the different noting that throughout the report, the “Space2030”
areas of action mentioned under this objective with Agenda is considered as the reference, as it provides a
selected challenges that humankind faces today where direct link between the challenges, space technologies
space can make a contribution, either in monitoring or and the global agendas. The work is complemented
in contributing to the mitigation of some aspects of the by a description of the challenges and how space can
challenge, with the objective of raising awareness and contribute to mitigating or monitoring them, providing
promoting the use of space applications to tackle them specific use cases based on European systems. To this
in the context of an 8 billion world. It is worth noting that end, chapter 1 provides the population context and the
not all space technologies are considered here and the analysis of the “Space2030” Agenda and the global
main focus of the report is on Earth observation, satellite agendas to determine the challenges, while the descrip-
navigation and satellite communication from the perspec- tion and evolution of the EU Space component is included
tive of the European systems, Copernicus, EGNSS and in chapter 2. Chapter 3 provides a more detailed descrip-
GOVSATCOM. tion of the challenges and some of the areas where
the use of space technology could be beneficial. It also
provides use cases based on European projects. The final
chapter (chapter 4) summarizes the main conclusions and
take-aways of the report.

1 . AN 8 BiLLiON WORLD AND
THE GLOBAL AGENDAS
1 .1 AN 8 BiLLiON WORLD
In 1960, the world population was estimated at more than On 31 , the United Nations Population
3 billion, and 24 years later the population had grown by Fund declared the Day of Seven Billion and, 11 years
another billion. However, according to the available esti- later, the 15 was marked as the Day of
mates, it only took another 13 years, until 1987, to reach 8 Billion. According to current scenarios, population will
5 billion, showing a pattern of accelerated growth. The continue to grow until a point between 2050 and the end
growth rate stabilized for the following two milestones, of the century, reaching a peak of between 9 billion and
and world population passed the 6 billion mark at the 11 billion. This increase in population creates challenges
end of the twentieth century. The entire population of the and opportunities to be addressed through the correct
world had doubled in less than 40 years. policies to ensure continued development, while consid-
ering the sustainability of the activities of humankind.
EXHIBIT 1 . W ORLD POPULATION AND WORLD POPULATION ESTIMATES WITH PREDICTION INTERVALS
Source: 2012 United Nations, DESA. Population Division. Licensed under Creative Commons licence CC BY 3.0 IGO. United Nations, DESA.
Population Division. World Population Prospects 2022. 

6 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
Growth rates and age structure of the population vary By 2050, the world’s urban population is expected to
strongly from region to region. Moreover, there are dif- nearly double, making urbanization one of the twenty-first
ferences in distribution. For example, between 2020 and century’s most transformative trends. Populations, eco-
2050, globally, the proportion of people living in urban nomic activities, social and cultural interactions, as well as
areas will increase from 55 per cent in 2018 to 66 per environmental and humanitarian impacts, are increasingly
cent by 2050.4 This trend is undisputed and irreversible. concentrated in cities, and this poses massive sustaina-
The world is becoming increasingly urbanized. Since bility challenges in terms of housing, infrastructure, basic
2007, over half the world’s population has been living in services, food security, health, education, decent jobs,
cities, and that share is expected to rise to 60 per cent by safety and natural resources, among others.
2030. Cities and metropolitan areas contribute to about
60 per cent of global gross domestic product (GDP) but While an increase in population generates explicit
they also account for about 70 per cent of global carbon benefits for societies and economies, and should not be
emissions and over 60 per cent of resource use.5 stopped or obstructed, it must be managed to maximize
positive impacts and minimize any adverse effects. To
Exhibit 2 shows the estimated growth rate of urban ensure sustainability and with a forward-looking vision,
agglomerations by size class, and it is worth noting in 2015, all Member States adopted the 2030 Agenda
certain patterns in the figure. The continent where the for Sustainable Development, containing 17 Sustainable
growth rates are highest is Africa, followed by Asia. There Development Goals to be reached by 2030, setting out
are also areas of higher growth (higher than 1 per cent) a 15-year path for reaching the goals. Although pro-
in some urban agglomerations in Latin America, and in gress has been made, action to meet the Goals is not
the United States and Canada. However, the majority of advancing at the required pace and, in ,
Europe, Japan and some urban agglomerations in the world leaders called for a Decade of Action to mobi-
United States and Canada are experiencing growth rates lize resources, enhance national implementation and
that are below 1 per cent. strengthen institutions to achieve the SDGs. Moreover, at
EXHIBIT 2 . ESTIMATED AVERAGE ANNUAL GROWTH RATE OF URBAN AGGLOMERATIONS BY SIZE CLASS
Source: 2018 United Nations, DESA, Population division. Licensed under CC licence CC BY 3.0 IGO. 
4 Demographic Trends and Urbanization, World Bank Group, 2020.
 (Accessed ).
5 United Nations, Sustainable Development Goal 11. (Accessed ).

1 . AN 8 BiLLiON WORLD AND THE GLOBAL AGENDAS | 7
the time of writing this report, World Food Programme satellite positioning and navigation and satellite commu-
estimates show that the number of severely food inse- nication, in particular, the contributions of Copernicus,
cure people doubled from 135 million pre-pandemic to European Global Navigation Satellite Systems (EGNSS)
276 million over just two years and this number could and GOVSATCOM, and how they can maximize positive
increase to 345 million in 2022.6 impacts and monitor the variables enabling data-driven
policymaking. The report uses the “Space2030” Agenda
In this report, some of the topics related to the popula- as a reference and shows the connections with other
tion increase will be examined from the contribution of global agendas.
three core space-based technologies: remote sensing,
1 .2 THE “SPACE2030” AGENDA AND
SELECTED CHALLENGES
The “Space2030” Agenda contains the following four as the contribution of space to society and environment
overarching objectives: is quite broad, as demonstrated in ST/SPACE/71.7 The
list of challenges is not meant to be comprehensive but
• Enhance space-derived economic benefits and
rather to provide examples, with the purpose of rais-
strengthen the role of the space sector as a major
ing awareness of where the Earth observation, Global
driver of sustainable development
Navigation Satellite Systems and satellite communications
• Harness the potential of space to solve everyday can be of use in the context of an 8 billion world.
challenges and leverage space-related innovation to
improve the quality of life The selected challenges are the following:
• Improve access to space for all and ensure that all
Ô Food security: Just prior the global coronavirus dis-
countries can benefit socioeconomically from space
ease (COVID-19) pandemic, some 2.4 billion people
science and technology applications and space-
were suffering from food insecurity.8 However,
based data, information and products, thereby
population continues to increase, and this increase
supporting the achievement of the Sustainable
combined with the environmental impact of human
Development Goals
activity, in particular climate change, poses chal-
• Build partnerships and strengthen international lenges for food security and agriculture. While some
cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space and mid-and high-latitude areas will initially benefit from
in the global governance of outer space activities higher agricultural production, for many others at
lower latitudes, especially in seasonally dry and trop-
Each objective is underpinned by actions to be taken ical regions, the increases in temperature and the
by Member States to realize those objectives. This frequency of droughts and floods are likely to affect
report focuses on overarching objective 2 and associ- crop production negatively, which could increase
ated selected actions connected to the capabilities of the number of people at risk from hunger, as well
Copernicus, EGNSS and GOVSATCOM. Those actions as levels of displacement and migration.9 Space
can be grouped into challenges connected to the global contributes in multiple ways to improvements in
agendas. The grouping has been made to highlight the food security, from precision farming to monitoring
role of space in the context of an 8 billion world. Different livestock, including fishing areas, and the provision
grouping of actions may result in different challenges of early warning for famine.
6 Global Food Crisis, World Food Program, (Accessed ).
7 ST/SPACE/71, European Global Navigation Satellite System and Copernicus: Supporting the Sustainable Development Goals. Building Blocks towards the
2030 Agenda”
8 Goal 2, Zero Hunger, United Nations. (Accessed on )

9 Silvern, S., and Young, S. , (Eds.). (2013). Environmental Change and Sustainability. IntechOpen. 

8 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
have changed the climate.12 Climate change
Feedback
goes beyond global warming and is also causing
significant environmental changes. Human activities
loop
have caused biodiversity losses, global warming,
disruptions in ecosystems, changes in land use
This occurs when the current
and the declining quality of air, water and soil all
state of a system is part of the
of which have consequences for development and
inputs which will determine the
are interrelated as positive and negative feedback
next state of a system . As a result,
loops exist. The visibility and importance of climate
uncertainty builds up as time
change, caused by the human-induced warming of
passes, making it very difficult
the atmosphere, has also raised awareness about
to use simple models to
the other consequences of environmental impact.
make predictions .
Most of the world’s carbon emissions come from
developed nations, where population growth has
slowed, and populations are more aged. During the
COVID-19 pandemic, global carbon emissions went
down by 7 per cent in 2020, and the median gross
Ô Water management: Just as challenges to food domestic product dropped by 3.95 per cent, mean-
security derive from population increase, there are ing that for each 1 per cent decrease in carbon
also challenges to water management and aquatic emissions, the GDP went down by more than 0.5
ecosystems, not to mention issues related to sanita- per cent. Space is key in monitoring the evolution
tion and hygiene services. Despite recent progress, of the Earth’s climate and the environment, provid-
2 billion people lacked safely managed drinking ing a global and integrated vision of the planet.
water in 2020, including 771 million who were
Ô Disaster management and emergency response:
without even basic drinking water.10 At the start of
Concentrations of people and assets are growing
the pandemic, 2.3 billion people worldwide (one in
in urban areas, often in high-risk areas such as
three) still lacked basic handwashing facilities (having
storm-exposed coasts, flooding river deltas,
soap and water at home), and 670 million had no
earthquake-prone valleys and volcanic slopes.13
handwashing facilities at all.11 The challenges posed
Cities may not have proper drainage or flood
by issues related to water access and water manage-
protection infrastructure and may depend on
ment go beyond the household and affect schools,
vulnerable sources of essential water and energy
hospitals and other essential facilities. Space can
supplies. To mitigate the devastation caused by
contribute to water management in many ways, such
these catastrophes, it is crucial to have accurate
as in supporting the mapping and management of
and complete information on population distribu-
water resources and in monitoring infrastructure.
tion which then can be used during the full disaster
Ô Environmental impact and climate change: The management cycle. Space supports the full disaster
reason why these two items are covered under management cycle, from risk assessment, mitigation
the same point is that they are tightly linked and and adaptation to post-disaster needs assessment,
affected by feedback loops. passing through emergency response.
 Climate change is when the average weather Ô Migration: Migration does not only occur between
starts to change, and its causes can be either countries, but also from rural to urban areas.
natural or caused by human activities. There is Migration has different drivers, such as climate
overwhelming evidence that human activities change, demographic changes, conflict, urbanization
10 Goal 6, Clean Water and Sanitation, United Nations Statistics Division, Department of Economic and Social Affairs.
 (Accessed ).
11 UNICEF, Factsheet: On Global Handwashing Day, UNICEF warns that 3 in 10 people do not have basic handwashing facilities at home to fight off infectious
diseases, (Accessed, )
12 International Panel on Climate Change, (Accessed )
13 World Meteorological Organization, Disaster Risk Reduction, Climate Risk Management and Sustainable Development, Bulletin Vol 58 (3), 2009
 (Accessed )

1 . AN 8 BiLLiON WORLD AND THE GLOBAL AGENDAS | 9
and overall economic development, all of which, population growth could be a significant contributor
in turn, are influenced by migration. Migration can to future carbon emissions, although it is important
create sudden surges in demand for services if to recognize the uncertainty of future population
the rate of change is fast. Space technologies can growth and its impact on climate change. At the
help track and monitor migration flows, supporting same time, climate change is also a driver of energy
Sustainable Development Goal 10 “Reduce inequal- demand in items such as heating or air-conditioning.
ity within and among countries” with target 10.7 However, renewable flows of energy to Earth are
“facilitate orderly, safe, and responsible migration and more than the current energy demand. For example,
mobility of people, including through implementation the Sun beams to Earth more than 10,000 times the
of planned and well-managed migration policies”. world’s total energy use every second. Space can
help in planning renewable energy plants, enabling
Ô Urbanization: Population and urbanization go hand
smart grid management and help individual users to
in hand. Urbanization can be a catalyst for economic
adjust their habits with renewable energy forecasts.
growth and social and cultural development. On
the other hand, if not properly managed, it can Ô Health: Several years have passed since the first
lead to congested cities lacking green and open cases of COVID-19 were reported. During that time,
spaces, without proper provision of public transport, more than 500 million people have been infected
education centres or health-care facilities, and high worldwide and more than 15 million have died.
levels of atmospheric pollution. According to data The pandemic disrupted essential health services
from 2019 for 610 cities in 95 countries and territo- in 92 per cent of countries (figure until end 2021).17
ries, about half the urban population has convenient A lot of effort remains to be made, and the different
access to public transport, defined as living within targets under SDG 3 “Good Health and Well-Being”
a walking distance of 500 metres to low- capacity indicate the path to be followed, leading to stronger
transport systems, such as buses or trams, and 1,000 preparation in the event of another global pandemic.
metres to high-capacity systems, such as trains and The COVID-19 pandemic affected all components
ferries.14 The challenges and opportunities posed of population change, including migration. Efforts
by urbanization are captured in SDG 11 which calls must be made to consider demographic changes
for making cities and human settlements inclusive, and their interconnection with other challenges such
safe, resilient and sustainable and in the New Urban as population increase. Due to the pandemic, plenty
Agenda. Space can help to support urban planning of work has gone into numerous reports which make
and vehicle traffic management. It is key for smart the connection between space and health. To avoid
grid management and provides key insights for data- replicating this work here, some reports that can be
driven decision-making. consulted on the topic are listed below:
Ô Energy: Global access to electricity increased from • United Nations draft resolution on space and
83 per cent in 2010 to 91 per cent in 2020. Over global health (A/AC.105/C.1/L.402)18
this period, the number of people without electricity
• Draft report of the Working Group on Space and
shrank from 1.2 billion to 733 million.15 On the other
Global Health on the work conducted under its
hand, energy-linked emissions pollute and degrade
multi-year workplan (A/AC.105/C.1/L.403)19
the environment resulting in 3 million premature
deaths per year.16 Emissions will rise even after • Editor’s Special: Innovative solutions for Health in
improvements in energy efficiency. For this reason, EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report, 2022/Issue 1
14 Statistics Division, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Sustainable Development Goal 11.
 (Accessed )
15 United Nations, Sustainable Development Goal 7 “Affordable and Clean Energy”. (Accessed ) 
16 United Nations Development Program, 2015, World Energy Assessment Key Messages (Accessed )

17 United Nations, Sustainable Development Goal 3 “Good Health and Well-Being”. (Accessed ) 
18 Draft resolution on space and global health, A/AC.105/C.1/L.402
19 Ibid.

10 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
EXHIBIT 3 . LIST OF CHALLENGES AND LINK TO THE “SPACE2030” AGENDA RELATED ACTIONS
CHALLENGE LiNK TO THE SPACE2030 AGENDA
Food security Overarching objective 1
Action 1 .7: Strengthen the contribution of space technologies and their applications to sustaina-
ble fisheries management, agriculture, food safety and security, and nutrition.
Water management Overarching objective 2
Action 2 .2: Promote the use of space technologies and their applications to enhance scientific
knowledge of the natural environment, including oceans and seas, mountainous regions, water
cycles and resources, forestry, biodiversity, desertification and land degradation, as well as urban-
ization, with a view to contributing to the preservation of the natural environment, sustainable
resource management and the protection of ecosystems.
Environmental Overarching objective 1
and climate change Action 1 .1: Promote the use of space-based solutions in global efforts to ensure sustainable forest
and ocean economies.
Overarching objective 2
Action 2 .2: Promote the use of space technologies and their applications to enhance scientific
knowledge of the natural environment, including oceans and seas, mountainous regions, water
cycles and resources, forestry, biodiversity, desertification and land degradation, as well as urbaniza-
tion, with a view to contributing to the preservation of the natural environment, sustainable resource
management and the protection of ecosystems
Action 2 .3: Strengthen the use of integrated space applications to facilitate the observation
of the climate and the assessment of disaster risks, improve early warning disaster systems and
provide data for the indicators used to track progress in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, the Sendai Framework and commitments by States parties to the
Paris Agreement.
Action 2 .4: Advance the role of space technologies in highlighting, analysing and addressing
climate change and facilitating the transition to low-emission societies, and promote international
collaboration in that regard, in line with existing and recognized international mechanisms and
organizations.
Disaster management Overarching objective 2
and emergency Action 2 .5: Promote the use of space-based technologies in all phases of the disaster manage-
response ment cycle, applicable to both natural and man-made disasters, including prevention, mitigation,
preparedness, response, recovery, reconstruction and rehabilitation; monitor and assess elements
such as exposure, hazards, disaster risk and damage in different regions of the world; and pro-
mote the sharing of disaster monitoring data.
Urbanization Overarching objective 2
Action 2 .6: Strengthen the use of space technologies and their applications to support the
development of socially and environmentally sustainable human settlements and infrastructure,
both urban and rural; improve livelihoods; study urbanization and migration patterns; and monitor
cultural heritage sites and contribute to their preservation
Migration Overarching objective 2
Action 2 .7: Strengthen the use of space technologies and their applications to support the
development of socially and environmentally sustainable human settlements and infrastructure,
both urban and rural; improve livelihoods; study urbanization and migration patterns; and monitor
cultural heritage sites and contribute to their preservation.
Energy Overarching objective 2
Action 2 .4: Advance the role of space technologies in highlighting, analysing and addressing
climate change and facilitating the transition to low-emission societies, and promote international
collaboration in that regard, in line with existing and recognized international mechanisms and
organizations.
Health Overarching objective 2
Action 2 .6: Strengthen space-related cooperation in support of global health; improve the use
and application of space medicine, science and technology, innovations in the global health
domain, cooperation and the sharing of information and tools to improve the timeliness and ef-
fectiveness of public health and health-care interventions; and enhance capacity-building in space
medicine, science and technology.

1 . AN 8 BiLLiON WORLD AND THE GLOBAL AGENDAS | 11
Those challenges are directly connected to the transversal and supports all the challenges encouraging
“Space2030” Agenda as described in the table above. It the use of space for research and development.
is important to note that some actions cover a broader
spectrum of activities than others and some of them may As can be seen, the selected challenges span over all
span over more than one challenge: actions of overarching objective 2 and on the action under
overarching objective 1. All actions are related to appli-
Action 2.1 “Support space science and research, as cations that can be served by Copernicus, EGNSS and
outer space provides a unique perspective for scientists GOVSATCOM. Introducing other space technologies such
to observe and study the Earth and the universe” is as satellite communications may produce further benefits.
1 .3 SELECTED CHALLENGES AND CONNECTiON WiTH
THE GLOBAL AGENDAS
The “Space2030” Agenda provides a bridge to other Early in 2018, UNOOSA together with EUSPA carried
global agendas of the United Nations and refers to other out the first study on how Copernicus and EGNSS could
agendas of the United Nations. This report presents a first contribute to the targets underpinning the SDGs.21 The
analysis of the connections between the “Space2030” study showed that those two space systems contribute
Agenda and four selected global agendas, namely: significantly to the targets, either by achieving them or
by monitoring the progress towards their achievement.
Ô 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
The study also classified the SDGs in two tiers: those
Ô Paris Agreement which would benefit most from the use of Copernicus and
EGNSS and those for which those technologies, although
Ô New Urban Agenda (Habitat III)
supportive, were not essential.
Ô Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is an
Paris Agreement22
overarching framework while the other three focus on
specific areas. The Paris Agreement is a legally binding international
treaty on climate change adopted by 196 Parties at COP
The following sections will give an overview of each of
21 in 2015 in Paris and entered into force on 4 November
the agendas considered, followed by a mapping of the
2016. The goal of the Paris Agreement is to limit global
challenges.
warming to well below 2° C, preferably to 1.5° C, com-
pared to pre-industrial levels. In order to do so it is of
paramount importance to lower greenhouse gas (GHG)
2030 Agenda for Sustainable
emissions and achieve a climate-neutral world by 2050.
Development20
Achieving this goal would significantly reduce the risks
In 2015, Member States adopted the General Assembly and impacts of climate change. However, on the other
resolution entitled “Transforming our World: the 2030 hand, the Paris Agreement recognizes the difficulty of
Agenda for Sustainable Development”. This resolution the task, as the reduction of emissions must be done in a
provides a set of goals, the Sustainable Development manner that takes into account the needs of society. For
Goals (SDGs) to be achieved by 2030. The SDGs are example, according to a recent analysis carried out by the
for all countries, considering different national realities, Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), around 31 per
capacities and levels of development, and respecting cent of human-caused GHG emissions originate from
national policies and priorities. the world’s agrifood systems,23 so achieving the global
20 A/RES/70/1.Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
21 ST/SPACE/71, European Global Navigation Satellite System and Copernicus: Supporting the Sustainable Development Goals. Building Blocks towards the
2030 Agenda”
22 Paris Agreement 2015, 
23 Food and Agriculture Organization, FAOSTAT portal. 

12 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
warming limit of 1.5° C, should be done without threaten- resilience, reducing disasters risks (disaster management
ing food production. and emergency response challenge) adopting mitiga-
tion and adaptation strategies for climate change, or by
The Paris Agreement itself calls for equity and considers enhancing liveability, by reducing air pollution (health
different national circumstances. In that regard, “the Paris challenge) and increasing food security and improving the
Agreement will be implemented to reflect equity and the management of water resources (food security and water
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities management challenges) and as well as providing access
and respective capabilities.” In the spirit of leaving no to social infrastructure and basic services such as health
one behind and noting the importance of technology for care (health challenge).
the implementation of mitigation and adaptation meas-
ures, the Paris Agreement also establishes a Technology
Mechanism to promote and facilitate enhanced action Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
on technology development and transfer to support its Reduction 2015–203025
implementation.
The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–
2030 was adopted in 2015, with the goal of preventing
New Urban Agenda24
new and reducing existing disaster risk through the
implementation of integrated and inclusive economic,
The New Urban Agenda was endorsed by the General
structural, legal, social, health, cultural, educational,
Assembly in 2016 and reaffirms the global commitment to
environmental, technological, political and institutional
sustainable urban development as a critical step for realiz-
measures that prevent and reduce hazard exposure
ing sustainable development. It is also related to the 2030
and vulnerability to disaster, increase preparedness for
Agenda for Sustainable Development in a very integrated
response and recovery, and thus strengthen resilience. It
manner, and to the achievement of the SDGs. In particular,
applies to risks of a large- or small-scale nature, frequent
SDG 11 focuses on making cities and human settlements
and infrequent, sudden and slow-onset disasters caused
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable, a topic of great
by natural or human-made hazards, as well as related
importance in an 8 billion world, where over half the
environmental, technological and biological hazards and
population live in cities, a figure that will continue to rise.
risks. It aims to guide the multi-hazard management of
Furthermore, cities and metropolitan areas contribute to
disaster risk in development at all levels as well as within
more than half of the world GDP and over two thirds of
and across all sectors.
global carbon emissions.
To achieve its goal, the Sendai Framework defines the
The New Urban Agenda is guided by the following princi-
following priorities:
ples which have been adapted to highlight the elements
where Copernicus and EGNSS could contribute most: Ô Priority 1: Understanding disaster risk
Ô Leave no one behind Ô Priority 2: Strengthening disaster risk governance to
manage disaster risk
Ô Ensure sustainable and inclusive urban economies
Ô Priority 3: Investing in disaster risk reduction for
Ô Ensure environmental sustainability
resilience
These elements are related to the challenges in many ways, Ô Priority 4: Enhancing disaster preparedness for effec-
and directly linked with the urbanization challenge, to tive response and to "build back better" in recovery,
manage the urban growth in a sustainable and equitable rehabilitation and reconstruction
manner. It also connects with the energy challenge by
promoting the use of clean energy to reduce the environ- Each priority provides a list of actions to be undertaken
mental footprint of the energy consumed (climate change at both global and regional level and at national and local
and environmental impact challenge), or by building urban level.
24 A/RES/71/256, New Urban Agenda, 
25 A/RES/69/283, Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030. 

1 . AN 8 BiLLiON WORLD AND THE GLOBAL AGENDAS | 13
Opportunities
in the
"Space2030" Agenda
The "Space2030" Agenda is an opportunity
and a call for action for the entire space sector
to take action to enhance space-derived economic
benefits and strengthen the role of the space sector
as a major driver of sustainable development, solve
challenges and improve the quality of life, harness
the potential of space to solve everyday challenges,
leverage space-related innovation to improve the
quality of life as well as an opportunity to build
partnerships and strengthen international
cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer
space and in the global governance of
outer space activities .
The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction forward the priorities of Member States on the areas
2015–2030 is directly linked to the challenge of disaster where space could make a contribution to the fulfilment
management and emergency response. As seen in the of the global agendas and how, making it the reference
other agendas, it is linked to the other challenges at dif- agenda for space actors.
ferent levels as managing the risk of disasters is aimed at
protecting people and their property, health, livelihoods As the challenges have been extracted from different
and productive assets, as well as cultural and environ- actions reflected in the “Space2030” Agenda, it is worth
mental assets, while promoting and protecting all human comparing how they are reflected in the global agendas.
rights, including the right to development. Exhibit 4 provides the mapping of the agendas and the
challenges, identifying which parts of the agenda can
be related to a specific challenge, however, the rele-
Mapping between the challenges vance of space for the fulfilment of the specific part of
and the selected global agendas the agenda was not considered in the creation of the
mapping. A space actor should make the additional step
The “Space2030” Agenda provides a forward- looking of identifying the areas to which space can contribute for
strategy for reaffirming and strengthening the con- each global agenda. However, the “Space2030” Agenda
tribution of space activities and space tools to the simplifies that task, providing already the list of what
achievement of global agendas, addressing long-term Member States require from space technologies, data
sustainable development concerns of humankind, putting and applications.

14 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
EXHIBIT 4 . MAPPING OF THE CHALLENGES AND THE GLOBAL AGENDAS CONSIDERED FOR THIS REPORT
Note: the paragraphs and sections referenced do not make a specific reference to space technology, data or applications, that additional step shall be
done to connect with space activities. See the previous work of UNOOSA and EUSPA on Earth observation and Global Navigation Satellite Systems and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.a
SENDAi
FRAMEWORK
2030 AGENDA FOR FOR DiSASTER RiSK
SUSTAiNABiLiTY SUSTAiNABLE PARiS AGREEMENT REDUCTiON NEW URBAN
CHALLENGE DEVELOPMENT 2015 2015–2030 AGENDA
Food security SDG 2: Zero Hunger Preamble Guiding principles,
Article 2, paragraph 1 (b) paragraph 19 (h)
Priority 2, Paragraph 28 (b)
Priority 3, Paragraph 30(j)
Priority 4, Paragraph 33 (h)
Water SDG 6: C lean Water and No mention Priority 4, paragraphs 33 (c) Paragraphs 13 (a), 13 (h), 34,
management Sanitation and (h) 64, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 88, 119,
120, 123
Environmental SDG 1: N o Poverty The topic of the agreement Preamble Paragraphs 2, 3, 5, 10, 13 (h),
and climate Target 1.5 is to strengthen the global Expected Outcome, 16 (g). 14 (c), 15 (c) iii, 24, 35, 44,
change SDG 2: Z T a e r r g o e H t u 2 n .3 g er r c e li s m p a o t n e s c e h t a o n t g h e e . threat of Guiding Principles, 19 (h) 5 1 0 0 , 6 5 , 1 1 , 0 5 9 4 , , 1 5 1 5 1 , , 5 1 8 1 , 4 8 ( 8 d , ) , 9 1 4 1 , 5 1 , 0 1,
Target 2.4 Priority 1, 119, 143, 144, 151, 165
SDG 3: G ood Health and paragraphs 25 (b) (c) A whole section on
Well-Being: Priority 2, Environmentally sustain-
Target: 3.9 paragraphs 28 (b) (c) able and resilient urban
development.
SDG 8: D ecent Work and Priority 4, paragraph, 33 (a)
Economic Growth Priority 4, paragraph 34 (c)
Target 8.4
Means of implementation,
SDG 9: I ndustry, Innovation paragraph 47 (d)
and Infrastructure
Target 9.4
SDG 11: S ustainable Cities
and Communities
Target 11.6
Target 11.a
SDG 12: Responsible
Consumption and
Production
Target 12.4
Target 12.c
SDG 13: Climate Action
SDG 14: Life Below Water
SDG 15: Life on Land
Disaster SDG 1: N o Poverty Article 7, The topic of the framework is Paragraphs 14 (c), 19, 29,
management Target 1.5 paragraph 9 (b) (c) (d) disaster risk reduction 63, 65, 67, 77, 78, 101, 119,
and emergency SDG 2: Z ero Hunger Article 8, paragraph 4 144, 165
response Target 2.4 Article 10, paragraph 2
SDG 11: S ustainable Cities
and Communities
Target 11.5
Target 11.b
SDG 13: C limate Action
Target 13.1
Target 13.3
a ST/SPACE/71, European Global Navigation Satellite System and Copernicus: Supporting the Sustainable Development Goals. Building Blocks towards the
2030 Agenda”

1 . AN 8 BiLLiON WORLD AND THE GLOBAL AGENDAS | 15
SENDAi
FRAMEWORK
2030 AGENDA FOR FOR DiSASTER RiSK
SUSTAiNABiLiTY SUSTAiNABLE PARiS AGREEMENT REDUCTiON NEW URBAN
CHALLENGE DEVELOPMENT 2015 2015–2030 AGENDA
Migration SDG 10: Reduced Preamble Preamble Paragraph 20, 28.34, 42, 57,
Inequalities Priority 2, paragraph 27 (h) 59, 104, 157, 159
Target 10.7
Role of stakeholders, para-
graphs 36 (a) (vi)
Urbanization SDG 11: S ustainable Cities Article 8, paragraph 4 Preamble The topic of the agenda is
and Communities Priority 2, paragraph 27 (d) around urbanization
Priority 3, paragraph 30 (b) (f)
Means of implementation
paragraph 47 (d)
Energy SDG 7: A ffordable and Indirect link to Emissions No mention Paragraphs 13 (a), 14 (c), 34,
Clean Energy 44, 54, 66, 70, 71, 74, 75, 88,
SDG 12: R esponsible 111, 121
Consumption and
Production
Target 12.c
Health SDG 3: G ood Health and Preamble Preamble Paragraphs 2, 5, 11, 13 (a), 14
Well-Being Expected outcome and goal, (a) (c), 32, 34, 36, 37, 39, 43,
SDG 5: G ender Equality 16, 17, 18 (d) 54, 55, 67, 75, 88, 100, 108,
Target 5.6 Guiding Principles 19 (c) (h) 111, 113, 115, 118, 119, 123
Priority 1, Global and regional
levels, paragraphs 24 (d), 25
(b) (d)
Priority 2, Global and regional
levels, paragraphs 27 (b) (d),
28 (b)
Priority 3. Paragraphs 29, 30
(i) (j), 31 (e),
Priority 4, paragraphs 33 (c)
Means of implementation,
43, 44
As exhibit 4 shows, the selected agendas are interlinked For the past decades, space activities have enhanced
and connected to all challenges, which speaks in favour the knowledge of our home, the Earth, improving our
of the validity of selecting those challenges. The selected understanding of the delicate connections between
global agendas set out the path for humankind concern- environment, biodiversity and human societal develop-
ing sustainability, disaster management, urbanization ments. Space technology, data and applications play
and climate change, all these aspects are captured in the an integral role in sustainability today and will continue
“Space2030” Agenda, which provides a more direct link to do so in the coming decades. The “Space2030”
for space actors to the aforementioned challenges and Agenda reinforces this notion and calls for action from all
other aspects concerning space sustainability, diplomacy space actors.
and economy.

Melting sea ice in the Arctic.
Photo credit: Alfred-Wegener-Institute, E. Horvath

2 . DESCRiPTiON AND
EVOLUTiON OF THE
EU SPACE COMPONENTS
The following flagship components deliver European and accessible to any citizen, and any organization
space-based services on a daily basis: around the world on a free, full and open basis.
Ô Galileo is Europe’s Global Navigation Satellite Ô GOVSATCOM has the objective to ensure the
System (GNSS), on which numerous economic long-term availability of reliable, secured and
sectors rely, from transport and agriculture to border cost-effective satellite communication (SatCom)
management and search and rescue. Its free and services to governmental users, contributing to the
global 20cm high-accuracy service makes Galileo a security and safety of all European Union citizens.
game changer for autonomous driving and commer-
cial drones. Already more than 3.7 billion smart- In addition, there are new EU Space flagship initiatives
phones are Galileo-enabled worldwide and all new under development to boost satellite-based secure
smartphones in the European Union are required by connectivity and ensure sustainable and secure space:
law to use Galileo.
Ô IRIS2 (Europe’s new Infrastructure for Resilience,
Ô EGNOS (European Geostationary Navigation Interconnection and Security by Satellites) will be a
Overlay Service) is Europe’s regional satellite-based ‘’new space’’ and multi-orbit constellation provid-
augmentation system (SBAS). It is used to improve ing connectivity to the whole of Europe, including
GNSSs such as GPS, and Galileo in the future. areas that do not currently benefit from broadband
EGNOS was deployed to provide safety-of-life Internet, as well as to the whole of Africa. The system
navigation services to aviation. However, due will ensure access to secure and cost-effective
to improved positioning performance, it is also satellite communications services, for governmen-
intended to support applications in a wide range of tal communications and commercial use. It aims to
other domains such as maritime, rail, agriculture and protect critical infrastructures, support surveillance
road. EGNOS is already operational in more than and crisis management, as well as enable high-speed
400 airports and helipads. broadband to best anticipate future challenges.
Ô Copernicus is the European Earth observation Ô EU Space Traffic Management (STM): STM encom-
system. It offers a vast amount of data from satellites passes the means and rules to access, conduct
and in situ (non-space) data, complemented by infor- activities in, and return from outer space safely,
mation services. It supports environmental manage- sustainably and securely. STM aims at securing the
ment, helps mitigate the effects of climate change, long-term viability of space activities by ensuring
and ensures safety and civil security across Europe. that space remains a safe and secure environment as
Copernicus is the largest provider of global Earth the European economy, society and citizens rely on
observation data. The vast majority of data/infor- space-based applications such as communications,
mation delivered by Copernicus is made available navigation and Earth observation. It encompasses

18 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
various elements such as space situational awareness Ô Promoting downstream market and integrated appli-
(SSA) activities, including space surveillance and cations based on Galileo, EGNOS and Copernicus
tracking (SST).
Ô Engaging the GOVSATCOM user community in
In terms of governance, the European Commission has shaping the service
the overall responsibility for the implementation of the
Ô Improving GNSS services and infrastructure
Programme in close cooperation with the European
exploitation
Union Member States, the European Union Agency for
the Space Programme (EUSPA), the European Space Concerning IRIS², specific tasks still have to be allocated.
Agency (ESA) and other stakeholders. Specifically, the However, EUSPA is already actively involved in build-
EUSPA tasks include:26 ing secure satellite communication infrastructure for
Europe through the coordination of the first phase of
Ô Managing EGNOS and Galileo service provision
GOVSATCOM on which IRIS² will be based.
and ensuring the Space Surveillance and Tracking
Front Desk
2 .1 EUROPEAN GNSS (EGNSS)
2 .1 .1 Galileo an accuracy of less than 20 cm globally and for
everyone. Galileo HAS has been operational since
Galileo is the European Global Navigation Satellite
24 .27
System (GNSS), providing stand-alone navigation, posi-
tioning and timing information (PNT) to users worldwide. Ô Commercial Authentication Service (CAS): A service
Unlike other systems, it is under civilian control and has will provide users with the capability to obtain an
been designed to meet the diverse needs of different authenticated Galileo PVT solution.
user communities.
Ô Public Regulated Service (PRS): An encrypted
navigation service for authorized governmental
Galileo provides Europe and European citizens with inde-
users and sensitive applications that require high
pendent PNT services. The Galileo system offers several
continuity.
high-performance services worldwide, featuring various
levels of accuracy, robustness, authentication and security: Ô Search and Rescue Service (SAR): Europe’s con-
tribution to COSPAS-SARSAT, an international
Ô Open Service: Galileo is a free-of-charge global satellite-based search and rescue distress alert
ranging, positioning and timing service. It also pro- detection system. Galileo not only quickly locates
vides Navigation Message Authentication (OSNMA), people in distress and makes their position known
allowing the computation of the user position using to the relevant authorities, but the SAR/Galileo
authenticated data extracted from the navigation RLS also provides an automatic acknowledgement
message. message back to the user informing them that their
request for help has been received.
Ô High Accuracy Service (HAS): A free-of-charge
high-accuracy corrections service disseminated Galileo entered its Initial Operational Capability phase in
through the Galileo signal (E6-B) and by terres- 2016. Since then, anyone with a Galileo-enabled device
trial means (Internet). Galileo HAS offers real-time is able to use its signals for positioning, navigation and
improved user positioning performances with timing.
26 
27 

2 . DESCRiPTiON AND EVOLUTiON OF THE EU SPACE COMPONENTS | 19
2 .1 .2 EGNOS
The European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service EGNOS has been declared fully operational since
(EGNOS) is Europe’s regional satellite-based augmen- 2009 for OS, and 2011 for SoL, continuously delivering
tation system (SBAS) that is used to improve the perfor- high-quality services to all users with enabled receivers.
mance of global navigation satellite systems (GNSSs),
such as GPS, and Galileo in the near future. EGNOS In a future perspective, as Galileo and EGNOS are user-
improves the accuracy and reliability of GNSS positioning driven programmes striving to meet the evolving needs
information, while also providing a crucial integrity mes- and the increasingly challenging expectations of users in
sage regarding the continuity and availability of a signal. multiple domains, future evolutions of EGNSS services
In addition, EGNOS also transmits an extremely accurate or the creation of new ones are already under study or
universal time signal. EGNOS delivers three core services: development:
Ô Open Service: free and open to the public, the Ô On the upstream side, Galileo continues its deploy-
Open Service is used by mass-market receivers and ment and launched its first so-called “Batch 3”
common user applications. satellites in 2021 to complete and replenish its nom-
inal Galileo first generation constellation by 2025.
Ô Safety of Life Service (SoL): primarily geared towards
In parallel, evolution studies are ongoing to prepare
civil aviation, the SoL service has potential applicabil-
the first batch of the Galileo second-generation
ity to a range of safety-critical transport applications
satellites. In addition, a new generation of EGNOS
which require enhanced and guaranteed perfor-
is currently under development. This new EGNOS
mance and an integrity warning system, including
V3 will introduce new services based on multiple
maritime, rail and road.
frequencies of multiple constellations (GPS, Galileo).
Ô EGNOS Data Access Service (EDAS): offered on
Ô On the service level, many activities are ongoing to
a controlled access basis, EDAS provides ground-
develop additional services for Galileo, including an
based access to EGNOS data through the Internet
Emergency Warning Service (EWS) and an extension
to customers requiring enhanced performance for
of the SAR Return Link Service capabilities.
professional use.
2 .2 COPERNiCUS
Copernicus is the Earth observation component of the The system consists of three main components:
European Union’s Programme. It is a leading provider of
Ô The space component, which delivers data from
Earth observation data, which delivers accurate, timely
a fleet of dedicated observation satellites (the
and reliable information in the field of environment and
“Sentinel satellites”) and from Contributing
security, and supports a wide range of Union policies in
Missions28
domains such as climate action, agriculture, environment,
energy, health, civil protection, humanitarian aid and Ô The in situ component which collects data
transport. Copernicus also serves research, academic, acquired by a multitude of sensors at air-, sea- and
commercial and other private users. The Earth observa- ground-level
tion data delivered by the Copernicus satellites through
Ô The service component, which transforms the wealth
various data access platforms and the data and informa-
of satellite and in situ data into timely and actionable
tion delivered by the six Copernicus services are available
information products, in six thematic areas
to users on a free, full and open basis.
28 Contributing Missions are missions from ESA, their Member States, Eumetsat and other European and international third-party mission operators
that make some of their data available for Copernicus. These satellites help cover the needs of Copernicus Service Providers, particularly for very high
resolution optical and radar data. Contributing Missions play a crucial role in delivering complementary data.

20 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
Sentinel-1 Sentinel-2 Sentinel-3 Sentinel-4
Seven Sentinel satellites are currently operational and two (i.e., Sentinel-4 and 5) to be launched by 2024:a
Sentinel-1 is a polar-orbiting, all-weather, day-and-night radar imaging mission for land and ocean ser-
vices. Sentinel-1A was launched on 3 and Sentinel-1B on 25 . Both were taken into
orbit from Europe’s Spaceport in French Guiana. The mission ended for Sentinel-1B in 2022 and plans
are in force to launch Sentinel-1C as soon as possible.
Sentinel-2 is a polar-orbiting, multispectral high-resolution imaging mission for land monitoring to
provide, for example, imagery of vegetation, soil and water cover, inland waterways and coastal areas.
Sentinel-2 also delivers information used for emergency management. Sentinel-2A was launched on
23 and Sentinel-2B followed on 7 .
Sentinel-3 is a multi-instrument mission to measure sea-surface topography, sea- and land-surface
temperature, ocean colour and land colour with high-end accuracy and reliability. The mission supports
ocean forecasting systems, as well as environmental and climate monitoring. Sentinel-3A was launched
on 16 and Sentinel-3B joined its twin in orbit on 25 .
a Source: ESA - The Sentinel missions
The programme is managed by the European Commission that serve a wide range of user needs related to land and
and implemented in partnership with Member States, the ocean surfaces, atmospheric measurements, air quality, EXHIBIT 5 . OVERVIEW OF THE COPERNICUS EXPANSION MISSIONS.
European Space Agency (ESA), the European Organization emergency situations, and so on.
for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites
Future evolutions of Copernicus infrastructure include six
(EUMETSAT), the European Centre for Medium-Range
Sentinel Expansion missions that will be deployed to
Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), European Union agencies
address European Union policy and gaps vis-à-vis
and Mercator Ocean International. Within this context,
Copernicus user needs and to expand the current capabili-
EUSPA is in charge of communicating, promoting and
ties of the Copernicus Space Component.29
developing the market for data, information and services
offered by Copernicus, while contributing to maximize its
The development and construction of those new mis-
socioeconomic benefits by fostering the development of a
sions, also known as “High Priority Candidate Missions”
competitive and innovative downstream industry.
(HPCM), were awarded to major European satellite manu-
The Sentinel satellites are the Earth observation satellites facturers in 2020. Those missions will contribute to better
of Copernicus and are designed to meet the needs of the respond to the needs of global institutional, scientific and
Copernicus services and their users. There are currently commercial users by providing additional information
six different models of Sentinel satellites, which ensure an regarding anthropogenic CO, the physical characteristics

independent and autonomous Earth observation capacity of the Earth and will also enable improved monitoring of
for Europe with global coverage. They deliver observa- polar regions, as detailed in exhibit 6 on .30
tions (including day and night, all-weather observations)
29 
Earth/Copernicus/Copernicus_Sentinel_Expansion_missions
30 Credit: ESA

2 . DESCRiPTiON AND EVOLUTiON OF THE EU SPACE COMPONENTS | 21
Sentinel-5P Sentinel-5 Sentinel-6
Sentinel-4 is a payload devoted to atmospheric monitoring that will be embarked upon a Meteosat
Third Generation-Sounder (MTG-S) satellite in geostationary orbit to monitor air quality and key trace
gases and aerosols over Europe in support of the Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS)
at high spatial resolution and with a short revisit time.
Sentinel-5 Precursor – also known as Sentinel-5P – is the forerunner of Sentinel-5 to provide timely
data on a multitude of trace gases and aerosols affecting air quality and climate. It has been developed
to reduce data gaps between the Envisat satellite – particularly the Sciamachy instrument – and the
launch of Sentinel-5. Sentinel-5P was taken into orbit on 13 .
Sentinel-5 will be a payload on board a MetOp Second Generation satellite that will perform atmos-
pheric measurements, with high spatio-temporal resolution, relating to air quality, climate forcing,
ozone and UV radiation and providing a daily global coverage.
Sentinel-6 carries a radar altimeter to measure global sea-surface height, primarily for operational ocean-
ography and climate studies. The first satellite was launched into orbit on 21 on a SpaceX
Falcon nine rocket from the Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, United States.
that serve a wide range of user needs related to land and
ocean surfaces, atmospheric measurements, air quality, EXHIBIT 5 . OVERVIEW OF THE COPERNICUS EXPANSION MISSIONS.
emergency situations, and so on.
Future evolutions of Copernicus infrastructure include six
Sentinel Expansion missions that will be deployed to
address European Union policy and gaps vis-à-vis
Copernicus user needs and to expand the current capabili-
ties of the Copernicus Space Component.29
The development and construction of those new mis-
sions, also known as “High Priority Candidate Missions”
(HPCM), were awarded to major European satellite manu-
facturers in 2020. Those missions will contribute to better
respond to the needs of global institutional, scientific and
commercial users by providing additional information
regarding anthropogenic CO, the physical characteristics

of the Earth and will also enable improved monitoring of
polar regions, as detailed in exhibit 6 on .30
Credit: ESA

22 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
EXHIBIT 6 . EXPLANATION OF THE SIX FUTURE COPERNICUS HIGH PRIORITY CANDIDATE MISSIONS AND MAIN
APPLICATIONS.
MiSSiON DESCRiPTiON
Complementing Copernicus Sentinel-2 for applications such as land-cover mapping, it
CHIME: Copernicus
will carry a unique visible to shortwave infrared spectrometer, providing routine hyper-
Hyperspectral Imaging
spectral observations to support new and enhanced services for sustainable agricultural
Mission
and biodiversity management, as well as soil property characterization.
Responding to high-priority requirements from key Arctic user communities, the mission
CIMR: Copernicus will carry a wide-swath conical-scan multi-frequency microwave radiometer to provide
Imaging Microwave observations of sea-surface temperature, sea-ice concentration and sea-surface salinity
Radiometer while also providing unique observation capabilities for a wide range of other sea-ice
parameters.
This mission will carry a near-infrared and shortwave-infrared spectrometer to measure
atmospheric carbon dioxide produced by human activity, providing the European Union
CO2M: Copernicus with a unique and independent source of information, to assess the effectiveness of
Anthropogenic Carbon policy measures, and track their impact towards decarbonization and allowing the verifi-
Dioxide Monitoring cation of compliance with emission reduction targets of the Paris Agreement. The meas-
urements from the mission would reduce current uncertainties in estimates of emissions
of carbon dioxide from the combustion of fossil fuel at national and regional scales.
The CRISTAL satellite mission will contribute to a better understanding of climate pro-
cesses, with its dual-frequency radar altimeter and microwave radiometer to measure
CRISTAL: Copernicus
and monitor sea-ice thickness and overlying snow depth. It will also measure and mon-
Polar Ice and Snow
itor changes in the thickness of ice sheets and glaciers worldwide, while measurements
Topography Altimeter
of sea-ice thickness would support maritime operations in polar oceans and, in the
longer term, would help in the planning of activities in the polar regions.
The satellite mission will respond to the priority requirements of the agricultural user
community, for improving sustainable agricultural productivity at field-scale in a world
of increasing water scarcity and variability. It will carry a high spatial-and temporal res-
LSTM: Copernicus Land olution thermal infrared sensor to provide observations of land-surface temperature.
Surface Temperature Such measurements and derived evapotranspiration indicators are key to understand
Monitoring and respond to climate variability, manage water resources for agricultural production,
predict and monitor droughts and also to address land degradation, hazards such
as fires and volcanoes, coastal and inland water management as well as urban heat
island phenomena.
The satellite mission will provide additional information that cannot be gathered by the
Copernicus Sentinel-1 C-band radar mission, since it would carry an L-band SAR, whose
ROSE-L: L-band
lower frequency L-band signal can penetrate through many natural structures such as
Synthetic Aperture
vegetation, dry snow and ice. It will be used in support of forest management, to mon-
Radar
itor subsidence and soil moisture and to discriminate crop types for precision farming
and food security.
Credits: ESA

2 . DESCRiPTiON AND EVOLUTiON OF THE EU SPACE COMPONENTS | 23
The Copernicus services deliver value-added information products in six thematic areas:
The Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS) continuously monitors the com-
position of the Earth’s atmosphere at global and regional scales and delivers accurate and
ATMOSPHERE reliable information and forecasts related to air pollution and health, ozone hole monitoring,
solar energy, greenhouse gases and climate forcing. ECMWF implements CAMS Under a
Contribution Agreement from the European Commission.
The Copernicus Marine Environment Monitoring Service (CMEMS) provides regular and
systematic reference information and forecasts on the physical and biogeochemical state,
MARiNE variability and dynamics of the ocean and marine ecosystems for the global ocean and the
European regional seas. Mercator Ocean International implements CMEMS on behalf of the
European Commission to implement CMEMS.
The Copernicus Land Monitoring Service (CLMS) delivers geographical and environmen-
tal information on the land cover, which includes land cover characteristics and changes,
land use, vegetation state, water cycle, snow and ice, phenology and earth surface energy
LAND
variables. Since 2022, it also operates the European Ground Motion Service. The CLMS is
jointly implemented by the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre and the European
Environment Agency.
The Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) provides authoritative information about
the past, present and future climate, as well as tools to enable climate change mitigation
CLiMATE
and adaptation strategies by policymakers and businesses. C3S is implemented by the
CHANGE
European Centre for Medium-range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) on behalf of the European
Commission.
The Copernicus Emergency Management Service (CEMS) delivers on-demand geospatial
information for emergency situations and humanitarian crises that arise from natural or man-
EMERGENCY made disasters anywhere in the world and provides early warning and monitoring information
for floods, wildfires and droughts. The CEMS is implemented by the European Commission’s
Joint Research Centre.
The Copernicus Security Service (CSS) is a dedicated service to deliver information that
helps the European Union improve crisis prevention, preparedness and response and to
face security-related challenges in the areas of maritime surveillance, border surveillance and
SECURiTY support to European Union external action. The European Commission has entrusted the
European Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA), the European Border and Coast Guard Agency
(FRONTEX) and EU SatCen with the operation of the different components of the CSS. CSS
services are only accessible to authorized users.
The massive amount of data and information produced in was inaugurated in , and the EUMETSAT-
the context of Copernicus – representing tens of tera- managed EUMETCast platform. In addition to the above
bytes every day – are freely available and accessible to platforms, several Copernicus services have developed
any citizen or any organization around the world thanks their own online platform, which provides users with
to a full, free and open data policy. access to information and forecasting products, associated
documentation and support services for their use. 1,000+
Considering the amount of data to be exploited, tradi- Copernicus products are available to users in total.
tional processing chains have today reached their limits.
Copernicus data are delivered to their users through To fully tap the potential of Copernicus data, in 2017,
a variety of online data access platforms,31 such as the the European Commission launched the development
ESA-managed Copernicus Data Space Ecosystem, which of five cloud-based platforms: the Copernicus Data and
31 Refer to for further information on data access.

24 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
Information Access Services (DIAS). Each DIAS provided better access and exploit the Copernicus Data. The new
access in a virtual environment to all Copernicus data service will be fully operational in after a pro-
and information, as well as tools and utilities to process gressive phase-in period corresponding to the phasing
them in the cloud without having to download massive out of the current data distribution service, leaving time
amounts of data. Building on the experience gained for users to migrate and familiarize themselves with the
with the launch of the DIASes, a new Copernicus data new service interfaces.33 In parallel, EUMETSAT, ECMWF,
access service, referred to as the Copernicus Data Space Mercator Ocean International and EEA operate the
Ecosystem,32 was launched in . This service WEkEO cloud-based platform, which provides access to
is part of the Copernicus activities delegated by the a variety of Sentinel data and to products and informa-
European Commission to the European Space Agency tion from the Copernicus Atmosphere, Ocean and Land
and aims at harmonizing and streamlining the Copernicus Monitoring and Climate Change Services.
Data Access framework through a single platform to
2 .3 GOVSATCOM
“GOVSATCOM is a crucial pillar In a highly fragmented landscape, with telecommunica-
tions services being offered by both nationally owned
of the EU Space Programme.
and commercial satellite infrastructures, a gap currently
While Copernicus and EGNSS
exists between governmental satellite communications
provide the necessary data, (SatCom) needs and available solutions. As a result, key
services and products, growing missions, operations and infrastructures are exposed to
security risks. Access to secure SatCom services is key in
security threats require means
case of network interruptions (e.g., in case of natural or
of communication that is
human-made disasters), unavailability (e.g., in maritime
robustly protected against areas or in the Arctic region), humanitarian missions and
operations of critical infrastructure. This is where the
interference, interception,
European Union GOVSATCOM (The European Union
intrusion, and other risks.
Governmental Satellite Communications) programme
With GOVSATCOM the component comes into play.
European Union will make
Secure satellite communications that can be timely and
another step into securing its
efficiently deployed are critical for governmental security
strategic autonomy in space.’’
actors such as police, border guards, firefighters, civilian
and military crisis forces. SatCom services can assist in
Rodrigo da Costa securely operating response missions, which may not be
EUSPA Executive Director
able to rely on the terrestrial networks or may be subject
to cyberthreats.
The GOVSATCOM programme component, which has
been launched by the European Commission as the
fourth component of the EU Space Programme (cur-
rently in pre-operational phase and the initial service is
foreseen in 2024), ensures the long-term availability of
reliable, secure and cost-effective governmental satellite
32 
33 

2 . DESCRiPTiON AND EVOLUTiON OF THE EU SPACE COMPONENTS | 25
communications services for the European Union and Although the primary focus is on continental Europe and
national public authorities managing security critical its neighbouring regions (Africa, Mediterranean, Middle
missions and infrastructures. East Asia, Arctic, Atlantic), GOVSATCOM services are
planned to support crisis management missions in areas
In this context, GOVSATCOM complements the capabil- according to specific needs from authorized users. They
ities offered by Copernicus, Galileo and EGNOS and will will cover the crisis area with connectivity and will be
provide assured and secured communications. made available in less than 48 hours.
GOVSATCOM is intended to be a user-centred pro- Implemented in close collaboration with EUSPA, the
gramme with a strong security dimension across national European Union Member States, the European External
and civil-military boundaries and is one of the elements of Action Service (EEAS), and with a large number of other
the Global Strategy for the European Union’s Foreign and European Union agencies and actors, GOVSATCOM will
Security Policy of . The Programme will contrib- provide an appropriate level of European independence
ute to the European Union response to hybrid threats and in terms of technologies, assets, operations and ser-
provide support to both the European Union Maritime vices. GOVSATCOM will also provide support to several
Strategy and its Arctic Policy. European Union policies, but above all, it will strengthen
European Union capacity to protect its citizens.
Three main use cases have been identified:
EUSPA is responsible for coordinating the GOVSATCOM
Ô Crisis management, which may include civilian and
user network and analysing user needs and requirements
military by common security and defence missions
to build a user perspective and assess market trends.
and operations, natural and human-made disasters,
EUSPA also generates market and user technology
humanitarian crisis, and maritime emergencies
intelligence focusing on space services for governmental
Ô Surveillance, such as border and maritime surveil- users and synergies between the secure services offered
lance or surveillance of illegal trafficking by the space programme components. Finally, EUSPA
supports the definition of the security baseline and man-
Ô Key infrastructures, including diplomatic work, police
ages the development of the architecture for the secure
communications and digital, energy and space infra-
ground infrastructure, also known as Hub, which will be in
structures, such as Galileo and EGNOS
charge of aggregating the supply and making it available
to the users.
For what concerns the specific use cases related to space
infrastructure, the following are mainly envisaged:
During the first implementation phase running until 2025,
Ô GOVSATCOM for the interconnection of remote EU GOVSATCOM will use the capacities and services
sites of the ground infrastructure (e.g., Galileo provided by existing national SatCom systems and
Sensor Stations). accredited service providers. Access to these existing
infrastructures will be provided through one or several
Ô GOVSATCOM contributing to a better dissemination
operational hubs interconnecting the users and the
of space data (e.g., EGNOS data, contribution to
operations centres of the different SatCom suppliers in a
a better dissemination of Galileo navigation data,
smart and secure manner.
Copernicus data, etc.)
Should the first phase be insufficient to cover the evolv-
GOVSATCOM may also serve specific use cases, such as
ing demand, a second phase might see additional
providing connectivity to the Arctic region, for machine
bespoke space infrastructure or capabilities being devel-
to machine (M2M) and Internet of things (IoT) communi-
oped through one or several public-private partnerships
cations, as well as for remotely piloted aircraft systems
beyond 2025.34
(RPAS) command and control.
34 and 

26 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
2 .4 iRiS2
Acknowledging the changing nature of the space approach for the infrastructure, the system will bring
ecosystem and to better address current and future an unprecedented security to its users, divided in three
challenges, European Union co-legislators reached security levels, among accredited commercial services,
a provisional agreement on a regulation establishing to robust governmental services and to enhanced (high
the European Union secure connectivity programme for degree of confidentiality) services.
the period 2023–202735 on 17 .
The co-legislators then adopted the Regulation (EU) The system will support a large variety of governmental
2023/588 on 15 , establishing a Union Secure applications, mainly in the domains of surveillance (e.g.,
Connectivity Programme (IRIS²/IRSS) for the period from border, maritime), crisis management (e.g., humanitarian
2023 until 2027.36 aid, maritime emergency, civil protection) and connec-
tion and protection of key infrastructures (e.g., secure
The programme sets goals for the European Union to communications for European Union embassies, trans-
deploy a European Union satellite constellation called port and space infrastructure). The system will also allow
“IRIS2” (Infrastructure for Resilience, Interconnectivity and mass-market applications, including mobile and fixed
Security by Satellite), which will enable secure communi- broadband satellite access, satellite trunking for B2B
cation services by 2027. services, satellite access for transportation, reinforced
networks by satellite and satellite broadband and cloud-
IRIS2 will be based on a multi-orbital constellation, com- based services.
bining the benefits offered by low earth (LEO), geosta-
tionary (GEO), and medium earth orbit (MEO) satellites. Complementing Copernicus, Galileo and EGNOS, the
It will comprise a space, ground and user segment, system will also open more opportunities for syner-
designed, built and operated to address a diverse range gies between already existing components of the EU
of services. It is set to provide secure communication Space Programme. For instance, the synergies between
services to the European Union and its Member States as Earth observation, SatNav and SatCom can be useful,
well as broadband connectivity for European citizens, pri- among others, for addressing maritime emergencies and
vate companies and governmental authorities. This new supporting disaster management. Synergies have been
component of the EU Space Programme will put an end demonstrated to play an important role when address-
to dead zones in Europe as well as the whole of Africa ing the SDGs, where EGNSS and Copernicus synergies
using the constellation’s North-South orbits through have been highlighted already in the previous report of
a resilient and ultra-secure space and ground-based this series. Synergies with satellite communications are
system. It may include the development and launch of up deemed even more important.38
to 170 LEO satellites between 2025 and 2027.
EUSPA is already actively involved in building secure
Relying on quantum cryptography through the European satellite communication infrastructure for Europe through
Quantum Communication Infrastructure (EuroQCI),37 the coordination of the first phase of GOVSATCOM on
and enhanced cybersecurity through a secure-by-design which IRIS2 will be based.39
35 
36 
37 
38 Baumgart, André and Vlachopoulou, Eirini Ioanna and Del Rio Vera, Jorge and Di Pippo, Simonetta. (2021). “Space for the Sustainable Development
Goals: mapping the contributions of space-based projects and technologies to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.”
Sustainable Earth. 4. 10.1186/s42055-021-00045-6.
39 

2 . DESCRiPTiON AND EVOLUTiON OF THE EU SPACE COMPONENTS | 27
2 .5 SPACE TRAFFiC MANAGEMENT
The European Union approach to
EXHIBIT 7 . ILLUSTRATION OF SPACE DEBRIS
space traffic management (STM)
To ensure a safe, secure and sustainable use of space, the
EU Space Programme has defined the European Union
approach for space traffic management (STM).
There are various challenges in today’s space:40
Ô More than 1 million debris items larger than 1cm are
orbiting the Earth, an ever-increasing number.
Ô Currently, more than 1.7 million satellites have
been registered with ITU to be launched in the next
decade. This rapid growth of satellite deployments
could further exacerbate the issues of space debris Credit: SST Corporation (2022)
and increase collision risks.
Ô Increasing congestion in space is threatening the
Space situational awareness
viability and security of space infrastructure and
operations. To mitigate the risk of a collision between European
space assets – such as Galileo, EGNOS, Copernicus
Such an environment is likely to increase the risk to space and GOVSATCOM satellites – and other spacecraft and
activities, where collisions could create hundreds of new debris, the European Union established a set of capa-
debris particles and could severely damage or destroy bilities through the space situational awareness (SSA)
active satellites, resulting in significant disruptions to component of the EU Space Programme.
services.
SSA is an essential component of the EU Space
European Union Space Traffic Management (STM)41 Programme. By providing comprehensive knowledge and
encompasses the means and the rules to access, conduct understanding about space hazards, SSA plays a key role
activities in, and return from outer space safely, sustaina- in ensuring the safety and security of the European econ-
bly and securely. STM relates to the following elements:42 omies, societies and citizens who rely on space-based
capabilities and applications such as communication,
Ô Space situational awareness (SSA) activities, includ-
navigation and observation applications.
ing space surveillance and tracking (SST)
Ô Orbital debris mitigation and remediation SSA covers three areas:
Ô Management of space orbits and radio spectrum Ô Space surveillance and tracking (SST) of human-
made objects
Ô The entire life cycle of space operations, including
launch phase, in-orbit operations of spacecraft, and Ô Space weather monitoring and forecast of solar
end-of-life de-orbit operations activity, and other phenomena
Ô Re-entry phase of spacecraft (both controlled and Ô Near-Earth objects (NEO) monitoring (only natural
uncontrolled) space objects)
40 
41 
42 

28 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
EU SST is the operational pillar of the European Union Following the European Commission’s decision of 3 June
approach to space traffic management. It is essential for 2022,43 EUSPA has taken responsibility for the Programme’s
protecting space-based infrastructure, facilities and ser- SST Front Desk operations service. Specifically, this service
vices. EU SST uses a network of ground- and space-based is being implemented by the EUSPA Galileo Security
sensors and other infrastructure to survey, track and pro- Monitoring Centre (GSMC) in Madrid.
tect artificial space objects orbiting Earth. It is composed
of three service functions: The operational information is built by the SST
Partnership made of European Union Member States,
Ô Collision avoidance to mitigate the risk of col- from the SSA assets and national operations centres that
lision between satellites and space objects. are owned by the Member States.
Over 135 public and private organizations from
23 European Union Member States currently benefit The Front Desk is the main interface to deliver SST infor-
from this service mation and services between the SST Partnership and the
users’ community, including activities related to user coordi-
Ô Monitoring atmospheric re-entries of de-orbited
nation, service performance, engagement and promotion.
objects, controlled or non-controlled
Ô Fragmentations in orbit to monitor the creation of In addition to its SST Front Desk responsibilities, EUSPA
space debris caused by fragmentations of satellites contributes to the system’s security monitoring, par-
(generally after the end-of-life) ticularly establishing the security requirements needed
to shape the SST network in support of the European
Commission and the EU SST Partnership.44
Fact
Over 268 satellites were monitored,
+/- 300,000 measurements per
day performed, and 435 collision
avoidance events and high interest
events (more than 1 per day)
recorded by EU SST in 2021
43 
44 

3 . HOW EU SPACE
ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED
SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES
3 .1 iNTRODUCTiON AND METHODOLOGY
Space-based data and services have the potential to pro- which the almost 7 billion GNSS receivers installed (almost
vide support for addressing all the sustainability challenges as many GNSS receivers as persons) nowadays fail to pro-
previously identified and thus contribute to the achieve- vide relevant socioeconomic benefits directly to their users,
ment of the objectives, guidelines and recommendations to the related industry, and thus to society as a whole.
featured in the "Space2030" Agenda, including regional Going forward, GNSS and Earth observation markets are
strategies, such as the European Union's Green Deal. set to become even more relevant, with the related global
GNSS- and Earth observation-enabled revenues set to
Earth observation is becoming more and more used as reach almost €500 billion by 2031 (they were around €200
a key source of information, as it has undisputed advan- billion in 2021) according to the latest EUSPA estimation.
tages for data-driven decision-making. Data acquired
through satellites are systematic and consistent, provid- Finally, SatCom can underpin, secure and complement
ing a source of reproduceable information from a very a myriad of GNSS/Earth observation applications,
limited set of sensors under the scrutiny of the scientific addressing different challenges. For example, when
community. Additionally, using Earth observation is disaster strikes and ground stations are destroyed or in
cost-effective as opposed to time-intensive or sometimes a communications-denied environment, SatCom can be
even inaccurate manual reporting or reporting based used to coordinate emergency response actors.
on a plethora of sensors, each of which being a possible
source of inaccuracies. Furthermore, satellites can assess Within this context, EU Space provides a comprehensive
phenomena remotely, even in regions where the physical contribution:
access of people is difficult, for example, for geographical
Ô Copernicus, with over 20 TB of geodata delivered
or political reasons.
every day, is the largest Earth observation data
provider and the third biggest data provider in the
Satellite navigation data, on the other hand, has become,
world
in the last decades, a somewhat hidden but fundamental
component of many every day applications: since May
Ô EGNSS
2000, when the accuracy-degrading selective availability
on the GPS navigation signals was removed, the market • EGNOS, which provides improved GNSS (GPS and
for GNSS applications services and applications continues GPS + Galileo in the near future) positioning and
to bloom. From transportation to consumer solutions, integrity, addressing the safety of life navigation
from agriculture to timing and emergency management to aviation or location-based services for maritime
applications, there is basically no field of application in and land-based users over Europe

30 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
EXHIBIT 8 . THE EUSPA EO AND GNSS MARKET SEGMENTATION
17 62 184
MARKET APPLiCATiON SPECIFIC
SEGMENTS DOMAiNS APPLICATIONS
AGRiCULTURE • Biomass monitoring
AViATiON AND DRONES
• Deforestation/degradation
BiODiVERSiTY, ECOSYSTEMS monitoring
AND NATURAL CAPiTAL Exemplicative:
• Forest inventory monitoring
FORESTRY
CiMATE SERViCES
• Forest vegetation health
CONSUMER SOLUTiONS, monitoring
TOURiSM AND HEALTH
• Illegal logging monitoring
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
AND HUMANiTARiAN AiD • Automatic steering
ENERGY AND RAW MATERiALS • Forest exploitation
ENViRONMENTAL certification
MONiTORiNG
• Forestry asset management
FiSHERiES AND AQUACULTURE
• Forestry machinery guidance
FORESTRY
iNFRASTRUCTURE
iNSURANCE AND FiNANCE
MARiTiME AND iNLAND
WATERWAYS
RAiL
ROAD AND AUTOMOTiVE
SPACE
URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND
CULTURAL HERiTAGE
• Galileo, which is the only global satellite navi- Ô Other EU Space components and services in the
gation system intended primarily for civilian use future, such as STM, EWS or IRIS2 will further com-
with an offer of services designed for commercial plement and enhance the EU Space capabilities
use rather than for military purposes. Galileo
offers unique global and free services, such as This section aims to assess, in a descriptive manner and
OS-NMA, which increases robustness to spoofing, by means of use cases, how the use of EU Space (EGNSS
HAS, which will provide high-accuracy service at a and/or Copernicus and/or GOVSATCOM) contribute to
global scale or SAR, which helps to quickly locate overcoming the challenges of a world of 8 billion people.
people in distress while they are ensured their For each of the challenges identified in section 1.2. and
request for help has been received following the logic depicted in the exhibit 9 on the next
page, following items are provided:
Ô GOVSATCOM, will soon provide secure and cost-
efficient communications capabilities to the European Ô An introduction characterizes the challenge by
Union and its Member States, including national providing information of current and future pros-
security actors and European Union agencies and pects regarding the particular challenge consid-
institutions, supporting crisis management (natural or ering the current trends are maintained and what
human-made disasters, humanitarian crises, and mari- is the risk associated with a “no action scenario”.
time emergencies), maritime or border surveillance or Furthermore, a general introduction explaining what
support key infrastructure operation and monitoring space can offer in general is provided, including a

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 31
EXHIBIT 9 . METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH
1 2 3
CHALLENGE ASSESSMENT OF EXEMPLiFiCATiON
CHARACTERiZATiON EU SPACE CONTRiBUTiON OF SPECiFiC
EU SPACE
CONTRiBUTiON
Definition of the chal- A . SERVICE LEVEL ANALYSIS
lenges, relation with
Qualitative assessment of how relevant
global agendas, risks Provision of use cases
are EGNSS, Copernicus, GOVSATCOM
associated with a no risk able to demonstrate
and their individual services in tackling
scenario and a high lev- EGNSS and Copernicus
the challenges
el explanation of space relevance
contribution [§“Use cases”]
[§“Introduction”] B . APPLICATION LEVEL ANALYSIS
[§“EU space specific support”]
Identification of the applications enabled
by EGNSS and/or Copernicus able to
support the challenges fulfillment
non-exhaustive description of what the different Report provides an exhaustive list of applications
technologies could do in view of the challenge. underpinned by EU Space which is used to under-
stand where the contribution of the four EU Space
Ô The second part emphasizes the “EU Space specific
components is stronger. Additionally, the EUSPA
support” and assesses the EU Space contribution to
Market Report features 17 market segments, each
each sustainable challenge, followed by a dedicated
addressing users as well as providers with different
analysis performed at two levels:
characteristics and needs, trying to minimize overlap.
• EU Space component level, analysing EGNSS The market segments are a way of understanding
(Galileo and EGNOS), Copernicus and GOVSATCOM the different economic dimensions underpinning
components, including the analysis of their ser- the challenges and are by no means unique.
vices, by assessing the relevance and applicability
of the individual services of three EU Space com- Ô Finally, the last section provides real-life examples of
ponents (EGNSS, Copernicus and GOVSATCOM45) EGNSS, Copernicus and/or GOVSATCOM usage by
for the identified challenges; The relevance of means of relevant use cases, including the ones from
the different EU Space components services is European Union-supported research and design
qualitatively assessed according to their relevance initiatives such as H2020 and Horizon Europe,48 pro-
for the challenge using different criteria such as viding tangible examples of the use of EGNSS and
strategic value, growth potential, socioeconomic Copernicus.
benefits, etc.
• Application level,46 by identifying EGNSS- and Exhibit 9 above provides a representation of the three
Copernicus-based applications and their relevance steps methodology approach used to showcase the
and contribution to ‘’8 billion world’’ challenges. EU Space contribution with regard to the selected
This analysis leverage uses the 2022 EUSPA EO and challenges.
GNSS Market Report 47 as a taxonomy. The Market
45 Based on preliminary mapping of potential GOVSATCOM applications; This analysis includes not only operational services but also services that will be
rolled out soon, expanding the applicability of satellite communication services.
46 While analysis at the space components/services level assesses also the GOVSATCOM contribution, the one at application level is only focusing on
EGNSS and Copernicus as only these two components were included in EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report.
47 Within this classification, the GNSS and Earth observation market is segmented in groups called “market segment” underpinning homogeneous fea-
tures (e.g., type of users, requirements, etc). Each market segment is further segmented in application domains (i.e., families of homogenous applica-
tions) and specific applications.
48 More details are available at: 
zon-europe_en

32 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
EXHIBIT 10 . QUALITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF THE RELEVANCE OF EU SPACE COMPONENTS SERVICES FOR THE
IDENTIFIED CHALLENGES (STEP 2.A)
Note: For the sake of completeness and simplicity, access to Copernicus open data, given its importance for the development of downstream space-
based applications and services, was added at the level of the Copernicus Services.
nt
F o o d s ec urity Wat er m a n a E g n e a v m n ir e d o n n c t m l i m e n a t t a e l c D i m h i a s a p a n n a s g r d c t e e e t s e r p m m o e n a r s n g e a e g n M e cy m i g e r ati o n Ur b a niz ati o n E n er gy
Open Service
HAS
OS-NMA
CAS
PRS
SAR
OS
SoL
EDAS
CLMS
CMEMS
CAMS
C3S
CEMS
CSS
Copernicus data
GOVSATCOM
#EUSpace
Synergies
Limited relevance/contribution Significant relevance/contribution

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 33
The overview of the relevance of individual services of Exhibit 12 below further details how the different market
EU Space components (EGNSS, Copernicus, GOVSATCOM) segments are interlinked with the challenges. Each
for all the identified challenges is shown in exhibit 10, while market segment is underpinned by a variable number of
in the following sections, the analysis of the relevance of applications. To get a better idea of the interlinkages, all
EU Space components services is additionally underpinned 17 EUSPA market segments are identified in the x-axis,
by some examples of products and applicability. while the y-axis gives information about the total number
of applications per market segment (blue bar). In addi-
As can be seen in exhibit 10, EGNSS (Galileo and EGNOS tion, a grey bar has been added to show the number of
together) and Copernicus support all seven identified specific applications of each segment that could contrib-
challenges, while GOVSATCOM contributes to six chal- ute towards solving the challenges. Moreover, market
lenges. Indeed, each of the EU Space components can segments have been sorted, from left to right, according
greatly contribute to the "8 billion world" challenges to the percentage of applications contributing towards
separately, however, the full potential is unleashed by its solving the challenges, therefore, giving an indication of
synergies and complementarity. the degree of involvement of each market segment.
For example, the agriculture market segment provides a
Zooming in on the services of the four EU Space higher number of applications, and they can all be used to
Programme components (EGNSS, Copernicus, address the challenge in different ways, making this a key
GOVSATCOM, step 2.A), the analysis revealed that four market segment. This information can help decision and
services (Galileo Open Service, Copernicus C3S and CEMS policymakers in providing incentives for the development
but also Copernicus data) contribute (significant rele- of this specific market segment to build resilience given
vance/contribution) to tackling all seven challenges and its central role. Only applications with a direct impact in
that 10 of the 17 services (>55 per cent) analysed support addressing the challenges have been considered.
for at least four challenges. More importantly, the joint
use of the four EU Space components services (synergies
and complementarity) contributes to all the challenges .
Concerning applications and challenges, this report has
considered the 184 applications featured in the EUSPA EXHIBIT 11 . A GENERAL OVERVIEW OF THE
ASSESSMENT OF EU SPACE
Market Report and 118 of those contribute to addressing
CONTRIBUTION TO SUSTAINABLE
the seven challenges, by using EGNSS and/or Copernicus CHALLENGES PERFORMED AT THE
products, eventually together with other GNSS and Earth MARKET SEGMENT AND APPLICATION
LEVEL (STEP 2.B), LEVERAGING THE
observation services. Those applications touch on 16 of
OUTCOME OF THE EUSPA EO AND GNSS
the 17 market segments considered. Therefore, address- MARKET REPORT 2022
ing the "8 billion world" challenges requires almost the
full spectrum of providers and will equally impact the full
spectrum of users, as challenges are multifaced. 27
Synergic
EO and GNSS
Specifically, it is worth noting how Earth observation- and applications applications 52
Copernicus-based solutions are especially effective in not adressing Copernicus
the challenges applications
addressing the challenges: indeed, 52 Earth observation/ 39
Copernicus applications out of the overall 66 Earth obser- EGNSS
applications
vation applications (i.e. around 79 per cent of the total) 66
resulted as enablers for tackling "8 billion world" chal-
lenges, while only 50 per cent of the GNSS and EGNSS 118
applications have been assessed as capable of doing so.
Such an outcome is, however, largely anticipated and in
EO and GNSS applications
line with what is presented in exhibit 10, given the direct adressing the challenges
relevance of Copernicus products and information for
tackling environment-related challenges.

34 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
EXHIBIT 12 . CONTRIBUTION OF EACH EUSPA MARKET REPORT MARKET SEGMENT TO SUPPORTING THE
SEVEN SUSTAINABILITY CHALLENGES (STEP 2.B)
100 100 100 100 100 100 100
20 100%
19 19
18 85
80%
15 15
68 67
13 13 13 13

12 12 60%

9 9
8 40%
33 33

6 6

5 5 5 5 5

20%
3 3 3

Bio 0 d A i g ve ri r c a s u i n t l y t d u , n e re c a o tu s r y a s l t e ca m C p E l s i i m t m a e l a r t g e a e s n n e d c r y v h i m c u E e m a n s n v a a i n r g o it e n a m r m ia e e n n n t a t a i F d l i s m he o r n ie it s o a ri n n d g aquacultu In re f U ra r s a b t n r a d u n c c d t u u e l r v t e u e r lo a C l p o h m n e s t e r o u i n t u m a t r g i e s e E r m n s e o a r l n g u d y ti o a h n n e s d a , l t r h a w materials R F o o a r d es a t n ry d auto motive Insura R n a c il e an A d v fi ia n t a io n n c e and dr i o n M n la e a n s r d it i w m a e te a r n w d a ys Space 0%
# of EUSPA Market Report applications # of EUSPA Market Report applications addressing the 7 challenges Related %
Indirect impacts have been discarded, which is why the be further elaborated in the following sections. For each
market space segment, although central to this report challenge two points are described:
from the market perspective, is the least important as it
Ô The relevance at the user/application level of
needs the application layer on top to be connected to the
EGNSS, Copernicus and their synergetic usage
challenges. Therefore, it only has indirect links and none
of their applications have a direct positive impact on the Ô An exemplificative list of the main related
challenges.49 applications
Finally, exhibit 13 provides an overall summary of EU The following sections of the present report provide addi-
Space contributions to the fulfilment of the seven sus- tional details on how EU Space (EGNSS, Copernicus and
tainable challenges, including a snapshot with examples GOVSATCOM) contributes to the fulfilment of each of the
of applications. The analysis at the application level will seven sustainable challenges.
49 It should be noted, however, that this representation is highly dependent on the granularity level of the market segmentation and its applications
adopted, and might penalize those market segments that include a relatively higher number of specific applications, such as maritime and aviation.

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 35
SUSTAiNABiLiTY
CHALLENGE
oelilaG SONGE
sucinrepoC
MOCTASVOG
seigrenyS
EXHIBIT 13 . OVERVIEW OF EU SPACE CONTRIBUTION TO THE FULFILMENT OF THE SEVEN SUSTAINABLE
CHALLENGES, INCLUDING A SNAPSHOT WITH EXAMPLES OF APPLICATIONS
EXAMPLE OF MAIN APPLICATIONS
USING EUSPA MARKET REPORT TAXONOMY
Disaster management including
preparedness,
rapid mapping and
post-event analysis
Monitoring and management of refugee camps
Migration
Telematics for humanitarian aid
Earth observation human displacement monitoring
Dark vessel monitoring
Used as a common communication channel for various actors
(e.g., land and sea border surveillance)
Earth observation-based climate modelling
GNSS-based climate modelling
Ecosystems monitoring (terrestrial, coastal, snow and ice)
Environmental impact monitoring
Environmental
Climate change mitigation and adaptation
impact and
Environmental resources management
climate change
Air quality and renewables
Biomass monitoring
Maritime surveillance and ship detection
Support to multiple crisis management zones
Support for renewable energy: site selection, planning and
monitoring
Power plant design optimization, assessment potential and
forecast,
Energy network conditions monitoring
Energy
Phasor measurement units (PMU) timing in systems providing
frequent measurements relevant to the network status
Remote control of renewable energy plants
Energy network operation and (conditions) monitoring for grid
operators or renewable energy
GNSS-enabled ocean monitoring buoys
Beacons for SAR operations in aviation, land and sea
Support for civil protection, emergency management and
Disaster humanitarian aid:
management Disaster [e.g., landslides, floods, wildfires] preparedness,
and emergency Disaster early warning
response Disaster rapid mapping
Post-event analysis
Coordination of emergency response actors in communications-
denied environment
continued
Legend: EO application
GNSS application
Low relevance/contribution
GOVSATCOM application
Synergetic application
Significant relevance/contribution
(combined use of EO and GNSS)

36 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
SUSTAiNABiLiTY
CHALLENGE
oelilaG SONGE
sucinrepoC
MOCTASVOG
seigrenyS
EXHIBIT 13 . OVERVIEW OF EU SPACE CONTRIBUTION TO THE FULFILMENT OF THE SEVEN SUSTAINABLE
CHALLENGES, INCLUDING A SNAPSHOT WITH EXAMPLES OF APPLICATIONS (continued)
EXAMPLE OF MAIN APPLICATIONS
USING EUSPA MARKET REPORT TAXONOMY
Urban modelling, 3D modelling, digital twins
Urban planning
Monitoring urban environment such as
air, heat islands and
greening
Urbanization Smart cities: smart management for streetlights and waste
management
Surveying and mapping
Navigation for smartphone users
Settlements and population monitoring
Maintaining public order and ensuring public safety
Agriculture monitoring such as
soil condition monitoring
crop yield forecasting and
carbon capture
Food security Climate services
Smart agriculture operation management including asset
monitoring and machinery guidance
Smart farm management systems
Precision irrigation
Water ecosystems monitoring (including suspended particulate
matter and algal blooms)
Early warning and rapid mapping for urban flooding
Water
Marine pollution monitoring
management
Aquaculture operations optimization
Early warning systems (e.g., sensors, monitoring)
Pollution detection
Legend: EO application
GNSS application
Low relevance/contribution
GOVSATCOM application
Synergetic application
Significant relevance/contribution
(combined use of EO and GNSS)

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 37
3 .2 THE FOOD SECURiTY CHALLENGE AND THE ROLE
OF EU SPACE
3 .2 .1 introduction “Ending hunger is within
our reach. There is enough
After remaining unchanged since 2015, the prevalence
of malnutrition jumped from 8.0 to 9.3 per cent from food in our world now for
2019 to 2020 and rose at a slower pace in 2021 to
everyone, if we act together.”
9.8 per cent. Between 702 and 828 million people were
affected by hunger in 2021. The number has grown by
António Guterres,
about 150 million since the outbreak of the COVID-19
Secretary-General of the United Nations
pandemic – 103 million more people between 2019 and
2020 and 46 million more in 2021. Projections are that
nearly 670 million people will still be facing hunger in
2030 – 8 per cent of the world population, which is the
same as in 2015 when the 2030 Agenda was launched. largely concentrates on staple foods, dairy and other
The numbers show persistent regional disparities, with animal source protein-rich foods, especially in high- and
Africa bearing the heaviest burden. One in five people upper-middle-income countries. Rice, sugar and meats of
in Africa (20.2 per cent of the population) was facing various types are the foods most incentivized worldwide,
hunger in 2021, compared to 9.1 per cent in Asia, 8.6 per while fruits and vegetables are less supported overall, or
cent in Latin America and the Caribbean, 5.8 per cent in even penalized in some low-income countries. There are
Oceania, and less than 2.5 per cent in Northern America many elements of traditional farming knowledge that,
and Europe. After increasing from 2019 to 2020 in most enriched by the latest scientific knowledge, can support
of Africa, Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean, productive food systems through sound and sustainable
the prevalence of undernourishment continued to rise soil, land, water, nutrient and pest management, and the
in 2021 in most subregions, but more slowly. more extensive use of organic fertilizers.
As the world population continues to grow, much more In the fight to reduce food insecurity, space technologies
effort and innovation will be urgently needed to sustain- can be an extremely helpful ally.
ably increase agricultural production, improve the global
supply chain, decrease food losses and waste, and ensure
that all who are suffering from hunger and malnutrition
have access to nutritious food. Land, healthy soils, water
and plant genetic resources are key inputs into food
Fact
production, and their growing scarcity in many parts of
the world makes it imperative to use and manage them
sustainably. Boosting yields on existing agricultural lands,
including restoration of degraded lands, through sustain-
In 2021, the prices of
able agricultural practices would also relieve pressure to
fertilizers rose 80%.
clear forests for agricultural production. Wise manage-
ment of scarce water through improved irrigation and
In 2022, from January until
storage technologies, combined with the development
April, fertilizer prices
of new drought-resistant crop varieties, can contribute to
sustaining drylands productivity.
rose nearly 30%.
In low-income countries but also in some lower-middle-
income countries agriculture is key for the economy,
jobs and livelihoods. Support for agricultural production

38 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
3 .2 .2 Food security and space 3 .2 .3 EU Space specific support
Monitoring crop growth and health and producing early Space technologies, including EGNSS and Copernicus,
forecasts of planted crops are of immense importance can help tackle the food security challenge in multiple
for planners and policymakers at the international and ways. In a short-term perspective, the use of satellite
national level in areas related to food security. Reliable, data and technologies in agriculture and fisheries has the
timely and credible information enables planners and potential to boost the related outputs while reducing
decision makers to handle deficits or surpluses of food the environmental footprint. Nevertheless, and to some
crops in a given year in an optimal manner. Up-to- extent even more importantly, the role of satellite data
date and reliable national agricultural statistics can be such those from Earth observation also supports initia-
obtained through the establishment of an adequate, tives aimed at fighting climate change and improving soil
periodic national agricultural survey based on probability- health, thus ensuring food security in the long run.
sampling methods, image classification and adherence to
well-defined and reproducible techniques. Keeping in mind this twofold aspect, the list of the GNSS/
Galileo- and Earth observation/Copernicus-related appli-
Spectral analysis of high-resolution satellite images ena- cations capable of supporting food security are several
bles the real-time monitoring of crop vegetation indices and relate to four market domains, following the taxon-
for different fields and crops as well as the identification omy featured in the EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report:
and tracking of positive and negative dynamics of crop agriculture, climate services, biodiversity, ecosystems and
development. Such dynamics, revealed by differences in natural capital, and fisheries and aquaculture.
vegetation indices, indicate imbalances in development
within the same culture or field. In addition to crop health In the agricultural domain, EGNSS and Copernicus are
and change detection, space-based platforms provide key enablers for operations management, increasing the
inputs for environmental analysis, irrigated landscape productivity of agricultural cultivation through informed
mapping, yield determination and soil analysis. All these management processes, improving the efficiency of the
techniques, when integrated in decision-making models, utilization of existing assets, as well as of natural and
may inform of the necessity of specific agricultural inter- anthropogenic resources (including land, seeds, fertilizers,
ventions in particular field zones. plant protection agents and water), enabling applications
such as farm machinery guidance, precision irrigation and
The use of a number of ancillary data, including the variable rate application. Decisions are supported by soft-
integral use of remotely sensed data, is a key component ware services based on data generated by space systems
in effective monitoring of agricultural production. Earth (GNSS and Earth observation), as well as by terrestrial
observation data is now used regularly to monitor the technologies.
crop season, and satellite imagery coverage integrated
with field surveys allows the quantification of areas Satellite-based Earth observation is the most accessible
planted and to be harvested during crop seasons. way to acquire information on site-specific crop prop-
erties over broad areas, generating intelligence around
As mentioned earlier, the price of fertilizers is increasing natural resource monitoring. In combination with agro-
dramatically. The use of GNSS for planting crops can also ecological crop growth and management models, Earth
determine where to apply fertilizers, thereby reducing observation data can increase the efficiency of farming
their consumption as well as that of fuel and pesticides. operations. The Copernicus Land Monitoring System
In fact, it is estimated that using Earth observation and (CLMS) can also provide useful inputs, as it delivers
GNSS together can contribute to increasing yields by important information on the vegetation, the water cycle
more than 10 per cent and reducing consumption of and the energy budget (e.g., crop yield forecasting and
inputs such as fuel, fertilizer and pesticides by up to soil condition monitoring).
20 per cent.
EGNSS is already being used for precision farming,
helping optimize the space between planted seeds and
the use of fertilizers to boost productivity. The addition
of Earth observation is a perfect complement to further

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 39
enhance agriculture productivity: relevant data obtained fisheries relates to improving safety at sea for fishing
via remote sensing are of major help to farmers. The vessels and their crews by using GNSS-enabled navi-
combination of EGNSS and Earth observation data can gation devices as well as AIS for collision avoidance.
help farmers increase yields by more than 10 per cent,
Ô In the field of aquaculture, Earth observation-based
and reduce input costs such as fertilizer, fuel and pesti-
applications support site selection for future fish
cides by 10 to 20 per cent.50
farms (with input of environmental conditions, fore-
casts and predictions, often in the form of maritime
In addition, information regarding soil moisture can sup-
spatial planning products) and aquaculture opera-
port best practices regarding the use of water resources,
tions by determining water quality in lakes and reser-
especially in areas/periods of the year when these are
voirs or in coastal areas. Both Earth observation and
scarce. Similarly, images taken by satellites and comple-
GNSS applications contribute to the optimization
mented by EGNSS can be used to evaluate and provide
and planning of aquaculture operations by providing
early warnings concerning drought and crop yields, giving
a host of information to aquafarmers.
governments a tool to tackle famine in a timely fashion.
Finally, Copernicus data, combined with data from
Finally, although not specifically listed among the EU
meteorological satellites, also supports the elaboration of
Space applications capable of helping to tackle the food
weather services for agriculture.
security challenge, it is worth noting that EGNSS consti-
tutes a vital building block of the food supply chain when
The use of Galileo and Copernicus is also proving to be
it comes to the logistic value chain, as a relevant enabler
useful for livestock management: Galileo-enabled collars
of transportation activities by air, land or sea. For exam-
– used to monitor livestock – support the activities of the
ple, GNSS is helpful in tracking the origin of agriculture
breeders while Earth observation/Copernicus data help
and fisheries products.
them identify the most suitable grazing. Similarly, natural
scientists and researchers make use of GNSS and Earth
While the environmental and climate change challenge is
observation to ensure the sustainable reproduction of
specifically described in a separate chapter, at a second
domesticated animals, as well as wild species.
and indirect level, Copernicus and EGNSS have the
potential to ensure food security in a long-term perspec-
Also, in the fisheries and aquaculture domain, the use of
tive by guaranteeing the sustainability of the related
EU Space data can be differentiated into short and long-
natural resources:
term improvements. From a short-term viewpoint, EU
Space data contribute strongly to output improvement: Ô Within biodiversity, ecosystems and natural capital
• Copernicus helps to further our understanding
Ô Within fisheries, Earth observation/Copernicus is
of the health of terrestrial, marine and coastal
used to support the assessment of fish stocks and
ecosystems and the existing and potential stress-
to potentially optimize fishing efforts (i.e., catch
ors therein, thus paving the way towards more
optimization). Optical and radar data is also used
concrete and effective measures against ecosys-
to trace and “see” fishing vessels and assess the
tem and biodiversity loss. While most biodiversity
legality of their actions, thus also helping to prevent
assessments are still performed on-site, the use of
and combat illegal, unreported and unregulated
Earth observation in the field is growing in view of
(IUU) fishing, also leveraging the maritime surveil-
its scalability.
lance component of the Copernicus Security Service.
GNSS also contributes to IUU detection with its • Galileo-enabled wearables are used to geolocate
traditional use in the field, namely tracking the loca- animals for the purposes of monitoring migrations,
tion of vessels through the Automatic Identification habitats and behaviours. These are becoming
System (AIS) and Vessel Monitoring System (VMS). more accurate and additional biodiversity applica-
An additional relevant application of GNSS data for tions are emerging (e.g., botanical mapping).
50 European Commission, D 3.1. Current and future agricultural practices and technologies which affect fuel efficiency, European Parliament, Precision
Agriculture: an opportunity for EU farmers – potential support with the CAP 2014- 2020 study, Policy Department B, Directorate-General for Internal
Policies (Brussels, 2014): 

40 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
Ô • C li T w d m h a e a e t l a l t - e r e f o o s s l t e r e a r c b o v li f l i m i c s E e h a a s e t r e d th m a o n o b d d s e e co l r l v i n n a t g t r i i . o b T n u h t i e e n s i c n w l t im e it g h a r t i a e n t v i s o a e n l r u v a o ic b f e le s is M o m i s n o n a o - c c i s s a n a o t p l l y m o l a e f v c e d a i t t h i l y s n id e p - f b r a s f a u c o p s i e r l a t d r c d d u i e n e i c v - g v t b i u d e a a r l e o e s re e p t t o d o i e n d e s d b o l e c i e m l o u e i t d u n in i n o a p n t n t e r l e a s i e e c p t d s e h . r e e e a A d s n g d e t d a d n o p t a i t e r r i e b o e d d e n t a u t a h b w c l e e o e e r v e f e t f e f h n o o e r r r e t e s l y EXHIBIT 14 . EXAMPLES OO OO OO O pp pp pp F ee ee ee nn nn nn R SS SS SS E ee ee ee L rr rr rr HH vv vv vv E ii ii ii AA cc cc cc V ee S e S e ee AN FF FF FF FF FF C oo oo oo oo oo oo oo oo oo oo E dd dd dd dd dd ss ss ss ss ss ee ee ee ee ee O cc cc cc cc cc uu uu uu uu uu rr rr rr rr rr F ii ii ii ii ii tt tt tt tt tt yy yy yy yy yy WW WW WW WW WW E aa aa aa aa aa tt tt tt tt tt U ee ee ee ee ee • rr rr rr rr rr mm mm mm mm mm S aa aa aa aa aa nn nn nn nn nn O p a Paa aa aa aa aa s EE EE EE EE EE gg gg gg gg gg o A p nn nn nn nn nn ee ee ee ee ee aa aa aa aa aa s R vv vv vv vv vv mm mm mm mm mm e nn nn nn nn nn C ii ii ii ii ii i rr rr rr rr rr ee ee ee ee ee dd dd dd dd dd T oo oo oo oo oo t n nn nn nn nn nn nn nn nn nn nn i E cc cc cc cc cc K tt tt tt tt tt o mm mm mm mm mm ll ll ll ll ll ii ii ii ii ii S mm mm mm mm mm ee ee ee ee ee n C o nn nn nn nn nn e aa aa aa aa aa i tt tt tt tt tt tt tt tt tt tt n r aa aa aa aa aa ee ee ee ee ee r O ll ll ll ll ll v cc cc cc cc cc g DD DD DD DD DD ii ii ii ii ii P mm mm mm mm mm hh hh hh hh hh i ii ii ii ii ii M aa aa aa aa aa , c ss ss ss ss ssaa aa aa aa aa P pp pp pp pp pp aa aa aa aa aa nn nn nn nn nn nn nn nn nn nn e aa aa aa aa aa i ss ss ss ss ss gg gg gg gg gg rr rr rr rr rr P dd dd dd dd dd cc cc cc cc cc n tt tt tt tt tt ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee P , ee ee ee ee ee tt tt tt tt tt ss ss ss ss ss ee ee ee ee ee - c rr rr rr rr rr pp pp pp pp pp mm mm mm mm mm u R Omm mm mm mm mm oo oo oo oo oo r ee ee ee ee eenn nn nn nn nn s e T aa aa aa aa aa rr rr rr rr rrss ss ss ss ss nn nn nn nn nn gg gg gg gg gg e N ee ee ee ee ee a K aa aa aa aa aaee ee ee ee ee d gg gg gg gg gg s nn nn nn nn nn , E MM MM MM MM MM ee ee ee ee ee cc cc cc cc cc e yy yy yy yy yy mm mm mm mm mm u i ii ii ii ii ii N gg gg gg gg gg s n ee ee ee ee ee s rr rr rr rr rr nn nn nn nn nn aa aa aa aa aa t e tt tt tt tt tt T tt tt tt tt tt G ii ii ii ii ii h oo oo oo oo oo d S nn nn nn nn nn e N f S S p o UU UU UU UU UU S E e r rr rr rr rr rr bb bb bb bb bb r R a aa aa aa aa aa m f nn nn nn nn nn o V ii ii ii ii ii m zz zz zz zz zz u aa aa aa aa aa r I tt tt tt tt tt l m C ii ii ii ii ii y t oo oo oo oo oo i nn nn nn nn nn r - a E i c a EE EE EE EE EE n S o nn nn nn nn nn d c ee ee ee ee ee n rr rr rr rr rr e F gg gg gg gg gg o s yy yy yy yy yy O f t o e a f R l p l a a p u F ti g l O o ic m n a O e t a i n D o n t n d a S s t m i E s o u u C n c l t U h t i e - R f a c r I s e h T q n m Y i u q a e u c n h e c i s n y s e u ch
Copernicus with innovative technologies and the OOppeenn SSeerrvviiccee
countries with significant development in their use of HHAASS guidance, variable rate applications, UAVs, etc. It can also be used for
HHAASS
number of policies requiring close monitoring is OOppeeOOnn SSSS--eeNNrrvvMMiiccAAee livestock tracking
space, and those without. For example, capacity-building OOSS--NN HH MM AA AA SS
set to further boost the market of Earth observa- OOSS--NNMMAA • OS-NMA and CAS increase robustness to spoofing to various applica-
tion applications related to climate resilience and initiatives have been kicked off to develop the needed OOSS--NN HH CC CC MM AA AAAA AA SS SSSS tions, including autonomous machinery
tools for visualization and analysis of data, with special CCAASS • HAS offers global and free-of-charge 20cm high-accuracy positioning
adaptation. OOSS--NNPPMMRRAASS
CCAASS service for machine guidance applications, field delineation, UAVs, geo-
emphasis on the specificities of the regions (and therefore PPRRSS
PPRRSS tagging photos, etc.
• Galileo has limited but important application best achieved by involving local specialists). CCSS PP AAAA RR RR SS SS
SSAARR
in the climate services domain. The technology SS PP AA RR RR SS
SSOOAARRSS
supports a range of geodetic applications that Within this context, GEOGLAM – the Group on Earth OOSS • OS and EDAS offer real-time and free-of-charge improved GPS
SSOOAARRSS (GPS + Galileo in future) positioning service over Europe. An affordable
measure properties of the earth (magnetic field, Observations Global Agricultural Monitoring Initiative,52 SSooLL
OOSS and entry-level solution for precision agriculture
SSooLL
atmosphere) with direct impact on the Earth’s whose goal is to improve food security by producing SSooLL
EEDDOOAASSSS
SSooLL
climate. GNSS is expected to play an increasing and disseminating information on agricultural conditions EEDDAASS
EEDDAASS
role in the growing market of climate modelling. and outlooks of production at national, regional and CCEEDDLL SS MMAA oo SSSS LL
CCLLMMSS
global scales – produce several ground validated crop CCEEDDLLMMAASSSS • Copernicus Sentinel-1 and -2 data have brought about a revolution in the
Ô Environmental monitoring monitoring products based on Copernicus Sentinel-1 and CC CC MM MM CC EE EE LL MM MM MM SS SS SS agricultural sector, providing world-class data in a free and open manner
CCMMEEMMSS for multiple agricultural applications at an adequate resolution and
• Various environmental parameters obtained by Sentinel-2:53 CCMM CCCCAA EE LL MM MMMMSS SS SS appropriate revisit time. Innovative companies are making use of Sentinel
CCAAMMSS
Earth observation data contribute to an increas- CCAAMMSS data to provide farm management support, soil moisture measurements
• In-season and end-of-season crop type maps and CCMM CCAA EECCMM MM 33 SS SSSS and agricultural supply chain insights
ing number of international, regional and local CC33SS
crop masks CC33SS • Additional products from CLMS (e.g., land use/land cover and various
policies related to, or impacting, the environment.
CCCCAAEE
CC
MMMM
33SS
SSSS
vegetation indices), as well as C3S products (e.g., temperature and pre-
CCEEMMSS
Additionally, private companies are increasingly • In-season and end-of-season crop area statistics CCEE CCCC MM 33SSSS SS SS cipitation) also contribute to agricultural activities or CMEMS to identify
CCEEMMSS the most favourable fishing zones or to monitor the existing ones
CCSSSS
using Earth observation data for including sus- CCooppeerrnniiccuuCCss EEdd CC MMaa SS ttSS SS aa • The European and Global Drought Observatories of CEMS also contrib-
tainability elements into their ESG reports (e.g., In the context of such an initiative and leveraging CCooppeerrnniiccuuss dd CC aa SS tt SS aa utes to early warning and monitoring of drought episodes
CCooppeerrnniiccuuss ddaattaa
Mondelez is using services from the Satelligence Copernicus data, several crop monitoring platforms have CCSSSS
CCooppeerrnniiccuuss ddaattaa
GGOOVVSSAATTCCOOMM
SME to ensure that the palm oil they use comes been created around the world and especially in develop-
GGOOVVSSAATTCCOOMM CCooppeerrnniiccuuss ddaattaa
from sustainable sources51) ing countries (e.g., Cropwatch in China). GGOOVVSSAATTCCOOMM • Institutional and diplomatic support
GG##EEOOUUVVSSSSppAAaaTTccCCeeOO MM
• Civil-military interaction
##SSEEyynnUUeeSSrrppggaaiieeccssee
GG##EEOOUUVVSSSSppAAaaTTccCCeeOO MM
SSyynneerrggiieess
The relevance of the four EU Space components services ##SSEEyynnUUeeSSrrppggaaiieeccssee
(Copernicus, Galileo, EGNOS and GOVSATCOM) for SS ##EE yynn UU ee SS rr pp gg aa iiee cc ss ee LLiimmiitteedd rreelleevvaannccee//ccoonnttrr•iibb uuttViiooennry high leveSSlii ggonnfii fifisccyaannnett rrrgeellieeevvsaa, nnfccoeer// cceooxnnattrrmiibbpuuttleiioo,nn Earth observation data can
the food security challenge is assessed in the following SSyynneerrggiieess LL LL ii ii mm mm ii ii tt tt ee ee dd dd rr rr ee ee ll ll ee ee vv vv aa aa nn nn cc cc ee ee // // cc cc oo oo nn nn tt tt rr rr ii ii bb bb uu uu tt tt pii ii oo oo rnn nn ovide informSS SS ii ii agg gg tnn nn iii ii ofifi fifi ncc cc aa aa onn nn tt tt n rr rr ee ee cll ll ree ee ovv vv paa aa nn nn hcc cc ee ee e// // acc cc loo oo tnn nn htt tt ,rr rr ii ii sbb bb ouu uu itt tt lii ii oo oo mnn nn oisture and other important
indicators, while EGNSS data can provide high-precision positioning
exhibit, including examples of products and applicability LLiimmiitteedd rreelleevvaannccee//ccoonnttrriibbuutt d iioo a nn ta. Togethe SS r, iigg t nn h iififi is cc aa e nn n tt a rree b ll l ee e vv s aa nn f cc a ee r // m ccoo e nn r tt s rr ii t bb o uu tt t iioo a nn rget irrigation, fertilization and
for services with high relevance. LLiimmiitteedd rreelleevvaannccee//ccoonnttrriibbuuttoiiootnnher operatioSSniiggsnn iitfifiocc aawnntth rreeerlleeevv taahnnecceey// ccaoornnett rrmiibbouuttsiioot nnneeded, powering precision
agriculture solutions
Limited relevance/contribution Significant relevance/contribution
51 Source: 
52 Source: 
53 Source: 

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 41
M o m i s n o n a o - c c i s s a n a o t p l l y m o l a e f v c e d a i t t h i l s y n id e p - f b r a s f a u c o p s i e r l a t d r c d d u i e n e i c v - g v t b i u d e a a r l e o e s re e p t t o d o i e n d e s d b o l e c i e m l o u e i t d u n in i n o a p n t n t e r l e a s i e e c p t d s e h . r e e e a A d s n g d e t d a d n o p t a i t e r r i e b o e d d e n t a u t a h b w c l e e o e e r v e f e t f e f h n o o e r r r e t e s l y EXHIBIT 14 . EXAMPLES O O O OO O O p p p pp p F e e e ee e n n n nn n R S S S SS S E e e e ee e L r r r rr r HH v v v vv v E i i i ii i AA c c c cc c V e e e S e S e e AN FF FF FF FF FF C oo oo oo oo oo oo oo oo oo oo E dd dd dd dd dd ss ss ss ss ss ee ee ee ee ee O cc cc cc cc cc uu uu uu uu uu rr rr rr rr rr F ii ii ii ii ii tt tt tt tt tt yy yy yy yy yy WW WW WW WW WW E aa aa aa aa aa tt tt tt tt tt U ee ee ee ee ee • rr rr rr rr rr mm mm mm mm mm S aa aa aa aa aa nn nn nn nn nn O p a Paa aa aa aa aa s EE EE EE EE EE gg gg gg gg gg o A p nn nn nn nn nn ee ee ee ee ee aa aa aa aa aa s R vv vv vv vv vv mm mm mm mm mm e nn nn nn nn nn C ii ii ii ii ii i rr rr rr rr rr ee ee ee ee ee dd dd dd dd dd T oo oo oo oo oo t n nn nn nn nn nn nn nn nn nn nn i E cc cc cc cc cc K tt tt tt tt tt o mm mm mm mm mm ll ll ll ll ll ii ii ii ii ii S mm mm mm mm mm ee ee ee ee ee n C o nn nn nn nn nn e aa aa aa aa aa i tt tt tt tt tt tt tt tt tt tt n r aa aa aa aa aa ee ee ee ee ee r O ll ll ll ll ll v cc cc cc cc cc g DD DD DD DD DD ii ii ii ii ii P mm mm mm mm mm hh hh hh hh hh i ii ii ii ii ii M aa aa aa aa aa , c ss ss ss ss ssaa aa aa aa aa P pp pp pp pp pp aa aa aa aa aa nn nn nn nn nn nn nn nn nn nn e aa aa aa aa aa i ss ss ss ss ss gg gg gg gg gg rr rr rr rr rr P dd dd dd dd dd cc cc cc cc cc n tt tt tt tt tt ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee P , ee ee ee ee ee tt tt tt tt tt ss ss ss ss ss ee ee ee ee ee - c rr rr rr rr rr pp pp pp pp pp mm mm mm mm mm u R Omm mm mm mm mm oo oo oo oo oo r ee ee ee ee eenn nn nn nn nn s e T aa aa aa aa aa rr rr rr rr rrss ss ss ss ss nn nn nn nn nn gg gg gg gg gg e N ee ee ee ee ee a K aa aa aa aa aaee ee ee ee ee d gg gg gg gg gg s nn nn nn nn nn , E MM MM MM MM MM ee ee ee ee ee cc cc cc cc cc e yy yy yy yy yy mm mm mm mm mm u i ii ii ii ii ii N gg gg gg gg gg s n ee ee ee ee ee s rr rr rr rr rr nn nn nn nn nn aa aa aa aa aa t e tt tt tt tt tt T tt tt tt tt tt G ii ii ii ii ii h oo oo oo oo oo d S nn nn nn nn nn e N f S S p o UU UU UU UU UU S E e r rr rr rr rr rr bb bb bb bb bb r R a aa aa aa aa aa m f nn nn nn nn nn o V ii ii ii ii ii m zz zz zz zz zz u aa aa aa aa aa r I tt tt tt tt tt l m C ii ii ii ii ii y t oo oo oo oo oo i nn nn nn nn nn r - a E i c a EE EE EE EE EE n S o nn nn nn nn nn d c ee ee ee ee ee n rr rr rr rr rr e F gg gg gg gg gg o s yy yy yy yy yy O f t o e a f R l p l a a p u F ti g l O o ic m n a O e t a i n D o n t n d a S s t m i E s o u u C n c l t U h t i e - R f a c r I s e h T q n m Y i u q a e u c n h e c i s n y s e u ch
OOppeenn SSeerrvviiccee
countries with significant development in their use of HHAASS guidance, variable rate applications, UAVs, etc. It can also be used for
HHAASS
OOppeeOOnn SSSS--eeNNrrvvMMiiccAAee livestock tracking
space, and those without. For example, capacity-building OOSS--NN HH MM AA AA SS
OOSS--NNMMAA • OS-NMA and CAS increase robustness to spoofing to various applica-
initiatives have been kicked off to develop the needed OOSS--NN HHCC MM AAAA AA SSSS tions, including autonomous machinery
CCAASS
tools for visualization and analysis of data, with special CCAASS • HAS offers global and free-of-charge 20cm high-accuracy positioning
OOSS--NNPPMMRRAASS
CCAASS service for machine guidance applications, field delineation, UAVs, geo-
emphasis on the specificities of the regions (and therefore PPRRSS
PPRRSS tagging photos, etc.
best achieved by involving local specialists). CCSS PP AAAA RR RR SS SS
SSAARR
SSAARR
PPRRSS
SSOOAARRSS
Within this context, GEOGLAM – the Group on Earth OOSS • OS and EDAS offer real-time and free-of-charge improved GPS
SSOOAARRSS (GPS + Galileo in future) positioning service over Europe. An affordable
Observations Global Agricultural Monitoring Initiative,52 SSooLL
OOSS and entry-level solution for precision agriculture
SSooLL
whose goal is to improve food security by producing SSooLL
EEDDOOAASSSS
SSooLL
and disseminating information on agricultural conditions EEDDAASS
EEDDAASS
and outlooks of production at national, regional and CCEEDDLL SS MMAA oo SSSS LL
CCLLMMSS
global scales – produce several ground validated crop CCEEDDLLMMAASSSS • Copernicus Sentinel-1 and -2 data have brought about a revolution in the
monitoring products based on Copernicus Sentinel-1 and CC CC MM MM CC EE EE LL MM MM MM SS SS SS agricultural sector, providing world-class data in a free and open manner
CCMMEEMMSS for multiple agricultural applications at an adequate resolution and
Sentinel-2:53 CCMM CCCCAA EE LL MM MMMM SS SSSS appropriate revisit time. Innovative companies are making use of Sentinel
CCAAMMSS
CCAAMMSS data to provide farm management support, soil moisture measurements
• In-season and end-of-season crop type maps and CCMM CCAA EECC MM MM33 SS SSSS and agricultural supply chain insights
CC33SS
crop masks CC33SS • Additional products from CLMS (e.g., land use/land cover and various
CCCCAAEEMMMMSSSS
CC33SS vegetation indices), as well as C3S products (e.g., temperature and pre-
CCEEMMSS
• In-season and end-of-season crop area statistics CCEE CCCC MM 33SSSSSS SS cipitation) also contribute to agricultural activities or CMEMS to identify
CCEEMMSS the most favourable fishing zones or to monitor the existing ones
CCSSSS
CCooppeerrnniiccuuCCss EEdd CC MMaa SS ttSS SS aa • The European and Global Drought Observatories of CEMS also contrib-
In the context of such an initiative and leveraging CCooppeerrnniiccuuss dd CC aa SS tt SS aa utes to early warning and monitoring of drought episodes
CCooppeerrnniiccuuss ddaattaa
Copernicus data, several crop monitoring platforms have CCSSSS
CCooppeerrnniiccuuss ddaattaa
GGOOVVSSAATTCCOOMM
been created around the world and especially in develop-
GGOOVVSSAATTCCOOMM CCooppeerrnniiccuuss ddaattaa
ing countries (e.g., Cropwatch in China). GGOOVVSSAATTCCOOMM • Institutional and diplomatic support
GG##EEOOUUVVSSSSppAAaaTTccCCeeOO MM
• Civil-military interaction
SS##EEyynnUUeeSSrrppggaaiieeccssee
GG##EEOOUUVVSSSSppAAaaTTccCCeeOO MM
SSyynneerrggiieess
The relevance of the four EU Space components services #SS#EEyynnUUeeSSrrppggaaiieeccssee
(Copernicus, Galileo, EGNOS and GOVSATCOM) for S # S #EE yynn UU ee SS rr pp gg aa iiee cc ss ee LLiimmiitteedd rreelleevvaannccee//ccoonnttrr•iibb uuttViiooennry high leveSSlii ggonnfii fifisccyaannnett rrrgeellieeevvsaa, nnfccoeer// cceooxnnattrrmiibbpuuttleiioo,nn Earth observation data can
the food security challenge is assessed in the following SSyynneerrggiieess LL LL ii ii mm mm ii ii tt tt ee ee dd dd rr rr ee ee ll ll ee ee vv vv aa aa nn nn cc cc ee ee // // cc cc oo oo nn nn tt tt rr rr ii ii bb bb uu uu tt tt pii ii oo oo rnn nn ovide informSS SS ii ii agg gg tnn nn iii ii ofifi fifi ncc cc aa aa onn nn tt tt n rr rr ee ee cll ll ree ee ovv vv paa aa nn nn hcc cc ee ee e// // acc cc loo oo tnn nn htt tt ,rr rr ii ii sbb bb ouu uu itt tt lii ii oo oo mnn nn oisture and other important
indicators, while EGNSS data can provide high-precision positioning
exhibit, including examples of products and applicability LLiimmiitteedd rreelleevvaannccee//ccoonnttrriibbuutt d iioo a nn ta. Togethe SS r, iigg t nn h iififi is cc aa e nn n tt a rree b ll l ee e vv s aa nn f cc a ee r // m ccoo e nn r tt s rr ii t bb o uu tt t iioo a nn rget irrigation, fertilization and
for services with high relevance. LLiimmiitteedd rreelleevvaannccee//ccoonnttrriibbuuttoiiootnnher operatioSSniiggsnn iitfifiocc aawnntth rreeerlleeevv taahnnecceey// ccaoornnett rrmiibbouuttsiioot nnneeded, powering precision
agriculture solutions
Limited relevance/contribution Significant relevance/contribution

42 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
EXHIBIT 15 . LIST OF EGNSS AND COPERNICUS APPLICATIONS ADDRESSING THE FOOD SECURITY CHALLENGE
3 .2 .4 Use cases
Meteorological assimilation from Galileo
MARKET SEGMENT APPLiCATiON DOMAiN EXAMPLES OF SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS and drones for agriculture
Carbon capture and content assessment The Horizon Europe Meteorological assimilation from
Environmental monitoring
Environmental impact monitoring
Galileo and drones for agriculture (MAGDA) project
Biomass monitoring aims at developing a toolchain for atmosphere monitor-
Crop yield forecasting ing, weather forecasting and severe weather/irrigation/
Natural resources monitoring
Soil condition monitoring
crop monitoring advisory, with GNSS (including Galileo)
Vegetation monitoring
at its core, to provide useful information to agricultural
Asset monitoring
operators.
Automatic steering
AGRiCULTURE CAP monitoring
Farm machinery guidance MAGDA exploits the untapped potential of assimilat-
Farm management systems ing GNSS-derived, drone-derived, Copernicus Earth
Operations management
Field definition
observation- derived data sets, in situ weather sensors
Livestock wearables
into very high-resolution, short-range (1-2 days ahead)
Pastureland management
Precision irrigation and very short-range (less than 1 day ahead) numerical
Variable rate application weather forecasts to provide improved prediction of
severe weather events (rainfall, snow, hail, wind, heat and
Weather services for agriculture Climate services for agriculture
cold waves), as well as of weather-driven agriculture pests
Animal tracking for biodiversity purposes Animal tracking for biodiversity purposes and diseases for the benefit of agriculture operations,
BiODiVERSiTY,
ECOSYSTEMS also in light of the ongoing effects of climate change.
Coastal ecosystems monitoring Coastal ecosystems monitoring
AND NATURAL
CAPiTAL
Terrestrial ecosystems monitoring Terrestrial ecosystems monitoring These targets are achieved by setting up a database of
variables of interest and an assimilation system to feed
Climate change mitigation and adaptation Climate change mitigation and adaptation
a numerical weather prediction model, which in turn
drives a hydrological model for irrigation performance
Earth observation-based modelling
Climate modelling
CLiMATE SERViCES GNSS-based climate modelling and water accounting to assess water use and related
productivity. In addition to already existing observational
Climate forecasting
Climate monitoring and forecasting
Climate monitoring networks, new dedicated networks of sensors, including
GNSS and drones, to monitor atmospheric variables at
Environmental auditing Environmental auditing high spatial resolution are deployed in the vicinity of large
ENViRONMENTAL farms and cultivated areas, to provide data with high
Environmental resources management Environmental resources management
MONiTORiNG
spatial and temporal resolutions for the assimilation into
Impact studies and environmental, social, Impact studies and environmental, social, and the weather model.
and corporate governance (ESG) corporate governance (ESG)
Aquaculture Aquaculture operations optimization The delivery of the augmented forecasts and irrigation
Aquaculture site selection
advisories to farmers is enabled by a dedicated dash-
FiSHERiES AND Catch optimization board and APIs to already existing farm management
AQUACULTURE Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) control
systems. The tools developed within MAGDA represent
Fisheries Fishing aggregating devices
the technical and methodological components based on
Fish stock detection
Fishing vessels navigation which services to support agricultural operations will be
defined.54
iNSURANCE AND
Insurance for natural disasters Index production
FiNANCE
Copernicus application EGNSS application Synergetic application (combined use of Copernicus and EGNSS)
54 
55 

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 43
EXHIBIT 15 . LIST OF EGNSS AND COPERNICUS APPLICATIONS ADDRESSING THE FOOD SECURITY CHALLENGE
3 .2 .4 Use cases Growing innovation to support organic
farming by leveraging space-based and
Meteorological assimilation from Galileo cutting-edge technologies
MARKET SEGMENT APPLiCATiON DOMAiN EXAMPLES OF SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS and drones for agriculture
The aim of the H2020 PestNu project is to conduct
Carbon capture and content assessment The Horizon Europe Meteorological assimilation from in-field testing and demonstration of digital and space-
Environmental monitoring
Environmental impact monitoring
Galileo and drones for agriculture (MAGDA) project based technologies (DST) with agroecological and
Biomass monitoring aims at developing a toolchain for atmosphere monitor- organic practices (AOP) in a systemic approach to reduce
Crop yield forecasting ing, weather forecasting and severe weather/irrigation/ the use of pesticides and fertilizers, and loss of nutrients.
Natural resources monitoring
Soil condition monitoring
crop monitoring advisory, with GNSS (including Galileo)
Vegetation monitoring
at its core, to provide useful information to agricultural The project brings novel DST, including:
Asset monitoring
operators.
Automatic steering Ô AI robotic traps for real-time pest monitoring;
AGRiCULTURE CAP monitoring autonomous mobile robots for pesticide monitoring
Farm machinery guidance MAGDA exploits the untapped potential of assimilat-
and 3D spot spraying
Farm management systems ing GNSS-derived, drone-derived, Copernicus Earth
Operations management
Field definition
observation- derived data sets, in situ weather sensors Ô Earth observation missions with robust Agroradar
Livestock wearables
into very high-resolution, short-range (1-2 days ahead) AI algorithms to map soil/plant nutrients and pest
Pastureland management
Precision irrigation and very short-range (less than 1 day ahead) numerical plant inputs using Copernicus data/services
Variable rate application weather forecasts to provide improved prediction of
Ô In situ and real-time nutrient analysers
severe weather events (rainfall, snow, hail, wind, heat and
Weather services for agriculture Climate services for agriculture
cold waves), as well as of weather-driven agriculture pests All the DST are interconnected to a user-centric cloud-
Animal tracking for biodiversity purposes Animal tracking for biodiversity purposes and diseases for the benefit of agriculture operations, based farm management system, which features a
BiODiVERSiTY,
ECOSYSTEMS also in light of the ongoing effects of climate change. robust decision support system integrated with a
Coastal ecosystems monitoring Coastal ecosystems monitoring
AND NATURAL blockchain-based system for DST data evidence, integrity
CAPiTAL
Terrestrial ecosystems monitoring Terrestrial ecosystems monitoring These targets are achieved by setting up a database of and AI models verification and with a cybersecurity plat-
variables of interest and an assimilation system to feed form to prevent cyberattacks and IoT vulnerabilities.
Climate change mitigation and adaptation Climate change mitigation and adaptation
a numerical weather prediction model, which in turn The AOP include the following: on-site production of
drives a hydrological model for irrigation performance biofertilizers from agricultural wastewaters through a
Earth observation-based modelling
Climate modelling
CLiMATE SERViCES GNSS-based climate modelling and water accounting to assess water use and related robust automated drainage recycling system via an inno-
productivity. In addition to already existing observational vative enzymatic hydrolysis procedure; a novel foliar bio-
Climate forecasting
Climate monitoring and forecasting
Climate monitoring networks, new dedicated networks of sensors, including pesticide formulated by circular bioeconomy operations,
GNSS and drones, to monitor atmospheric variables at targeting fungal diseases with biostimulant effect; and
Environmental auditing Environmental auditing high spatial resolution are deployed in the vicinity of large advanced nutritional programmes for organic farming.55
ENViRONMENTAL farms and cultivated areas, to provide data with high
Environmental resources management Environmental resources management
MONiTORiNG
spatial and temporal resolutions for the assimilation into
Impact studies and environmental, social, Impact studies and environmental, social, and the weather model. FaST – a tool to increase the sustainable
and corporate governance (ESG) corporate governance (ESG)
use of nutrients
Aquaculture Aquaculture operations optimization The delivery of the augmented forecasts and irrigation
Aquaculture site selection The vision of FaST (the Farm Sustainability Tool for
advisories to farmers is enabled by a dedicated dash-
Nutrients) is to become a world-leading platform for the
FiSHERiES AND Catch optimization board and APIs to already existing farm management
AQUACULTURE Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) control generation and reuse of solutions for sustainable and
systems. The tools developed within MAGDA represent
Fisheries Fishing aggregating devices competitive agriculture based on space data (Copernicus
the technical and methodological components based on
Fish stock detection
and Galileo) and other public and private data sets. The
Fishing vessels navigation which services to support agricultural operations will be
modular platform supports European Union agriculture
defined.54
and the Common Agricultural Policy by also enabling
iNSURANCE AND
FiNANCE Insurance for natural disasters Index production the use of solutions based on machine learning applied
to image recognition, as well as the use and reuse of IoT
data, various public sector data and user-generated data.
Copernicus application EGNSS application Synergetic application (combined use of Copernicus and EGNSS)
54 
55 

44 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
FaST helps lay the foundations of a comprehensive digital farmers and paying agencies, and streamline communica-
ecosystem for sustainable farm and land management tion between farmers and public authorities.
in Europe. It will support farmers in their administrative
decision-making processes, for farm profitability and The project is supported by the European Commission’s
environmental sustainability. At the same time, it pro- DG Agriculture and Rural Development, by the EU Space
vides a reliable on-farm landing spot for digital solution Programme (DG DEFIS) and by the EU ISA2 Programme
developers (including satellite-based solutions) and (DG DIGIT).56
service providers. It will reduce administrative burdens for
3 .3 THE WATER MANAGEMENT CHALLENGE AND THE
ROLE OF EU SPACE DATA
“Water can be a source At the human level, water cannot be seen in isolation
of conflict but also of from sanitation. Together, they are vital for reducing
the global burden of disease and improving the health,
cooperation. It is essential
education and economic productivity of populations.
that we work together to
provide better stewardship Contaminated water and a lack of basic sanitation are
undermining efforts to end extreme poverty and disease
of all water sources, including
in the world’s poorest countries.
the world’s supply of
groundwater.” In 2017, 2 billion people worldwide did not have access
to basic sanitation facilities such as toilets or latrines.
António Guterres, Some 673 million people still practised open defeca-
Secretary-General of the United Nations tion. According to the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation, at least
1.2 billion people worldwide are estimated to drink water
3 .3 .1 introduction that is not protected against contamination from faeces.
Even more drinking water is delivered through a system
Water is at the core of sustainable development and is
without adequate protection against sanitary hazards.57
critical for socioeconomic development, energy and food
production, healthy ecosystems and for human survival
The links between lack of water and sanitation access
itself. Water is also at the heart of adaptation to climate
and the development goals are clear, and the solutions to
change, serving as the crucial link between society and
the problem are known and cost-effective. A 2012 WHO
the environment.
study shows that every US$1 invested in improved sani-
tation translates into an average global economic return
Water is also a rights issue. As the global population
of US$5.5. Those benefits are experienced specifically by
grows, there is an increasing need to balance all the
poor children and in the disadvantaged communities that
competing commercial demands on water resources, so
need them most.
that communities have enough for their needs. Women
and girls must have access to clean, private sanitation
facilities to manage menstruation and maternity in dignity
and safety.
56 
57 Global Issues: Water | United Nations

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 45
3 .3 .2 Space and water 3 .3 .3 EU Space specific support
management
EU Space data, especially those supplied by Copernicus,
provide several opportunities to monitor water availability
Satellite-based Earth observation relies on the use of
and quality, and surface water ecosystems. It supports
remote sensing techniques for collecting information on
national governments, water authorities and river basin
the physical, chemical and biological systems of planet
commissions with vital data on basin hydrology and
Earth to monitor land and marine habitats as well as fresh-
infrastructural development projects (e.g., planning dam
water bodies such as rivers, lakes and reservoirs, as well as
construction, irrigation schemes and enforcing laws and
groundwater and atmosphere. Earth observation data has
practices to protect freshwater ecosystem integrity) and it
become an invaluable resource for supporting decision
is also crucial knowledge for irrigation and livestock water-
makers in all sectors of society, including responding to
ing and monitoring water-related ecosystems. To this end,
the SDGs and the Convention on Wetlands.
an increasing number of private companies are providing
this type of intelligence to public authorities and national
Technological advances and significant reductions in
governments.
the costs of operation and maintenance of satellites
together with the Copernicus free and open data policy
With regard to water availability, Copernicus Sentinels
has allowed the generation of a large amount of geo-
contribute to a better understanding of the Earth’s water
spatial data that are freely available to a wide range of
cycle thanks to their ability to obtain data on issues such
users – such as researchers, service providers and small
as soil moisture content and evapotranspiration and
businesses, NGOs, and society – to benefit from Earth
water quality (e.g., algal blooms and pollution).
observation data.
In addition, the Copernicus Global Land Service provides, in
In 2016, the United Nations Office for Outer Space
a timely manner, biophysical variables describing how water
Affairs (UNOOSA) and the Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz
is partitioned on the ground and in the soil. For example,
International Prize for Water (PSIPW) signed an agree-
the soil water index quantifies the water content in the first
ment to collaborate on their common goal of promoting
few centimetres of soil. In addition, global maps of water
the use of space-based technology for increased access
bodies delineate the zones permanently covered by water,
to water.
such as lakes, those with a seasonal frequency, such as back-
The Space4Water Project was launched in 2018 with the water ponds, and those that occur occasionally because
aim of promoting the use of space-based technology and of flooding. These biophysical products are useful for
data for increased access to water. The project comprises hydrological modelling as well as short- and medium-term
three pillars: meteorological forecasting since they control the water and
heat exchanges between land and the atmosphere.
Ô Foster scientific exchange via conferences, to inform
decision-making and have an impact on policy In terms of monitoring water ecosystems, Sentinel-1 and
Sentinel-2 and -3 provide data enabling the monitoring of
Ô Reach and inform users worldwide, via the
coastal and inland vegetated wetlands (e.g., floodplains,
Space4Water Portal, to showcase excellent work and
lakes, peatlands and deltas). The existence of some kind
allow users to find partners based on their expertise
of vegetation, such as mangroves, is extremely important
or regional focus
to protect against flooding and serve as buffers against
Ô Community building via interactive Space4Water saltwater intrusion and erosion. Inland wetlands such as
Portal stakeholder meetings with the aim of creat- the Okavango can reduce the risk of drought.
ing an experts committee for quality assurance and
scientific guidance. The capability of Copernicus to monitor water ecosystems
is also confirmed by the fact that – among other Earth
The Space4Water can be accessed at space4water.org.
observation data – it is currently employed by the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the custodian
agency responsible for supporting countries with monitor-
ing and reporting official SDG data of 26 SDG indicators.

46 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
Indeed, UNEP updated in its "Measuring warming. From more frequent severe weather events to
change in the extent of water-related ecosystems over rising sea levels, its effects are widespread. The water
time (SDG 6, indicator 6.6.1)" to specifically include more sector is particularly vulnerable to changing rainfall pat-
detailed information about how to leverage satellite-based terns. While overall some places are experiencing more
Earth observation data to compute the related subindi- rainfall and others less, almost everywhere is seeing more
cators.58 For example, the European Union’s Copernicus frequent flooding and longer periods of drought.59 To this
space programme has been deemed useful in estimating end, the “European water and climate data explorer”60
lake water parameters such as turbidity and trophic state application enables you to explore how a wide variety of
index, which are respectively key indicators of underwa- climate indicators are expected to change during the twen-
ter light availability and eutrophication, two fundamental ty-first century for three different emissions scenarios.61 It
parameters to monitor lake ecosystems. includes more general indicators, such as temperature and
precipitation, as well as water-specific indicators, such as
Furthermore, the Copernicus Sentinel-2 and -3 satellites flood recurrence and the amount of nitrogen in the water.
provide data that can be used to measure several water Meanwhile, the “Hydrological seasonal forecast explorer”62
quality parameters, namely scums containing chlorophyll-a application provides forecasts of river discharge up to seven
and phycocyanin cyanobacteria, total suspended matter months ahead. It is designed to give an overview of the
and many other parameters. Notably, those parameters general situation in rivers around Europe, as well as to help
provide indications on the proliferation of harmful algae users plan how water will be managed on a regional scale.
blooms that have negative repercussions on tourism and The application provides an automatically generated “most
human health and are monitored in the European Union probable forecast”, as well as information on the skill of the
within the Water Framework Directive. They also provide model to aid interpretation of the quality of the forecast.
analytical support to assess the diffusion of waterborne
diseases such as Escherichia coli. Additionally, they support Although GNSS technology is certainly less effective than
aquaculture by optimizing many operational phases of the Earth observation in addressing water management chal-
aquaculture plants and ensuring the selection of ideal aqua- lenges, some specific use cases, along with the water level
culture sites. Within this application area, Galileo also plays monitoring, demonstrate the potential of Galileo to pre-
a role by providing positioning and navigation services to serve water ecosystems. For example, within the FloatEco
fully automated vessels, underwater drones and innovative (floating ecosystem) project,63 a consortium of partners
robotics that are increasingly adopted by water farmers. including the University of Hawaii and the United States
non-profit Ocean Voyages Institute employed GNSS-
SAR-based and optical satellite data provided by enabled trackers to study the dynamics of the so-called
Copernicus can be used to monitor marine pollution and “garbage patch”, a huge collection of marine debris in
help in the detection of oil spills and marine litter. Earth the North Pacific Ocean. GNSS trackers were attached to
observation also provides information on sea-surface fishing gear and other debris to better understand drift
height (altimetry), sea-surface salinity (in situ data), patterns. As a result, the trackers contributed to identifying
sea-surface temperature, ocean colour and sea-ice data areas of the ocean where much larger collections of plastic
that are useful for monitoring and forecasting the course debris had gathered, which was subsequently removed.
of pollution. Moreover, remote sensing data can also con- An additional use case showcasing the relevance of Galileo
tribute to identifying polluters. in addressing this challenge relates to the employment
of GNSS receivers to time stamp measurements across a
It is worthwhile mentioning that along with a myriad of wide geographical area through supervisory control and
data and information generated by CLMS, CMEMS and data acquisition (SCADA) systems. Those systems refer to
C3S, there are new data and applications in C3S that help complex, digital networks that automatically monitor and
the sector to better prepare and adapt to climate change. control each step of the water treatment process. Given
Climate change is bringing us much more than global the high number of sensors and components involved,
58 Source: 
59 For more information: 
60 Copernicus Climate Data Store
61 Emissions Scenarios — IPCC
62 
63 Source: 

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 47
GNSS receivers constitute the most effective solution to management and most importantly cybersecurity support
ensure the needed synchronization, resulting in overall to the infrastructure grids.
better water management.
The relevance of the four EU Space components services
Finally, GOVSATCOM can play an essential role in water (Copernicus, Galileo, EGNOS and GOVSATCOM) for the
management, enabling early warning systems (e.g., water management challenge is assessed in the following
sensors and monitoring), RPAS/UAV surveillance network exhibit, including examples of products and applicability
s E u X p H p I o B r I t T , p 1 o 6 l . l ut E F io O X n A R d M O O O O T e p p p p P H t e e e e e L O O O n n n n E c E S S S S S S S t W S - - - e e e e i N N N o r r r r H H H H C C C P v P v v P vO O O O O M M M A n i i i i A A A A A A A R R R c c c cp p p p T , A A A S S S S S S e S e e S S S e F e e e e c E O O O n n n n R r R S S S i S S S S t E - - - e e e e i F F F F F N N N M c L r r r r o o o o o H H H H C C C P v P v P v v o o o o o M M M a E i i i iA A A A A A A d d d d d R R R A c c c c l A A A V s s s s s S S S S S e S e S S S e S e e e e e e N k A c c c c c u u u u u e r r r r r A N i i i i i t t t t t y y y y y y W W W W W G F F F F F C o o o o o i a a a a a n o o o o o t t t t tE e e e e e E d d d d d r r r r r f M s s s s s m m m m m r e e e e e O a a a a a ac c c c c u u u u u n n n n n E s r r r r r a a a a a F i i i i i E E E E E g g g g g t t t t t t N y y y y y n n n n n e e e e e r W W W W W a a a a av v v v v m m m m m E u n n n n ni i i i iT a a a a a r r r r r e e e e e d d d d do o o o o t t t t t U c e e e e e n n n n n n n n n n • • c c c c cr r r r r t t t t t C m m m m m t l l l l l i i i i i m m m m m m m m m m u e e e e e Sa a a a a H n n n n n a a a a a n n n n n r O r t i s i O t t t t t t t t t tP c n a a a a a e e e e ea a a a a e i h y A l l l l l E E E E E g g g g g v A a c c c c c p S D D D D D i i i i i a s n n n n n e e e e e m m m m m h h h h h e t a a a a a l v v v v v m m m m m i i i i iL t a a a a a N s s s s s h t e a a a a a n n n n n C p p p p p i i i i i r a a a a a r r r r r n n n n n e n n n n n a e e e e e d d d d d L o o o o o a a a a a s s s s s s e n g g g g g c r r r r r d d d d d n n n n n M c c c c c n n n n n t t t t t m e e e e e r E c c c c c e e e e e E t t t t t e e e e e t t t t t a m m m m m s s s s se e e e e e l l l l l a r r r r r i i i i i o p p p p p S m m m m m m m m m m e e e e e n N A s m m m m m a o o o o o n C n n n n n e a a a a a c e e e e e n n n n n a a a a a t t t t t t t t t t r r r r r d o s s s s s b e a a a a a e e e e e n n n n n G r g g g g g t O a e e e e e l l l l l a a a a a v e e e e e h n c c c c c a D D D D D e i i i i i g g g g g n n n n n n m m m m m r h h h h h i E f r M M M M M i i i i i e e e e e c c c c c n e M a a a a a c s s s s s a a a a a d p p p p p o o v y y y y y m m m m m a a a a a n n n n n u n n n n n i i i i i e a a a a a s g g g g g s s s s s g g g g g r r r r r e d d d d d e e e e e u c c c c c t t t t t r e e e e e s r r r r r e e e e e e P C e e e e e n n n n n t t t t t a a a a a s s s s s e e e e e s e c g r r r r r t t t t t t t t t t p p p p p r m m m m m s i i i i i O s A m m m m m o o o o o a o o o o o v d h e e e e e e e n n n n n n n n n n a a a a a n o r r r r r S s s s s s n n n n n g g g g g N l r e e e e e t S a a a a a s e e e e e i v o b g g g g g r i n n n n n C U U U U U E n M M M M M s e e e e e c c c c c i u e r r r r r y y y y y m m m m m c . t c b b b b b A i i i i i N s g g g g g i e e e e e a a a a a e A r r r r r r m i u n n n n n n n n n n D a a a a a n e t t t t t T i i i i i s t t t t t t z z z z z l i i i i i g o o o o o a e a a a a a s A i S t t t t t l n n n n n w o s i i i i i i o o o o o z s d i n n n n n , s n S i e t e y t i a U U U U U g E E E E E E d t h s e r r r r r n n n n n m b b b b b t e e e e e R c p a a a a a r t e r r r r r h n n n n n g g g g g o a p o V i i i i i m y y y y yz z z z z l i n b a a a a a e g I m m t t t t t C s i i i i i u a o o o o o p h n n n n n s e o r o E r n t o a r n E E E E E r n S i e n n n n n s v n i e e e e e e c t u i l r r r r r g o a d g g g g g s e r y y y y y s n r e e v t m o a w a b a g n a e e c d a t c c n e e u i u e n t t r s s r e . s e a l t c a e d t t c s e v p r a i e o n a o n l s s n d c o , s d a fi s m a m n u r e w g c a e l h p i r i o a d a a b p f e s s l l T e w a g s s a e e i t t t i n a o i h m c d s g G , i d n r S l a e N a g p b k S h e r S i - s s ,
OS-NSMAAROS-NSMAAR
SAR SAR
Open SerSvOAicpRee n SerSvAicRe
CAS CAS
OS OS
• OS and EDAS for GIS mapping
HOASS HOASS
PORSS PORSS
SoL SoL
OS-NSMoALOS-NSMoAL
SSAoRL SSAoRL
EDAS EDAS
EDCAASS EDCAASS
EDAS EDAS
OS OS
CLPMRSS CLPMRSS
CLMS CLMS
CLSMoSL CLSMoSL • CLMS, for example, provides data about lake and reservoir surface water
CMESMARS CMESMARS temperature, water quality, water level or monitor snow and ice at high
CMEMS CMEMS
CMEEDMASS CMEEDMASS resolution
CAMS CAMS
• CMEMS provide a wealth of ocean products, e.g., monitor variables such
CAMOSS CAMOSS
CAMS CAMS as salinity, sea surface height, sea ice, currents, temperature, etc.
CLCM3SS CLCM3SS
CS3oSL CS3oSL • C3S, for example, provides a variety of hydrology-related climate indi-
C3S C3S
CMCEEMMSS CMCEEMMSS cators, such as temperature and precipitation, as well as water-specific
CEEDMASS CEEDMASS indicators, such as flood recurrence and the amount of nitrogen in the
C C A E C M MS S SS C C A E C M MSS S S water that is expected to change during the twenty-first century
CSS CSS • CEMS service includes an on-demand mapping component and an
CLCMSSS CLCMSSS
CopernicuCso dCpae3trSan icus dCa3tSa early warning component, including the European and Global Flood
CopernicuCso dpaetranicus data Awareness Systems and European and Global Drought Observatories
CopernicCuCMso EdpMaetrSanicCuMs EdMatSa
CEMS CEMS
• Sentinel-1 data for monitoring surface water dynamics in cloud-prone
GOVSAGTCOOVMSATCOM CAMS CAMS regions; Sentinel-2 to assess the historical surface water resources world-
GOVSAGTCOOVMSATCOM CSS CSS
GOVSAGTCOOVMSATCOM wide; Sentinel-3 to estimate the changes in water levels in rivers and
#EUSpa#cEeU Space C3S C3S lakes or marine pollution
CopernicuCso dpaetranicus data
#SEynUeSrpgaS#iecEysenU eSrpgaiecse
#EUSpa#cEeU Space
SynergSieysnergies CEMS CEMS
SynergSieysnergies • Early warning systems (e.g., • Support to multiple crisis
GOVSAGTCOOVMSATCOM sensors, monitoring) management zones
LimCitSeSd reLleimvCaitnSecSde /recolenvtarinbcuet/icoonntribution SignificantS irgenleifivcaanncte /recolenvtarinbcuet/icoonntribution
Limited reLleimvaitnecde /recolenvtarinbcuet/icoonntr•ib utIinonstituStigionnifiacla anntS irdge nldeifivipcaanlonctem /recaoltenivctar inbcuet/icoonntrib•ut ioPnollution detection
Limited reLleimvaitnecde /recolenvtarinbcuet/icoonntribution SignificantS irgenleifivcaanncte /recolenvtarinbcuet/icoonntribution
#EUSpa#cEeU Space CopernicuCso dpaetranicus data support • Critical key infrastructure
SynergSieysnergies • Civil-military interaction management
• RPAs/UAV surveillance • Cybersecurity support
GOVSAGTCOOVMSATCOM
Limited reLleimvaitnecde /recolenvtarinbcuet/icoonntribution SignificantS irgenleifivcaanncte /recolenvtarinbcuet/icoonntribution
#EUSpa#cEeU Space • EGNSS and Copernicus complementarity at different phases of the water
SynergSieysnergies management
Limited reLleimvaitnecde /recolenvtarinbcuet/icoonntribution SignificantS irgenleifivcaanncte /recolenvtarinbcuet/icoonntribution
Limited relevance/contribution Significant relevance/contribution

48 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
EXHIBIT 17 . LIST OF EGNSS AND COPERNICUS APPLICATIONS
ADDRESSING THE WATER MANAGEMENT CHALLENGE
MARKET SEGMENT APPLiCATiON DOMAiN EXAMPLES OF SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS
BiODiVERSiTY,
ECOSYSTEMS
Water ecosystems monitoring Water ecosystems monitoring
AND NATURAL
CAPiTAL
EMERGENCY Early warning Early warning (for floods and droughts)
MANAGEMENT AND
HUMANiTARiAN AiD Rapid mapping Rapid mapping
ENViRONMENTAL
Environmental resources management Environmental resources management
MONiTORiNG
FiSHERiES AND Aquaculture operations optimization
Aquaculture
AQUACULTURE Aquaculture site selection
MARiTiME AND
Environmental monitoring Marine (and inland) pollution monitoring
iNLAND WATERWAYS
Copernicus application EGNSS application Synergetic application (combined use of Copernicus and EGNSS)
3 .3 .4 Use cases The Earth observation data used to support the monitoring
and reporting on freshwater ecosystems come from several
space agencies. ESA, NASA and JAXA provide various
Monitoring the world’s freshwater
satellite-derived imagery at different temporal coverage.
ecosystems
The NASA Landsat satellites have been orbiting Earth since
Understanding the state of the world’s freshwater ecosys- the early 1970s and provide high-quality global coverage
tems is an essential first step in their protection and resto- of surface water extent from 2000. Both Copernicus
ration. Recognizing how multiple pressures interact to Sentinel and the JAXA Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR)
cause changes in freshwater ecosystems is complex. For satellites are more recent and, thanks to advances in tech-
example, growing populations drive ecosystem changes nology, allow image and data capture for mangroves, wet-
through increased demand to generate locally stored lands and water quality monitoring. Copernicus Sentinel-2
fresh water, which alters hydrological systems, or by allows for monitoring of the optical property of water and
deforesting and urbanizing areas, which increases run-off, consequent derivation of important water quality charac-
flooding rates and nutrient and sediment loss, thereby teristics such as chlorophyll concentration and turbidity.
degrading water bodies.
Data are updated annually and produced to align with
In , UNEP launched the Freshwater the SDG indicator 6.6.1 methodology. They can be visu-
Ecosystems Explorer – a free and easy-to-use data alized and downloaded at national, subnational and basin
platform providing accurate, up-to-date, high-resolution, levels. The data are available for the following: perma-
geospatial data to monitor freshwater ecosystems. The nent and seasonal surface waters, reservoirs, wetlands,
platform was developed to help decision makers readily mangroves and water quality.
access and understand ecosystem changes and enable
countries to track progress towards the achievement of As explained, the Freshwater Ecosystems Explorer sup-
Sustainable Development Goal Target 6.6. ports countries with monitoring and reporting on SDG

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 49
indicator 6.6.1 data. However, all interested practitioners provide a user- and stakeholder-driven concept for water
and managers are encouraged to access the platform and services (water quantity, water quality, hydrological
use the data.64 parameters, ice, snow, etc.), by assessing the existing
and emerging needs, the opportunities presented by the
current and future technical capabilities of satellite and in
Developing a road map for Copernicus
situ sensors, and addressing the current disconnects
Water Services
between remote sensing, in situ observations and model-
Inland and coastal waters play a crucial role in human ling communities.
health and well-being, in the global carbon and nutrient
cycles, as well as supporting high levels of biodiversity. Critically, the road map aims at fostering closer coop-
eration between remote sensing, in situ and modelling
The H2020 project “Water scenarios For Copernicus communities to build an optimal water service that pro-
Exploitation”, Water-ForCE, is developing a road map vides necessary information to policymakers, managers,
for Copernicus water services. Such a road map will researchers and the public.65
3 .4 THE ENViRONMENTAL AND
CLiMATE CHANGE CHALLENGE
AND THE ROLE OF EU SPACE
Climate
Adaptation
3 .4 .1 introduction and Mitigation
Former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said: “no Plan B for
Adaptation refers to adjustments
climate action as there is no planet B” and more recently
in ecological, social, or economic
his successor António Guterres added: “Climate change
systems in response to actual or
is the defining issue of our time, and we are at a defining
expected climatic stimuli and their
moment”. Thus, the strong worldwide focus on environ-
effects or impact . Mitigation
mental and climate change, as global climate targets are
refers to efforts to reduce
at risk of not being met. António Guterres expressed it
or prevent emission of
very clearly when stating that “The 1.5-degree goal is on
greenhouse gases .
life support, it is in intensive care”. The implications of not
meeting the goal highlighted in the Paris Agreement to
limit future warming to 1.5-degree are numerous and, in
one way or another, the other challenges are closely linked
to the evolution of climate and environment. Global warming has profound and impactful conse-
quences on the environment; therefore, it is of the utmost
It is worth noting that climate change and global warm- importance to keep it constrained within the limits set
ing, although sometimes used interchangeably, do not under the Paris Agreement 2015. The IPCC Special
refer to the same thing. Climate change refers to long- Report points out the consequences of not keeping to
term weather patterns, including temperature changes, the 1.5°C limit:66
while global warming refers specifically to the long-term
heating of Earth’s surface and atmosphere. Climate Climate-related risks for natural and human systems are
change encompasses global warming, and both have an higher for global warming of 1.5°C than at present, but
effect on the environment. lower than at 2°C (high confidence). These risks depend
64 SDG 6.6.1 (sdg661.app)
65 Water-ForCE (waterforce.eu)
66 Extracted from IPCC Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5 C, summary for policymakers.

50 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
warming from 1.5°C to 2°C, including potential shifts in
Heat
their geographic range (high confidence).
islands
Limiting warming to 1.5°C compared with 2°C is fore-
Heat islands are areas casted to result in smaller net reductions in yields of
of urbanized land which maize, rice, wheat and potentially other cereal crops,
experience higher
particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, South-East Asia, and
temperatures than their
Central and South America, and in the CO-dependent

surroundings as they absorb
nutritional quality of rice and wheat (high confidence).
more of the sun’s heat
Reductions in the forecasted food availability are larger
than they emit .
at 2°C than at 1.5°C of global warming in the Sahel,
southern Africa, the Mediterranean, central Europe and
the Amazon (medium confidence). Livestock may also be
adversely affected by rising temperatures, depending on
on the magnitude and rate of warming, geographic loca-
the extent of changes in feed quality, spread of diseases
tion, levels of development and vulnerability, and on the
and water resource availability (high confidence).
choices and implementation of adaptation and mitigation
options (high confidence).
Depending on future socioeconomic conditions, limiting
global warming to 1.5°C compared to 2°C may reduce the
It is important to stress that the risk depends on the
proportion of the world population exposed to a climate
adaptation and mitigation choices made, as they might
change-induced increase in water stress by up to 50 per
be the target of local policies, which can have a great
cent, although there is considerable variability between
impact at local level on the effects of climate change. In
regions (medium confidence).
general, the impact is higher on those who are less able
to protect themselves.
Although in this report, an effort has been made to decou-
ple the different challenges they are all related to some
Several regional changes in the climate are forecasted
degree, as the examples above show and, ultimately, they
with a global warming of up to 1.5°C compared to pre-in-
are all related to what two Secretaries-General of the United
dustrial levels, including warming and extreme temper-
Nations considered extremely urgent to tackle collectively
atures in many regions (high confidence), increases in
(“Collective action or collective suicide” said António
frequency, intensity, and/or amount of heavy precipitation
Guterres about the need for meeting the 1.5-degree goal).
in several regions (high confidence), and an increase in
intensity or frequency of droughts in some regions.
3 .4 .2 Space and climate change
At the time of writing, there have been severe heat waves
in the northern hemisphere, and their frequency and Space has played an important role in the awakening call
intensity are likely to grow as the mean temperature of for environmental and climate action. Not only showing the
the planet increases. In particular, the impact is amplified fragility of planet Earth, but also monitoring very closely
in cities due to heat islands. the climate. In fact, about 60 per cent of the 54 essential
climate variables can be addressed by satellite data.67
It is not only the increase in the frequency and intensity
of some disasters, but also risks to health, livelihoods, Thanks to satellites today we know that:
food security, water security, human security and eco-
Ô Sea level is rising at a rate of more than three
nomic growth are expected to increase as global warming
millimetres per year, and this finding is supported
increases.
by more than 27 years of satellite observations.68
However, this value is only the average; the increase
Risks from some vector-borne diseases, such as malaria
in sea level accelerated during that period.
and dengue fever, are forecasted to increase with
67 
68 24WMO.pdf (un.org)

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 51
Ô Satellites have shown that the land ice sheets in both international coordination, cooperation, capacity-build-
Antarctica and Greenland have been losing mass ing and providing a multiplying-effect for existing efforts.
since 2002.69 Crucially, through capacity-building, the Office facilitates
the access of developing countries to space technologies
Ô Satellite data show a stable increase in land sur-
and applications. Additionally, in collaboration with several
face temperature of 0.2°C per decade over the last
partners and supported by the Government of Austria the
25 years. However, it is worth noting that there is
Office works towards providing capacity-building opportu-
significant regional variability.70
nities as well as in-person forums for information exchange
Ô Satellites track the health of the ozone layer by mon- and also a “Space4Climate Action” website (https://
itoring its evolution. Satellites have been instrumen- space4climateaction.unoosa.org/) in order to maximize the
tal in following the implementation of the Montreal benefit of space for all humankind.
Protocol.71
3 .4 .3 EU Space specific support
Today the number of Earth observation satellites stands
at around 1,000, the highest in history. Space agencies Copernicus and, to a lesser extent EGNSS, provides
are jointly working to maximize the benefits of this large extraordinary support for tackling environmental impact
number of satellites and obtain continuous and consist- and climate change challenges. This is indeed one of the
ent measurements. The Committee of Earth Observation fields where the use of Earth observation data can make
Satellites works to ensure that satellites and associated the largest difference, as it has the unique capability to
ground segments are operating collaboratively, in the capture environmental and socioeconomic data over
form of virtual constellations that overlap or complement a range of spatial, spectral and temporal resolutions.
coverage and measurements to meet Earth observation Fuelled by the growing awareness of the climate crisis
needs. Virtual constellations can be composed of individ- and the urgent need for informed adaptation and mitiga-
ual constellations, one of them being Copernicus. tion actions, Copernicus-derived intelligence integrating
existing land, marine, atmosphere and climate change
UNOOSA, with the support of the UK Space Agency, services can provide the tools necessary to meet the
has published a report on the use of space technology global challenges in the delivery of sustainable develop-
to support climate action at the global level, which aims ment and carbon neutral cities.
to improve understanding of how selected stakeholders
are using space technology to support climate action. Primarily, by providing data on air and sea surface tem-
The report shows that climate observation, research, peratures, sea level and GHG concentration, Copernicus
science and policy are well-coordinated and evolving in observations and measurements allow climate scientists
an expanding stakeholder landscape. However, inconsist- and modellers to understand, monitor and forecast the
encies in the definition of climate action and services are extent of climate change. The Copernicus Sentinel-5
rendering coordination among stakeholders challenging. Precursor mission carrying the TROPOspheric Monitoring
Instrument (TROPOMI) is the first Copernicus mission ded-
Gaps have been identified in information-sharing efforts icated to monitoring the atmosphere and, since 2017, has
and networks that could increase awareness, understanding been measuring several atmospheric trace gases, including
and collaboration in the use of space for climate action. methane. In addition, the upcoming CO2M Copernicus
More could also be done to improve cooperation and coor- Expansion Mission will support emission measurements,
dination in capacity-building as an important component of focusing on anthropogenic CO (carbon dioxide) monitor-

successful and sustainable short and long-term actions. ing and methane from human activity.
UNOOSA aims to address potentially existing niches Those data, together with other Copernicus Sentinel
through supporting and promoting the use of space for satellites providing additional parameters at sea and
climate action. The Office serves as a conduit for facilitating land levels, are the base of climate models that support
69 Ice Sheets | Vital Signs – Climate Change: Vital Signs of the Planet (nasa.gov)
70 Increases in land surface temperature and water vapour analysed in new satellite data (climatechangenews.com)
71 Satellites track the health of the ozone layer - Earth Online (esa.int)

52 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
the forecasting of phenomena in the atmosphere, the
oceans and on land over seasonal, decadal and cen- Fact
tennial time-scales. The importance of those models
goes well beyond the scientific community. They
indeed became important decision-making tools for Approximately 60 terabytes of
environment-r elated national and international public data are downloaded from the
bodies – notably policymakers and environmental agen- C3S Climate Data Store every day
cies – non-governmental organizations, corporations and •
even the general public. Within this context, Copernicus, C3S makes use of 350 million
together with data from other Earth observation systems, observations every day to
is already successfully contributing to awakening global produce data provided in the
Climate Data Store
consciousness around the climate change issue.
•
The C3S key dataset is
EU Space data, however, do not only contribute to under-
7,000 terabytes
standing the issue, but rather and most importantly they
actively support the mitigation of the impacts of climate
change by informing sustainable business decisions.
Source: climate.copernicus.eu
The 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference
(also known as COP26) held in Glasgow made it clear
It provides information on climate change and on impacts
that it is imperative to identify potential opportunities to
for many sectors through the Climate Data Store, a
increase sustainable practices and develop a posture of
powerful cloud-based infrastructure providing access to
resilience.72 In 2022, the United Nations Climate Change
a vast range of global and regional information, including
Conference 2022 (COP27) focused on accountability,
climate data records derived from observations, the latest
fairness and an assessment of non-State progress at
ECMWF reanalyses, seasonal forecast data from multiple
COP27,73 and featured keynote speeches from the High-
providers and a large collection of climate projections.
level Climate Champions who presented the Summary of
Zooming in, C3S supports its users by sharing regular
Global Climate Action.74
climate updates relating to surface air temperature, sea
ice cover, precipitation and soil moisture, as well as river
In this sense, Copernicus becomes an active instrument
discharge, alpine glaciers and land surface information.
for business organizations to reduce emissions, end
These include the annual European State of the Climate
deforestation and protect oceans, ensuring sustainable
report76and monthly climate bulletins.77
prosperity without compromising the future.
C3S data is also used by The European Climate Adaptation
The focus of Copernicus on climate change mitigation
Platform Climate-ADAPT,78 which is a partnership
is emphasized by the fact that the Copernicus Climate
between the European Commission and the European
Change Service75 (C3S) is one of the six thematic services
Environment Agency (EEA). Climate-ADAPT is maintained
provided by Copernicus, supporting society by provid-
by the EEA with the support of the European Topic Centre
ing authoritative information about the past, present
on Climate Change Impacts, Vulnerability and Adaptation
and future climate in Europe and the rest of the World.
(ETC/CCA). The platform aims at supporting Europe in its
Implemented by ECMWF on behalf of the European
adaptation to climate change by helping users access and
Commission, C3S provides open and free access to state-
share data and information on topics such as expected
of-the-art climate data and tools for use by governments,
climate change in Europe, current and future vulnera-
public authorities and private entities around the world.
bility of regions and sectors, national and transnational
72 
73 
74 
75 For more information: 
76 
77 
78 

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 53
adaptation strategies and actions, adaptation case studies In a broader context, exhibit 19 lists many commercial
and potential adaptation options, and tools that support applications that support businesses in implementing
adaptation planning. sustainable practices: from agriculture, in which farm-
ers use Copernicus and EGNSS to optimize agricultural
Similarly, the Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service output while optimizing the use of pesticides and natural
(CAMS)79 supports the monitoring and understanding resources, to aviation in which EU Space data are used
of greenhouse gases, the hole in the ozone layer and air to monitor aircraft emissions or optimize the use of fuel
pollution levels. This service provides vital data to support while avoiding diversions.
policymakers, businesses and individuals in dealing with
air pollution episodes and understanding the shifts in the Nevertheless, another potentially impactful way EU Space
context of a changing atmosphere. data can contribute to mitigating the effects of climate
change relates to the role of Copernicus in supporting
Consistent information from CAMS allows users to assess companies operating under ESG criteria. Copernicus,
the past and to predict air quality up to five days into together with big data analysis and machine learning
the future. The data used and interpreted come from techniques that enable the extraction of insights, can,
satellites and in situ sensors on the ground and in the air. for example, effectively determine how businesses and
Furthermore, CAMS has a key role in the development industries are managing their carbon emissions, how
of the CO Monitoring and Verification Support Capacity they are impacting (or polluting) the environment, what

(CO2MVS) that will monitor anthropogenic CO emissions their GHG emission levels are or whether their supply

supporting the global efforts to curb emissions. Finally, chain truly adheres to certification programmes ensur-
every 12 hours, CAMS observations are provided in five ing sustainable plantations (e.g., of cocoa, oil palm or
main categories: air quality and atmospheric composition; coffee). The power of satellite data resides in the fact
solar energy; the ozone layer and ultraviolet radiation; they reveal insights based on real, observed data that
emissions and surface fluxes of pollution and greenhouse can be measured and compared over time and not on
gases; and climate forcing. proxies by estimates or reporting. Earth observation in
general and Copernicus in particular have the potential to
C3S and CAMS are game changers for the 2015 United support a real paradigm shift involving not only financial
Nations Climate Change Conference (known as COP21), institutions and socially responsible investors, but also
which negotiated the Paris Agreement on climate supporting and driving purchase decisions by customers,
change,80 where it was agreed to hold the global average ultimately avoiding “greenwashing” practices. In this
temperature rise to well below 2°C above pre-industrial context, EUSPA published the report EU Space for Green
levels, and to pursue efforts to limit it to 1.5°C. These Transformation: a new tool for companies to monitor their
services can help nations and businesses around the world sustainability targets .82
work to implement this global treaty but also to take
advantage of the economic opportunities it presents. Finally, GOVSATCOM may play a role in the environ-
mental and climate change challenge, enabling RPAS/
It is worth mentioning that CAMS and C3S made a UAV surveillance networks support, pollution detection
wide-ranging contribution to the Conference of the Parties or by providing a common communication channel to
of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate exchange information between various actors.
Change (COP27) in 2022. ECMWF organized several side
events highlighting the wealth of Earth observation data The relevance of the three EU Space components ser-
provided by CAMS and C3S and their applications. The vices (Copernicus, EGNSS and GOVSATCOM) for the
presence of ECMWF at COP underlined the strategic role environmental and climate change challenge is assessed
that the institution plays in supporting the development in exhibit 18, including examples of products and applica-
and monitoring of European climate policy.81 bility for services with high relevance.
79 
80 
81 and
 (Accessed )
82 (Accessed )

54 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
EXHIBIT 18 . E FO XA R M T P H L E E E S F F F N o o o O o o o d d d V F s s s Ie e e R c c c u u u Rr r r O i i i t t t E y y y W W WN L a a a t t t E e e e Mr r r V m m m E A a a a n n n N a a a N E E E g g g n n n e e e T F F F a a a C v v v m m m o o o n n ni i i Ar r r o o o e e e d d do o oE n n n d d d n n n c c c L t t t m m m l l l s s s i i i e e e m m m Oe e e c c cA n n n a a a u u u t t t t t t r r r a a a e e e Fi i i N t t t l l l y y y c c c D D D i i i W W W m m m h h h E i i i D a a a s s s a a a a a a p p p a a a n n n n n n t t t a a a U s s s g g g e e e r r r d d d c c c t t t e e er r r e e e e e e C t t t s s se e e m m m r r r p p p m m m S m m m o o oa a aL e e e n n n n n n a a a Pr r r I a a a s s s n n n g g g M e e e E E E g g gA a a a e e e n n n e e e g g g n n n a a a v v v m m m M M M e e e c c c n n n C i i i Ar r r y y y m m m e e e d d d o o o i i i g g g n n n e e e n n nT E c c c r r r t t t n n n m m m a a a l l l i i i t t t m m m Et t t e e e i i i o o oC n n n a a a n n n t t t t t tC a a a e e e O l l l c c c D D D i i i m m m H h h h U U Ui i i M a a a s s sa a a p p p a a a n n n r r r n n n A a a a b b b s s s g g g r r r d d d c c c t t t a a a e e e e e e Pe e e t t t n n n s s s e e e N r r r p p p i i im m m z z zO m m m o o o a a a e e eGn n n t t t a a a r r ri i i s s s o o o n n n g g g N e e e a a a n n n e e e E g g g n n nE M M M e e e c c c E E E y y y m m m C n n n i i i N g g g e e e e e e r r r r r r n n n a a a Hg g g t t t T t t t y y y i i i o o oA S n n n L S L U U U E r r r E b b b R a a a Nn n n V i i i z z z G a a a I t t t C i i i o o o E n n n E E E E S n n n e e e r r r g g g y y y
Open Service Open Service • Open Service/HAS - Although there is limited use of GNSS, there are
Open Service Open Service a number of techniques such as GNSS radio occultation sounding and
Open Service Open Service
HAS HAS GNSS reflectometry that support climate modelling. Both techniques can
HAS HAS benefit from improved performances offered by Galileo and its services.
OS-N H M A A S OS-N H M A A S GNSS is also used for biodiversity mapping or smart waste management
OS-NMA OS-NMA
OS-NMA OS-NMA
CAS CAS
CAS CAS
CAS CAS
PRS PRS
S S S P P O O O A A A R R R R R S S S S S Food security W S S S a P P tO O O A A A e R R r R R R S S S S Smana E g n e Fa v m on ir o e d o n d n c t m l si em e c n au t tr a eit l yc D i W m h i a s aa p a n nt a s g e r d• c t e r e e t s e m r p m m o aen nO G a ra s n g e E g a e a Sn e g n a v m lM e c n i i ar y m e l d o ie g n n e n cr t n m o al di t m t e i o n a i n E n t t a e l D c D i f m h uU iA a s a p a n r n t a b s g S r d u c t a e e e t n s e r r p oi m e z m o a e fn ) t a r f i s o n g e e p a n e g n r oM e c E y m r snig e e e i r t r n aag i t t o yi l o - n n ti i m nUg e rb s aan e niz r a d v tio i n c f r e e E n e o er- v goy e f r - c E h u a r r o g p e e i m th p a r t o c v a e n d b G e P u S s e (G d P , S fo + r
SoL SoL instance, for GIS mapping of protected areas, species monitoring, etc.
SoL SoL
Ope O n C S S M - e C C C E E E N r E D D D H L L L vS MM M M M i A AA A oc AS S S e S S S S S L Fo O od p s e eO c n u C r S S it M y - e C C C E E E W N r E D D D H L L L a vS M t M M M M i A AA A e oc rA S S S S e S S S S L m ana E g n e Fa v m on ir o e d o n d n c t m l si em e c n au t tr a eit l yc D i W m h i a s aa p a n nt a s g e r d• c t e r e e t s e m r p m m o aen nC t a ra s o n g e E g 3 a e n e g n ad vS m M e c n ir y m e d e o ig c n e n c v r t n m oal i t e m t e im o n a l n o t t a e b l p c D i i m h n U i a s a p a a n r n e a b s g ur d c t a e s e e t n st e r p i m h z o m o a e o n t a b r i s o n g r e a s n e i g n e tM e c Ea y m r nit g v e e i rr n aa v g t tyt e io i n o , q ns uU ra o ba l f i n t iz t y a h - ti a o e n s c sEu l n i e m r r e gya d t e in s fo ys r t m e a m ti o w n it h ab t o he u t l a th te e s t p s a c s i t e , nce
CMECMASS CMECMASS
current and future states of the climate in Europe and worldwide, e.g.,
CMEMS CMEMS
CAMS CAMS provide data on climate indicators (temperature, sea ice, sea level,
Open Service Open Service
CAPMRSS CAPMRSS greenhouse gas concentrations/fluxes, glaciers and ice sheets), climate
CAMS CAMS
C3S C3S projections, re-analysis, etc.
HAS HAS
S C CA 3 3R S S S C CA 3 3R S S • CAMS provides a wealth of data about air pollution and health and
CEMS CEMS greenhouse gases, for instance, data on pollutants such as PM2.5 and
OS-NMA OS-NMA
CEMS CEMS PM10, pollen, ozone, CO, methane, etc.
CEMOSS CEMOSS 2
CSS CSS • CMEMS, for example, provides key data products for sea ice monitoring
CAS CAS
CSS CSS to assess environmental, safety and societal impacts in both poles or pro-
CSS CSS
Copernicus d S a o ta L Copernicus d S a o ta L vide accurate forecasts concerning ocean currents and waves that can be
PRS PRS
Copernicus data Copernicus data used to compute oil spill drift forecasts, it also provides biogeophysical
CopernicusE DdaAtSa CopernicusE DdaAtSa
data and indicators to support ecosystem monitoring and restoration as
GOVSATCOMGOVSATCOM SAR SAR well that sustainable exploitation of the oceans.
G G O O V V S S A A T T C C O O M M G G O O V V S S A A T T C C O O M M CLMS CLMS • CLMS provides data on land cover to a broad range of users in the field
OS OS of environmental terrestrial applications, including information on land
#EUSpace #EUSpace use, land cover characteristics and changes, vegetation state, water cycle
# S # SE E y y n nU U e eS S r rp p g ga a i i e ec c s se e # S S # E E y y n nU U e eS S r rp p g ga a i i e ec c s se e CME S M o S L CME S M o S L and earth surface energy variables (e.g., CORINE land cover, snow and
Synergies Synergies ice monitoring, NATURA 2000, etc.). It also provides, over Europe, the
CAMS CAMS European Ground Motion Service (EGMS).
EDAS EDAS
Limited relevance/cLoimntirtiebdu trieolnevance/contr•ibS uigtCnioiEfincManSt, r efolerv eanxcaSemi/gcnpoinlfietcr,ai bnputr torieovlneidvaensc ed/rcooungtrhibtu-trieolnevant information and early
LimCit3eSd relevance/cLoimnCtirt3iebSdu trieolnevance/contribSuigtnioifincant relevancSei/gcnoinfitcraibnut trieolnevance/contribution
Limited relevance/cLoimntirtiebdu trieolnevance/contribSuigtwnioifiancrannint gresle fvoarn cESeui/gcrnooinpfitcerai bnautn trideol negvlaonbcea/llcyo notrr ibmuotinonitors forest fire risk or activity in
CLMS CLMS near-real time
CEMS CEMS
• The Copernicus Maritime Surveillance Service (CMS) in the framework of
CMEMS CMEMS the CSS provides for the detection of discharges of oil, assists in identi-
CSS CSS
fying polluting vessels, as well as monitoring the evolution of accidental
CAMS CAMS spills during emergencies
Copernicus data Copernicus data
C3S C3S
Common communication channel to exchange information between
GOVSATCOMGOVSATCOM CEMS CEMS various actors
• Maritime surveillance and ship • Member States ministries support
#EUSpace #EUSpace CSS CSS detection (e.g., agriculture, civil protection)
Synergies Synergies • Institutional and diplomatic • RPAs/UAV surveillance
Copernicus data Copernicus data support • Mission location support
• Civil-military interaction • Support to multiple crisis manage-
Limited relevance/cLoimntirtiebdu trieolnevance/contribSuigtnioifincant relevancSei/gcnoinfitcraibnut trieolnevance/contribution
ment zones
GOVSATCOMGOVSATCOM
#EUSpace #EUSpace • EGNSS and Copernicus complementarity; some emerging applications,
Synergies Synergies e.g., combining CAMS data with in situ air pollution monitoring devices
on vehicles within city, leveraging GNSS positioning. Furthermore,
GOVSATCOM may complement many applications by providing
communication channel
Limited relevance/cLoimntirtiebdu trieolnevance/contribSuigtnioifincant relevancSei/gcnoinfitcraibnut trieolnevance/contribution
Limited relevance/contribution Significant relevance/contribution

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 55
EXHIBIT 19 . LIST OF EGNSS AND COPERNICUS APPLICATIONS
ADDRESSING THE ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE CHALLENGE
MARKET SEGMENT APPLiCATiON DOMAiN EXAMPLES OF SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS
Carbon capture and content assessment
Environmental monitoring
Environmental impact monitoring
AGRiCULTURE Soil condition monitoring
Natural resources monitoring
Vegetation monitoring
Weather services for agriculture Climate services for agriculture
Aircraft emission measurement and monitoring
AViATiON Environmental monitoring
Particulate matter monitoring
Coastal ecosystems monitoring Coastal ecosystems monitoring
BiODiVERSiTY,
Snow and ice ecosystems monitoring Snow and ice ecosystems monitoring
ECOSYSTEMS
AND NATURAL
CAPiTAL Terrestrial ecosystems monitoring Terrestrial ecosystems monitoring
Water ecosystems monitoring Water ecosystems monitoring
Climate change mitigation and adaptation Climate change mitigation and adaptation
Earth observation-based modelling
Climate modelling
CLiMATE SERViCES GNSS-based climate modelling
Climate forecasting
Climate monitoring and forecasting
Climate monitoring
CONSUMER
SOLUTiONS, TOURiSM Health and lifestyle Air quality monitoring
AND HEALTH
ENERGY AND RAW Environmental impact assessment of energy
Environmental impact monitoring
MATERiALS and mineral resources plants
Environmental auditing Environmental auditing
ENViRONMENTAL
Environmental resources management
MONiTORiNG
Environmental resources management Impact studies and environmental, social and
corporate governance (ESG)
Biomass monitoring
Environmental monitoring
Deforestation/degradation monitoring
FORESTRY
Forest inventory monitoring
Natural resource monitoring Forest vegetation health monitoring
Illegal logging monitoring
Environmental impact assessment of
iNFRASTRUCTURE Environmental monitoring
infrastructure
Environmental monitoring Marine pollution monitoring
MARiTiME AND
iNLAND WATERWAYS Metocean (meteorology over oceans, and
Ocean services
offshore weather and sea state monitoring)
Copernicus application EGNSS application Synergetic application (combined use of Copernicus and EGNSS)

56 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
anticipates monitoring and protecting up to 40 million EXHIBIT 20 . WEATHER, CLIMATE AND WATER-RELATED DISASTERS IN EUROPE DURING 2021
3 .4 .4 Use cases
hectares of global forests by 2030, saving foresters over Note: Impacts for some disaster occurrences may be missing due to data unavailability
€468 million in monitoring costs.83
Satellites for wilderness inspection and
EVENTS DEATHS AFFECTED PEOPLE ECONOMIC DAMAGE
forest threat tracking
Monitoring the human impact on 2% 4% 8% 6% 1%2% 11% 5%
Forests are essential to life on Earth. They provide 1% 19% 1%
CO emissions 10% 29%
habitats for fauna and flora and combat climate change 2
through carbon sequestration. However, our forests are To support European Union countries in assessing
51 297 510K 51 454M
threatened by insect outbreaks, fires, windthrow and their progress towards the targets agreed in the Paris
droughts. Notably, insect pest outbreaks are one of the Agreement, monitoring global compliance and support-
leading causes of forest loss globally. Pests are respon- ing the European Green Deal, the European Commission
sible for damaging 35 million hectares of forest around aims to provide observation-based information on 55% 85% 78% 83%
the world every year. In the Mediterranean region alone CO emissions.

Storm Flood Wildfire Landslide Extreme temperature
an area the size of Slovakia – five million hectares – is
affected by pests annually, according to the United In line with these objectives, The H2020 CoCO2 project
Source: State of the Climate in Europe 2021. Source of data: EM/DAT, accessed on 9 .
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). builds the prototype systems for a European Monitoring
and Verification Support capacity for anthropogenic
At the same time, wildfires destroy millions of hectares of CO emissions, which will be implemented as part of

forests annually on a global scale, according to data from Copernicus. Since 2021 CoCO2 is bringing together
the Global Wildfire Information System. The wind is also expertise, existing capacities and innovative ideas from a
a significant forest disturbance agent in the temperate wide range of European and international players.
forests of France, Germany and most of Europe.
The CoCO2 project is a continuation of the CO Human

Climate change affects forests, causing insects to breed Emissions (CHE) project and builds on some of the work
more frequently. It also provides more dry fuel for global initiated in the Verifying Greenhouse Gas Emissions
wildfires. The dry conditions increase the length of the (VERIFY) project.
fire season and the size of areas affected by the fires. In
addition, both the frequency and the severity of large The prototypes are designed to leverage as much as
storms causing windthrow can be attributed to climate possible the already existing Copernicus infrastructure
change. As a result, countless habitats are lost, and a while ensuring that all the components needed for the
large volume of absorbed CO is released back into the attribution of CO emissions are properly developed (e.g.,
2 2
atmosphere. Earth system models, data assimilation techniques, prior
emission estimation, etc.).84
The Horizon Europe SWIFTT project provides a scientifi-
cally sound and technically feasible way to help monitor Considering the importance of the environmental and
and manage forest risks: windthrow, insect outbreaks, climate change challenge, two more examples of other
and forest fires. SWIFTT enables forest managers to European Union initiatives are provided below.
adapt to climate change with affordable, simple and
effective remote sensing tools backed up by powerful
State of the climate in Europe – the first
machine learning models. This solution offers a monthly
edition of the joint WMO – C3S State of the
health monitoring service using Copernicus satellite
Climate in Europe report
imagery to detect and map the various risks to which for-
ests and their managers are exposed. Early threat detec- Europe is the fastest warming World Meteorological
tion aids timely intervention. SWIFTT has been tested Organization (WMO) region and the direct impacts of
in real conditions by several end users from the forest climate change affected hundreds of thousands of
industry, which include Fürstliches Forstamt, Groupe citizens during 2021, according to a new report issued by
Coopération Forestière and the Rigas Mezia. The project the WMO and the C3S.
83 
84 

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 57
anticipates monitoring and protecting up to 40 million EXHIBIT 20 . WEATHER, CLIMATE AND WATER-RELATED DISASTERS IN EUROPE DURING 2021
hectares of global forests by 2030, saving foresters over Note: Impacts for some disaster occurrences may be missing due to data unavailability
€468 million in monitoring costs.83
EVENTS DEATHS AFFECTED PEOPLE ECONOMIC DAMAGE
Monitoring the human impact on 2% 4% 8% 6% 1%2% 11% 5%
1% 19% 1%
CO emissions 10% 29%

To support European Union countries in assessing
51 297 510K 51 454M
their progress towards the targets agreed in the Paris
Agreement, monitoring global compliance and support-
ing the European Green Deal, the European Commission
aims to provide observation-based information on 55% 85% 78% 83%
CO emissions.

Storm Flood Wildfire Landslide Extreme temperature
In line with these objectives, The H2020 CoCO2 project
Source: State of the Climate in Europe 2021. Source of data: EM/DAT, accessed on 9 .
builds the prototype systems for a European Monitoring
and Verification Support capacity for anthropogenic
CO emissions, which will be implemented as part of This first edition of the joint State of the Climate in

Copernicus. Since 2021 CoCO2 is bringing together Europe report85 was released on 2 and
expertise, existing capacities and innovative ideas from a is part of a global WMO-led effort to provide essential
“With Destination Earth,
wide range of European and international players. climate data and information tailored to the specific
needs of each region, enhancing adaptation and mitiga- we are building on
The CoCO2 project is a continuation of the CO Human tion strategies. An interactive story map with the main Europe's strong cards.

Emissions (CHE) project and builds on some of the work findings completes the nearly 50-page assessment.
From artificial intelligence,
initiated in the Verifying Greenhouse Gas Emissions
cloud computing, high-
(VERIFY) project. The State of the Climate in Europe report gives a compre-
hensive assessment of 2021, its key extreme weather speed connectivity
The prototypes are designed to leverage as much as events, their impacts and future scenarios for the region.
networks to our successful
possible the already existing Copernicus infrastructure
Copernicus Earth
while ensuring that all the components needed for the
attribution of CO emissions are properly developed (e.g., EU Space contribution to a “digital twin” observation programme

Earth system models, data assimilation techniques, prior of the Earth and our world leading
emission estimation, etc.).84
Copernicus will also play a role in Destination Earth EuroHPC supercomputers,
(DestinE),86 the European Commission initiative which we are combining our
Considering the importance of the environmental and
aims to develop a very high-precision digital model of the
climate change challenge, two more examples of other assets to make our future
Earth (a “digital twin”) to monitor and predict environ-
European Union initiatives are provided below.
more safe and secure”.
mental change and human impact to support sustainable
development.
State of the climate in Europe – the first Thierry Breton,
edition of the joint WMO – C3S State of the DestinE will provide unique digital modelling capabilities Commissioner for the Internal Market
Climate in Europe report of the Earth to enhance the ability of the European Union
to monitor and model environmental changes, predict
Europe is the fastest warming World Meteorological
extreme events, and adapt European Union actions and
Organization (WMO) region and the direct impacts of
policies to climate-related challenges. DestinE builds on at our disposal, and on European excellence in data and
climate change affected hundreds of thousands of
European Union investment in high-performance comput- AI technologies. The Commission, ESA, EMCWF and
citizens during 2021, according to a new report issued by
ing, the massive space and socioeconomic data sources EUMETSAT will gradually develop the DestinE systems,
the WMO and the C3S.
85 
86 

58 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
called Digital Twins. By the end of 2024, the DestinE • The Digital Twin on weather-induced and geo-
system will consist of the following: physical hazards will focus on floods, droughts,
heat waves and geophysical phenomena such as
Ô Core Service Platform. It will provide decision-making earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and tsunamis. In
tools, applications and services, based on an open, case of floods, for example, this Digital Twin will
flexible and secure cloud-based computing system help local and regional authorities to test actions
with greater accuracy that will help save lives and
Ô Data Lake. Storage space and seamless access to
reduce property damage
the data sets. The data lake will leverage existing sci-
entific data sets, such as the Copernicus Data Access • The Digital Twin on climate change adaptation will
infrastructure, complemented by other non-space provide observation and simulation capabilities
sources, such as sensor-based environmental data to support activities and mitigation scenarios for
and socioeconomic data climate change. To help achieve carbon neutrality,
information will be made available from different
Ô Digital Twins that combine data from real-time
domains such as sustainable agriculture, energy
observations and simulations:
security and protection of biodiversity
3 .5 THE DiSASTER MANAGEMENT AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CHALLENGE
AND THE ROLE OF EU SPACE
“Extreme weather events will 3 .5 .1 introduction
happen. But they do not need
If current trends continue, the number of disasters per
to become deadly disasters.”
year globally may increase from around 400 in 2015 to
560 per year by 2030 – a forecasted increase of 40 per
António Guterres, cent during the lifetime of the Sendai Framework. The
Secretary-General of the United Nations
number of extreme temperature events per year is also
increasing and, based on current trends, will almost triple
between 2001 and 2030.
Risk is increasing globally, as are the frequency and costs
of disasters. Intensive and extensive risks are growing
at an unprecedented rate. Human activities are creating
Fact greater and more dangerous risk. As risk multiplies, it
has increasing impacts on communities and on entire
systems. Everyone is living downstream of something
While disasters are claiming else. Global impacts become local, and vice versa. They
fewer lives annually, they cascade across sectors, creating new challenges. For
are also costing more and droughts, there is a significant year-to-year variation, but
increasing poverty research indicates a likely increase of more than 30 per
cent between 2001 and 2030. While disasters are claim-
ing fewer lives annually, they are also costing more and
increasing poverty. Economic losses from disasters have
more than doubled over the past three decades, showing
an increase of 145 per cent from an average of around
US$70 billion per year in the 1990s to over US$170 billion

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 59
per year in the decade ending in 2020. Approximately motion of tectonic plates and the magnitude of the most
40 per cent of this loss is insured. However, such cov- powerful earthquakes, particularly when seismometers
erage is overwhelmingly concentrated in developed become saturated. The global coverage of the signals
countries, with insurance coverage rates in the develop- provided by these constellations of satellites allows emer-
ing world averaging less than 9 per cent. There are many gency responders to supply coordinates of landing sites to
systemic risks and trends, such as sea level rise, for which helicopter pilots in areas affected by disasters. They also
insurance is not an option.87 help develop more accurate maps of disaster areas and
facilitate interoperability of data and information.
3 .5 .2 Space and disaster Communication satellites are essential when there is a
management and need to transmit messages very rapidly across vast areas.
emergency response The transmission of messages regarding tsunamis is of
relevance, not only from one continent to another, but
Reliable and timely information is essential when it comes also to small, populated islands which may otherwise be
to dealing with natural hazards and the resulting disasters unreachable. Communication satellites also allow devices
– especially when infrastructure is hindered or ineffective. such as deep-sea buoys, rainfall and river level gauges,
Satellites provide this information in a variety of ways. and seismographs to transmit their data to specialized
They help disaster responders by giving a clear picture of centres where they are processed to identify disasters.
inaccessible, flooded or damaged areas. They allow for dis- Simple applications of georeferenced photographs also
aster risk reduction by informing, for example, urban plan- allow crowdsourcing of in situ data to assess damage.
ners. They enable communication in emergency situations The COSPAS-SARSAT programme is especially useful, in
and the identification of precise locations of first response that it allows maritime vessels, airplanes and people to
teams, shelters, disaster areas or vulnerable populations. send distress alerts and location information for search
The information gathered by satellites can help anticipate and rescue operations.
or plan for the consequences of disasters such as earth-
quakes, floods, landslides, wildfires or tsunamis. In its resolution 61/110 of 14 , the
General Assembly agreed to establish the “United
Earth observation satellites provide valuable additional Nations Platform for Space-based Information for
input that can be used to: Disaster Management and Emergency Response -
UN-SPIDER” as a new United Nations programme as
Ô Track the path of tropical storms including typhoons,
part of UNOOSA, with the following mission statement:
cyclones and hurricanes worldwide while enabling
“Ensure that all countries and international and regional
the monitoring of their impact
organizations have access to and develop the capacity to
Ô Assess the changing morphology of volcanic domes, use all types of space-based information to support the
the dispersion of ash emitted when eruptions occur, full disaster management cycle”.
or the ground deformation during seismic episodes
A number of initiatives in recent years have contributed
Ô Visualize the geographical extent and impact of
to making space technologies available for humanitarian
floods even under cloudy conditions or at night
aid and emergency response. Yet, UN-SPIDER is the first
thanks to radar data, and the extent and conse-
to focus on the need to ensure access to and use of such
quences of forest fires
technologies during all phases of the disaster manage-
Ô Detect accidental or voluntary oil spills and predict ment cycle, including the risk reduction phase which is
their drifting pattern crucial for reducing the losses of lives and property. The
UN-SPIDER programme is achieving this by focusing on
Ô Monitor droughts and their effects on soils, vegeta-
being a gateway to space information for disaster man-
tion and crops
agement support, by serving as a bridge to connect the
Global navigation and positioning satellites orbit the Earth disaster management, risk management and space com-
on a permanent basis and are used to assess the relative munities and by being a facilitator of capacity-building
87 GAR2022: Our World at Risk | UNDRR

60 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
and institutional strengthening for developing countries. and assess their magnitude. This could bring an
UN-SPIDER is being implemented as an open network of additional 10 to 30 seconds of warning to a city or
providers of space-based solutions to support disaster nuclear reactor of an imminent quake, which could
management activities. result in enormous social benefits.
Ô During a disaster, Earth observation/Copernicus
data provide rapid mapping, while GNSS provides
3 .5 .3 EU Space specific support
support to ancillary data sources (e.g., crowdsourced
EGNSS and Copernicus contribute to addressing the mapping updates, geolocalized social media posts,
disaster management and emergency response challenge precision guidance for surveying drones, etc.),
by enabling several applications thanks to the provision allowing emergency response to be coordinated as
of specific services: efficiently as possible.
Ô Copernicus provides supporting information for emer- Ô Finally, during post-event analysis, the comparison
gency response and disaster management in relation of recent and archive Earth observation/Copernicus
to different types of disasters, including meteorolog- data assists relevant actors with an accurate damage
ical hazards (for example, severe storms, floods), and assessment and has been used in international
geophysical hazards (volcanic eruptions and earth- efforts such as the Recovery Observatory, assisting
quakes or tsunamis), wildfire hazards, or deliberate the elaboration of the post-disaster needs assess-
and accidental human-made disasters (e.g., industrial ment which is the basis for allocating recovery funds
accidents) and other humanitarian disasters and dif-
ferent stages of emergency management. Specifically, the Copernicus Emergency Management
Service88 (Copernicus EMS) is the European Union tool
Ô The main contribution of EGNSS is its SAR capability
developed to provide the actors involved in all the phases
to locate persons in distress to ensure the quickest
of the disaster management cycle, and of humanitarian
response time. EGNSS (Open Service or PRS) is
crises, with timely and accurate geospatial informa-
crucial to guiding or navigating first responders or
tion derived from Earth observation satellite data and
drones safely. Furthermore, the above-mentioned
completed by available in situ or open data sources. The
services are complemented by Galileo HAS which
Copernicus EMS consists of the following components:
increases the positioning accuracy down to 20cm
globally, and OSNMA or CAS which increase the Ô Copernicus EMS on-demand mapping provides
robustness of positioning. on-demand detailed information for selected emer-
gency situations that arise from natural or human-
Furthermore, Copernicus provides information for emer- made disasters anywhere in the world.
gency response and disaster risk management at each of
Ô Rapid mapping provides geospatial information
the following stages:
within hours or days of a service request to support
Ô For preparedness, prevention, risk reduction and emergency management activities in an urgent
recovery phases, Copernicus provides risk, hazard mode.
and vulnerability assessments and simulation
Ô Risk and recovery mapping supplies geospatial infor-
models.
mation in support of disaster management activities,
Ô For early warning, Earth observation/Copernicus including prevention, preparedness, risk reduction
data provide continuous observations and forecasts and recovery phases.
for many types of disasters such as flooding (e.g.,
Ô Exposure mapping:
hydrological modelling), earthquakes (e.g., surface
deformation), landslides (e.g., ground motion), • The exposure mapping component provides highly
volcanic eruptions (e.g., atmospheric composition), accurate and continuously updated information on
tsunamis (e.g., wave height), wildfires (e.g., soil the presence of human settlements and population
moisture conditions) and others. Galileo receivers with the Global Human Settlement Layer (GHSL).
can then help to detect earthquakes and floods The following data sets are provided:
88 For more information: 

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 61
• Population grids representing the amount of As an example of the usefulness of CEMS for involved
resident population at a fine spatial resolution operators, between June and , the peak
of the European wildfire season, the CEMS rapid map-
• Built-up surface grids representing human set-
ping (RM) and risk and recovery mapping (RRM) modules
tlements and their characteristics (such as land
were activated 50 times in the case of RM and 6 times in
use and density)
the case of RRM in order to assess the damage caused by
• Detailed information on exposure is fundamen- wildfires in Europe.89
tal to manage crisis and assess disaster risk.
It allows answering questions like how many Also, other Copernicus services (in a limited number
people are living in a flooded area or how many of cases) can provide relevant information and data
settlements will be affected by a cyclone. for disaster and emergency management, such as the
Copernicus CSS (only to authorized users), which is
Ô Early warning and monitoring with critical geospa- described in section 3.6 below on the migration chal-
tial information at the European and global level lenge or CMEMS with ocean products that can help to
through continuous observations and forecasts for develop early warning systems or services related to
floods, droughts and forest fires: extremes and hazards.
• European Flood Awareness Systems
In all previously mentioned examples of disasters, GNSS
(EFAS) and Global Flood Awareness Systems
also plays a crucial role in search and rescue operations
(GloFAS) provide complementary flood forecast
through the Galileo SAR Service, which is contributing
information to relevant stakeholders that support
to the Cospas-Sarsat MEOSAR programme. Specifically,
flood risk management at the national, regional
Galileo provides a unique contribution via the provi-
and global level.
sion of the Galileo Return Link Service (RLS), declared
• The Global Flood Monitoring tool provides auto- operational by the European Commission on 21 January
matic and continuous processing of Copernicus 2020. RLS is a free-of-charge global service available to
Sentinel-1 radar data to extract flooded areas and Cospas-Sarsat RLS-compatible beacons and it enables
is reprocessing the entire Sentinel-1 archive to a communication link that relays return link messages
provide times series from 2015 for urban planning, (RLM) back to the originating beacon through the Galileo
territorial management and insurance applications. Navigation Signal in Space. The uniqueness of the RLS
message resides in the fact that beacon owners receive
• The European Forest Fire Information System
the confirmation that their emergency rescue has been
(EFFIS) monitors forest fire activity in near-real
initiated and search and rescue teams know exactly
time over non-cloudy areas and delivers fire
where they are. By knowing this, thanks to Galileo RLS,
risk estimate forecasts. EFFIS supports wild-
users in distress are provided with the needed confidence
fire management at the national and regional
to patiently wait for help, avoiding any risky operations.
level for European Union Member States and
across the Middle East and North Africa. Its
If the Galileo SAR service is primarily intended to assist
pre-operational counterpart, the Global Wildfire
people in distress with no connectivity, Galileo and
Information System, supplies similar information at
EGNOS also greatly contribute to the functioning of
a global level
everyday emergency response solutions such as eCall.
• The European and Global Drought Observatories This service ensures rapid assistance to motorists involved
(EDO and GDO) provide drought-relevant infor- in a collision anywhere within the European Union by
mation and early warnings and analyses. The automatically sharing, as soon as the call is initiated, the
service publishes short analytical reports (Drought Galileo-derived incident location to the nearest public
News) in anticipation of an imminent drought. safety answering point. This substantially improves the
existing accuracy provided by mobile network oper-
ators via network-based location solution (Cell-ID)
technologies. By speeding up emergency response times
89 Information Bulletin 163 - Exceptional mobilisation of Copernicus Emergency Management Service during the 2022 wildfire crisis | COPERNICUS EMER-
GENCY MANAGEMENT SERVICE

62 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
EXHIBIT 21 . E FO XA R Fo M oTd P s H ecL E urE i ty D S Wa It O Ser A mFa S nR a T E g E n e E a v m n L ir R e d o E n n c t m l V M i m en Aa t t A a e N l c D i N m h F i a C s a p o a n nA a o s g r d c Et e d e e t s G e r s p m e m o Oc e E n a ur s n g r eF M i a e ty g n WM e c E E y m aigt U e eNr n ra t t m i T o Sann P a A E g A n e U N a v m n C r ir b e d o Da n nE cn t m l ii zm e a E C n ati t to M a e O n l c D i m h E E i M a s a p n a n nR a e s g r d c r t e e P g e t G s e r y p m O m oE e n a r s n g N N e a e g n E M e C cy m i N gY e r n a t T ti R o Sn E S S U E P rb R Oan V iz N aItCio S n E E E S n Ce r gH y ALLENGE n (e o .g g ., r o d u u n ri d n g st a a t n i o e n a s r , t h e q it u h a e k r e b ) e o c r a b u e se c a t u h s e e y t w h e e r y e n d e e v s e t r r oyed
O O O p p p e e e O n n n S S S S - e e e N r r r H H H Cv v v P M i i i A A A A R c c c A S e S e S S S e F F F o o o o o o d d d s s s e e e c c c u u u r r r i i i t t t y y y W W W a a a O O O t t t e e e r r r p p p m m m e e e a a a O n n n n n n a a a S E E E S S S g g g n n n e e e - e e e a a a v v v m m m N n n n r r r i i i H H H C r r r e e e d d d v v P v o o o M n n n n n n i i i A A A A R c c c t t t c c c m m m l l l A i i i S e S e S S S e m m m e e e n n n a a a t t t t t t a a a e e e l l l c c c D D D i i i m m m h h h F F F i i i a a a s s s a a a p p p o o o a a a n n n n n n a a a o o o s s s g g g r r r d d d c c c t t t e e e d d d e e e e e e t t ts s s e e e r r r s s sp p p m m m e e e m m m o o o c c c e e e n n n a a a u u u r r r s s s n n n g g g r r re e e i i i a a a e e e t t t y y y g g g n n n W W W M M M e e e c c c y y y m m m a a a i i i g g g t t t e e e e e e • • r r r n n n r r r a a a t t t t t t m m mi i i o o o a a a n n n n n n G s n m d t O i e n a a a e e e m E E E g g g i a c p s e a n n n e e e r U U U w a a a v v v m m m t r l v s e m e n n n r r r i i i i e r r r rb b b e e e l d d d i s o o o e r n e c a a a n n n f a n n n a s g c c c n n n t t t u s e m m m o l l l s i i i i i i g S z z z m m m e s k n e e e a a ae n n n a e e a a a t t t S n n ci i i t t t t t t t o o o v a a a e e e s r t A h c o t n n n l l l v h a i c c c D D D y i i i a o w m m m ( h h h R i E E E e i i i i R a a a c s s s t a a a l p p p n n n n r a a a n n n / a n n n e a a a e e e L e s s s g g g e R r r r r e d d d a c c c r r r t t t e e e b e e e o Mg g g e e e t t t s x s s s e e e m e l a r r r y y y p p p l im m m p b a em m m t o o o t n ) e e e e y n n n o u c u a a a r r r d s s sb n n ntg g g r t e e e r s n a a a e oe e e g l n a g g g t n n n y H s n M M M e e e n c c c e c e C y y y m m m L a A w i i i k e n g g g s e e e i O b r r r s n n n n c S a a a h t t t t t t t t s l y k o i i i S e e o o o o i n n n n a P r s r S t e b e n A h e a G s e d e U U U t S r c N c h v r r r - b b b c u a o o i e S a a a o S c c e n n n r m y A i i i e S c o i z z z g a a a h u R a m r t t t ( m i i i i d a o o o R r r S n n n n e a u s i L A u a n c n E E E S b t l T a y n n n t i i ) e e ee n c i t - r r r R o e o g g g a e g c y y y L f d t f o n f i b S t o e n a h i e n n r s c s e s a t i o t e l e c i a p i m n l a o f l o fi a k f t n p r e c s t e , a t i i i d o t h e e t t i h i n a o n - a b o u t t n n l a l f e s r y i d - n n e c i b d a g n l s h a s e e f , a m y o a a a p r s r c g r l u o m l c r o o e l e s h t n i w s i t n g - s i u a f b g i . l r n n r o e l n T g e d p b q h , e l a u i r e h n o e l e e k p s n l c l p c e u y s e i n e a c o t P f r o e h o s x r t s e r o h i m t s p r e g a h t e o m r p e e r a n d i p s u s A m s e l n e i i G r c n c m i c c u a a O t t a e r t i c h i c i t V . t t o i e ) y o o S F ? n - r n fi A o r s O s e r ? T r s s i l r C n a e u S t w t x c u O p t e a h c h h l d M a m h e a a c t i , s p i e n c s i t l o c t f e h ( t h i m e t h d , e e h . e G e g m e f c n o . c O u o , e t u a n s i o V n r s n . i t r e d S c h d F r A a e d o u i p t n T m u r s i a o i C e l r s o l t n i a r O i i n t t s o s r e u g - M n r o d a e r c t f e o e q c y io t n g f a u b h i n e i n i e e o e r s m e d r n b E a l s e i e s e t k U e t r s n e g a u c u S v c s e u t c i p k e h r n r h o s a d e e c c n s y a e e - n , d
rapid mapping, safe navigation of UAVs (such as those used by the new
OS-NSMAAR OS-NSMAAR Copernicus EMS aerial component) or detect/assess earthquake magni- ment, early warning systems, satellite radio broadcasting
OpeOn SS-eNrvMicAe OpeOn SS-eNrvMicAe
tude; OS-NMA and CAS increase robustness to spoofing
for sharing emergency messages with the population or
CAS CAS
HCOAASSS HCOAASSS • PRS with an encrypted navigation service for governmental authorized
users and sensitive applications that require high continuity (for users smart emergency response vehicles.
PRS PRS
OS-NPSMRoASL OS-NPSMRoASL such as fire brigade, health service, humanitarian aid, search and rescue
CM C E E DC L S S S P S SM M O O A A AAA R o o R R R SS S S S S S L L Food security Water man C a E g M n e C E a v m n i E DC L r S S S e d P o S SM M n O O A A A n AA R c o o t m l i R R R S S S S S S S L L m en a t t a e l c D i m h F i a s a p o a n n a o s g r d c t e d e e t s e r s p m e m o c e n a ur s n g r e i a e ty g n WM e cy m aigt e e • r n ra t t m ioann o O ( m G a E g r S an e P Ua p v m p nr i S a r b e d o o pa n n n cn t l + m il i i d in zm c e a g n e atGi Et to a e , n l a o D c D e i m h l r E i i Aa s t a p n la n n c n e a e s g S r d c r t e . a e o g e t ) s e r y p o v m m o i i e f n ng a r f s n g e e a a e f g u nr t M e c i t y m r o i u g e e nr n r a a t e t. i l o - )n t p im o U e s rb i t a a n io n izan d tio i n n f r g e En e s er - e g o y rv f- i c c h e a o rg ve e r i m Eu p r r o o p v e e , d u G se P d S f or T ( d is C h i s a o e a s p s s r e t e e e r l s e n r s v i e m c a d u a n s n i c , n a e G g e o a x e f l h m il t i e h b e o e i n t , t f 2 E o a 2 G u n , r N d i n E O e c U m l S u S d e a p r i n n g a d g c e e n G e c c x O y o a V m r m e S p p s A p l o T e o n C s n e O o s n e f M t s p c ) r s h o f e a o d r l r v l u e i t c c n h e t g e s s e
and applicability for services with high relevance.
EDAS EDAS
Open SCeEArDvMOiAcSeSS Open SCeEArDvMOiAcSSeS
C C HL L CSM M A3oSS S SL C C HL L CSM M A3oSSS S L • CEMS provides information for prevention, preparedness, response and
recovery activities for different natural and human-made disasters and
OC
C
SM
M
C-ENE
E
EDMM
M
MAASS
S
S OC
C
SM
M
C-ENEE
E
DMMM
M
AASSS
S other humanitarian crises. The service includes an on-demand mapping EXHIBIT 22 . LIST OF EGNSS AND COPERNICUS APPLICATIONS ADDRESSING THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT
and an Early Warning component, complemented by wildfire information
C CC A A C L C M M M ASS S S S S C CC A A C L CM MM ASS S SS S services (EFFIS), Flood Awareness Systems (EFAS, GLOFAS and Global AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE CHALLENGE
Flood Monitoring tool) and the Drought Observatories (EDO and GDO)
Copernicus dCPaR3tSSa Copernicus dCPaR3tSSa
CMECM3SS CMECM3SS • As part of the CSSa, for example, Support to European Union External
Action assists non-European Union countries in situations of crisis or
GOVSATCOM GOVSATC
C
C CA
E
E
SM
MM O
ARS
SS M C
C
CA
E
E
SM
MM
ARS
SS emerging crisis and can provide rapid, on-demand geospatial informa- MARKET SEGMENT APPLiCATiON DOMAiN EXAMPLES OF SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS
tion for monitoring of events or activities outside Europe
CSS CSS
CCO3SSSS CCO3SSSS • Various CMEMSb ocean products are helpful for the development of Early warning Early warning
#EUSpace C # o E p U er S ni p cu a s c d e a ta Copernicus data early warning systems or services that relate to extreme weather and GNSS-enabled ocean monitoring buoys
Synergies CSoypneernricguiCse Eds SMaotSaL CopernicuCs EdSMaotSaL hazards (e.g., sea surface temperature as a driver of hurricanes)
• C3S data and information, for example, helps to better understand Post-event analysis Post-event analysis
GOVSATCOM GOVSATECDCOASSSM EDCASSS extreme hydrometeorological events or the climate projections can fore-
GOVSATCOM GOVSALTimCiOteMd relevance/contributioLnimited relevanScigen/cifiocnatnritb ruetlieovnance/contribuStiigonnificant relevance/contribution EMERGENCY
see an increase in heavy rain events Preparedness Preparedness
Copernicus data Copernicus data MANAGEMENT AND
#EUSpace #EUSpaCcLeM S CLMS HUMANiTARiAN AiD
S #E yn U e S r p g a ie c s e S #E yn U e S r p g a ie c s e Rapid mapping Rapid mapping
Synergies SynergCMieEsMS CMEMS • Coordination of emergency • Support to multiple crisis
GOVSATCOM GOVSATCOM response actors in communica- management zones
Beacons for aviation
LCimAiMteSd relevance/contributioLnCimAiMteSd relevanScigen/cifiocnatnritb ruetl t ieo io vna n n s c - e d / e co n n ie tr d ib u e St n iigo v nn i i r fi o c n an m t e re n le t vance/contrib • ut io I n ntense density areas, assets Search and rescue Beacons for maritime
#EUSpace #EUSpaLimceite d relevance/contributioLnimited relevanScigen/cifiocnatnr•itb ruetlEieoavnarlnyc ew/caornntirnibgu Stsiigyosnntifiecmanst relevance/contributiosnurveillance
Beacons on land
Synergies SynergieCs3S C3S • Satellite radio broadcasting for • Law enforcement support
sharing emergency messages operations
CEMS CEMS with population • Search and rescue operations MARiTiME AND Metocean (meteorology over oceans, and
Limited relevance/contributioLnimited relevanScigen/cifiocnatnr•itb ruetlSieomvnaanrcte /ecmonetrrigbeuStniigocnnyi firceasnpt orenlesvea nce/contrib•ut ioPnollution detection iNLAND WATERWAYS Ocean services offshore weather and sea state monitoring)
CSS CSS vehicles • Response environmental
• Institutional support monitoring
Copernicus data Copernicus data • Civil-military operation • Critical key infrastructure
iNSURANCE AND Event footprint
• RPAs/UAV surveillance management Insurance for natural disasters
FiNANCE Risk modelling
• Mission location support
GOVSATCOM GOVSATCOM
#EUSpace #EUSpace • EGNSS, Copernicus and GOVSATCOM complementarity; EU Space com- Copernicus application EGNSS application Synergetic application (combined use of Copernicus and EGNSS)
Synergies Synergies ponents contribute to all phases of the disaster/emergency management
cycle
Limited relevance/contributioLnimited relevanScigen/cifiocnatnritb ruetlieovnance/contribuStiigonnificant relevance/contribution
a Only to authorized users and in a limited number of cases.
b In a limited number of cases.
Limited relevance/contribution Significant relevance/contribution

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 63
EXHIBIT 21 . E FO XA R Fo M oTd P s H ecL E urE i ty D S Wa It O Ser A mFa S nR a T E g E n e E a v m n L ir R e d o E n n c t m l V M i m en Aa t t A a e N l c D i N m h F i a C s a p o a n nA a o s g r d c Et e d e e t s G e r s p m e m o Oc e E n a ur s n g r eF M i a e ty g n WM e c E E y m aigt U e eNr n ra t t m i T o Sann P a A E g A n e U N a v m n C r ir b e d o Da n nE cn t m l ii zm e a E C n ati t to M a e O n l c D i m h E E i M a s a p n a n nR a e s g r d c r t e e P g e t G s e r y p m O m oE e n a r s n g N N e a e g n E M e C cy m i N gY e r n a t T ti R o Sn E S S U E P rb R Oan V iz N aItCio S n E E E S n Ce r gH y ALLENGE b co y u 4 n 0 t r p y e si r d c e e , n it t i i s n e u s r t b im an a t a e r d e a t s h a a t n e d C 5 a 0 ll p c e o r u c ld e n h t e i l n p t p h r e e vent n (e o .g g ., r o d u u n ri d n g st a a t n i o e n a s r , t h e q it u h a e k r e b ) e o c r a b u e se c a t u h s e e y t w h e e r y e n d e e v s e t r r oyed
O O O p p p e e e O n n n S S S S - e e e N r r r H H H Cv v P v M i i i A A A A R c c c A S e S e S S S e F F F o o o o o o d d d s s s e e e c c c u u u r r r i i i t t t y y y W W W a a a O O O t t t e e e r r r p p p m m m e e e a a a O n n n n n n a a a S E E E S S S g g g n n n e e e - e e e a a a v v v m m m N n n n r r r i i i H H H C r r r e e e d d d v P v v o o o M n n n n n n i i i A A A A R c c c t t t c c c m m m l l l A i i i S e S S S e S e m m m e e e n n n a a a t t t t t t a a a e e e l l l c c c D D D i i i m m m h h h F F F i i i a a a s s sa a a p p p o o o a a a n n n n n n a a a o o o s s s g g g r r r d d d c c c t t t e e e d d d e e e e e e t t t s s s e e e r r r s s sp p p m m m e e e m m m o o o c c c e e en n n a a a u u u r r rs s s n n n g g gr r re e e i i i a a ae e et t t y y y g g g n n n W W W M M M e e e c c c y y y m m m a a a i i i g g g t t t e e e e e e • • r r r n n n r r r a a a t t t t t t m m mi i i o o o a a a n n n n n n G s n m d t O i e n a a a e e e m E E E g g g i a c p s e a n n n e e e r U U U w a a a v v v m m m t r l v s e m e n n n r r r i i i i e r r r rb b b e e e l d d d i s o o o e r n e c a a a n n n f a n n n a s g c c c n n n t t t u s e m m m o l l l s i i i i i i g S z z z m m m e s k n e e e a a a e n n n a e e a a a t t t S n n ci i i t t t t t t t o o o v a a a e e e s r t A h c o t n n n l l l v h a i c c c D D D y i i i a o w m m m ( h h h R i E E E e i i i i R a a a c s s s t a a a l p p p n n n n r a a a n n n / a n n n e a a a e e e L e s s s g g g e R r r r r e d d d a c c c r r r t t t e e e b e e e o Mg g g e e e t t t s x s s s e e e m e l a r r r y y yp p p l im m m p b a em m m t o o o t n ) e e e e y n n n o u c u a a a r r r d s s sb n n ntg g g r t e e e r s n a a a e oe e e g l n a g g g t n n n y H s n M M M e e e n c c c e c e C y y y m m m L a A w i i i k e n g g g s e e e i O b r r r s n n n n c S a a a h t t t t t t t t s l y k o i i i S e e o o o o i n n n n a P r s r S t e b e n A h e a G s e d e U U U t S r c N c h v r r r - b b b c u a o o i e S a a a o S c c e n n n r m y A i i i e S c o i z z z g a a a h u R a m r t t t ( m i i i i d a o o o R r r S n n n n e a u s i L A u a n c n E E E S b t l T a y n n n t i i ) e e ee n c i t - r r r R o e o g g g a e g c y y y L f d t f o n f i b S t o e n a h i e n n r s c s e s a t i o t e l e c i a p i m n l a o f l o fi a k f t n p r e c s t e , a t i i i d o t h e e t t i h i n a o n - a b o u t t n n l a l f e s r y i d - n n e c i b d a g n l s h a s e e f , a m y o a a a p r s r c g r l u o m l c r o o e l e s h t n i w s i t n g - s i u a f b g i . l r n n r o e l n T g e d p b q h , e l a u i r e h n o e l e e k p s n l c l p c e u y s e i n 2 I s a m p s n e e p , o 5 o r r a p r v v 0 r t d l e i i 0 i c c t c d e e o r a r i e t s o t f a i s , i o o a o i i s r d n r n n a t , c g a s n d l G n o u g t e h t v d a e a a e t l i t i n o o t l h r e n g f s r s o e m E p a b q P u e o n u u R r n d o t o i r S t fi n p e s a n o a p l e h g v t a r a i o e u g l n o i v t m h E r h p i d U j i o c u a t e o R e r b m s i d n z l 2 i m a e t c 6 t i n d n o i s n u b a e u g fi i i f n t s l e r . l y c e e i t P o r r y a y b R s n n p a r S a d e i n t g n e v c d t a d e a d h d n e r e s y n e m e g a s s y n e i , e v e v s i r h r e a g i g v t e r a i i e . s v c a 9 t u n e 0 e l i t o p c h y n - e a c o t P f r o e h o s x r t s e r o h i m t s p r e g a h t e o m r p e e r a n d i p s u s A m s e l n e i i G r c n c m i c c u a a O t t a e r t i c h i c i t V . t t o i e ) y o o S F ? n - r n fi A o r s O s e r ? T r s s i l r C n a e u S t w t x c u O p t e a h c h h l d M a m h e a a c t i , s p i e n c s i t l o c t f e h ( t h i m e t h d , e e h . e G e g m e f c n o . c O u o , e t u a n s i o V n r s n . i t r e d S c h d F r A a e d o u i p t n T m u r s i a o i C e l r s o l t n i a r O i i n t t s o s r e u g - M n r o d a e r c t f e o e q c y io t n g f a u b h i n e i n i e e o e r s m e d r n b E a l s e i e s e t k U e t r s n e g a u c u S v c s e u t c i p k e h r n r h o s a d e e c c n s y a e e - n , d
rapid mapping, safe navigation of UAVs (such as those used by the new
OS-NSMAAR OS-NSMAAR Copernicus EMS aerial component) or detect/assess earthquake magni- services (ambulance), humanitarian aid, critical infra- ment, early warning systems, satellite radio broadcasting
OpeOn SS-eNrvMicAe OpeOn SS-eNrvMicAe
tude; OS-NMA and CAS increase robustness to spoofing
structure, search and rescue, police, coastguard, border for sharing emergency messages with the population or
CAS CAS
HCOAASSS HCOAASSS • PRS with an encrypted navigation service for governmental authorized
users and sensitive applications that require high continuity (for users control or civil protection units. smart emergency response vehicles.
PRS PRS
OS-NPSMRoASL OS-NPSMRoASL such as fire brigade, health service, humanitarian aid, search and rescue
CM C E E DC L S S S P S SM M O O A A AAA R o o R R R SS S S S S S L L Food security Water man C a E g M n e C E a v m n i E DC L r S S S e d P o S SM M n O O A A A n AA R c o o t m l i R R R SS S S S S S L L m en a t t a e l c D i m h F i a s a p o a n n a o s g r d c t e d e e t s e r s p m e m o c e n a ur s n g r e i a e ty g n WM e cy m aigt e e • r n ra t t m ioann o O ( m G a E g r S an e P Ua p v m p nr i S a r b e d o o pa n n n cn t l + m il i i d in zm c e a g n e atGi Et to a e , n l a o D c D e i m h l r E i i Aa s t a p n la n n c n e a e s g S r d c r t e . a e o g e t ) s e r y p o v m m o i i e f n ng a r f s n g e e a a e f g u nr t M e c i t y m r o i u g e e nr n r a a t e t. i l o - )n t p im o U e s rb i t a a n io n izan d tio i n n f r g e En e s er - e g o y rv f- i c c h e a o rg ve e r i m Eu p r r o o p v e e , d u G se P d S f or A a e g u v e s o t n e h l c v x o y i p r n i fi l g t a r ie i s s n t s i e t r r u d e e a s l i t y p n i o o o t n n h n . d i s C O e c o r n h s p a t u e h p s r e n t e e i g c E r, u r G o w s u N h t n o S e d S n d , e t d fi o t i r s e e s a c fi a s t g f t e a e h l n r t y e d s g r t s m r u i k a i o d e n n e s d i , t t o e p h r m u e t b m e h l r i - e - c T ( d is C h i s a o e a s p s s r e t e e e r l s e n r s v i e m c a d u a n s n i c , n a e G g e o a x e f l h m il t i e h b e o e i n t , t f 2 E o a 2 G u n , r N d i n E O e c U m l S u S d e a p r i n n g a d g c e e n G e c c x O y o a V m r m e S p p s A p l o T e o n C s n e O o s n e f M t s p c ) r s h o f e a o d r l r v l u e i t c c n h e t g e s s e
selves or drones through the smoke, fog or flames. But and applicability for services with high relevance.
EDAS EDAS
Open SCeEArDvMOiAcSeSS Open SCeEArDvMOiAcSeSS what happens when an incident occurs where there are
C
C
HL
L
CSM
M
A3oSS
S
SL C
C
HL
L
CSM
M
A3oSS
S
SL
• CEMS provides information for prevention, preparedness, response and
recovery activities for different natural and human-made disasters and
OC
C
SM
M
C-ENE
E
EDMM
M
MAASS
S
S OC
C
SM
M
C-ENE
E
EDMM
M
MAASS
S
S
other humanitarian crises. The service includes an on-demand mapping EXHIBIT 22 . LIST OF EGNSS AND COPERNICUS APPLICATIONS ADDRESSING THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT
and an Early Warning component, complemented by wildfire information
C CC A A C L CM MM AS S SS S S C CC A A C L CM MM AS S SSS S services (EFFIS), Flood Awareness Systems (EFAS, GLOFAS and Global AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE CHALLENGE
Flood Monitoring tool) and the Drought Observatories (EDO and GDO)
Copernicus dCPaR3tSSa Copernicus dCPaR3tSSa
CMECM3SS CMECM3SS • As part of the CSSa, for example, Support to European Union External
Action assists non-European Union countries in situations of crisis or
GOVSATCOM GOVSATC C C CA E E S M M M O ARS SS M C C CA E E S M M M ARS SS emerging crisis and can provide rapid, on-demand geospatial informa- MARKET SEGMENT APPLiCATiON DOMAiN EXAMPLES OF SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS
tion for monitoring of events or activities outside Europe
CSS CSS
CCO3SSSS CCO3SSSS • Various CMEMSb ocean products are helpful for the development of Early warning Early warning
#EUSpace C # o E p U er S ni p cu a s c d e a ta Copernicus data early warning systems or services that relate to extreme weather and GNSS-enabled ocean monitoring buoys
Synergies CSoypneernricguiCse Eds SMaotSaL CopernicuCs EdSMaotSaL hazards (e.g., sea surface temperature as a driver of hurricanes)
• C3S data and information, for example, helps to better understand Post-event analysis Post-event analysis
GOVSATCOM GOVSATECDCOASSSM EDCASSS extreme hydrometeorological events or the climate projections can fore-
GOVSATCOM GOVSALTimCiOteMd relevance/contributioLnimited relevanScigen/cifiocnatnritb ruetlieovnance/contribuStiigonnificant relevance/contribution EMERGENCY
see an increase in heavy rain events Preparedness Preparedness
Copernicus data Copernicus data MANAGEMENT AND
#EUSpace #EUSpaCcLeM S CLMS HUMANiTARiAN AiD
S #E yn U e S r p g a ie c s e S #E yn U e S r p g a ie c s e Rapid mapping Rapid mapping
Synergies SynergCMieEsMS CMEMS • Coordination of emergency • Support to multiple crisis
GOVSATCOM GOVSATCOM response actors in communica- management zones
Beacons for aviation
LCimAiMteSd relevance/contributioLnCimAiMteSd relevanScigen/cifiocnatnritb ruetl t ieo io vna n n s c - e d / e co n n ie tr d ib u e St n iigo v nn i i r fi o c n an m t e re n le t vance/contrib • ut io I n ntense density areas, assets Search and rescue Beacons for maritime
#EUSpace #EUSpaLimceite d relevance/contributioLnimited relevanScigen/cifiocnatnr•itb ruetlEieoavnarlnyc ew/caornntirnibgu Stsiigyosnntifiecmanst relevance/contributiosnurveillance
Beacons on land
Synergies SynergieCs3S C3S • Satellite radio broadcasting for • Law enforcement support
sharing emergency messages operations
CEMS CEMS with population • Search and rescue operations MARiTiME AND Metocean (meteorology over oceans, and
Limited relevance/contributioLnimited relevanScigen/cifiocnatnr•itb ruetlSieomvnaanrcte /ecmonetrrigbeuStniigocnnyi firceasnpt orenlesvea nce/contrib•ut ioPnollution detection iNLAND WATERWAYS Ocean services offshore weather and sea state monitoring)
CSS CSS vehicles • Response environmental
• Institutional support monitoring
Copernicus data Copernicus data • Civil-military operation • Critical key infrastructure
iNSURANCE AND Event footprint
• RPAs/UAV surveillance management Insurance for natural disasters
FiNANCE Risk modelling
• Mission location support
GOVSATCOM GOVSATCOM
#EUSpace #EUSpace • EGNSS, Copernicus and GOVSATCOM complementarity; EU Space com- Copernicus application EGNSS application Synergetic application (combined use of Copernicus and EGNSS)
Synergies Synergies ponents contribute to all phases of the disaster/emergency management
cycle
Limited relevance/contributioLnimited relevanScigen/cifiocnatnritb ruetlieovnance/contribuStiigonnificant relevance/contribution
90 Source: 

64 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
3 .5 .4 Use cases A proof-of-concept for the implementation
of a European Coastal Flood Awareness
Integrated holographic management map System
for safety and crisis events
Fact
Due to climate change and rising sea levels, weather-
The need for higher-performance crisis planning and induced climate risks affecting coastal zones are expected
command tools and new methodologies arises from the to grow in number. Copernicus Earth observation data can
Over the next few decades,
increasing frequency and impact of a variety of natural support societies to better respond to weather-r elated
migration will be the sole driver
hazards, including floods, earthquakes, droughts, land- emergencies. The European Union-funded H2020 ECFAS
of population growth in
slides and wildfires that are responsible for fatalities, or project demonstrated the technical and operational
high-income countries.
displaced people and severe destruction and disruption feasibility of a European Coastal Flood Awareness System.
of property and industry with a clear impact on the econ- Technically, the ECFAS system has two components: the
omy for years after the event. In Europe, 1,672 recorded Early Warning System, and the Mapping Component.
disasters (floods, storms, wildfires, heatwaves) cumulated Both are based on cutting-edge technology and the
in 159,438 deaths and US$ 476.5 billion in economic best available data. The Early Warning System, based
damage from 1970 to 2019.91 on Copernicus Marine Service data, can predict storm-
triggering water levels up to three days in advance. The
The objective of the Horizon Europe OVERWATCH ECFAS Mapping Component was based on complex mod-
project is to develop an integrated holographic manage- elling using the ECFAS database of extreme events and
ment system for response, recovery and mitigation of test cases, which provided a catalogue of flood maps for
emergencies and disasters by enabling the authorities to most of the European coast. Leveraging satellite imagery,
quickly deploy and manage air, water and ground assets ECFAS has produced a novel tool for shoreline analysis
and personnel through decision support tools integrated and extraction as well as rapid mapping and risk and
in an immersive and decentralized command platform. recovery mapping capabilities. The technical operational
This system will be supported by combining several feasibility of the products has been demonstrated through
services already offered by EGNSS and Copernicus with a performance assessment of the service in selected test
digital technologies, artificial intelligence, drones, 5G cases for past events, as well as in forecasting mode. The
and augmented reality, which will provide the required availability and accessibility of generated data and derived
performance to make this system a valuable resource for products has been assessed via specific consultation with
citizen, land and infrastructure protection.92 involved coastal stakeholders and end users.
3 .6 THE MiGRATiON CHALLENGE
AND THE ROLE OF EU SPACE
3 .6 .1 introduction rights and humanitarian needs of everyone […]. It means
recognizing the value of pathways for regular entry for
Today, over 80 per cent of the world’s migrants move both migrants and host countries. And it means address-
between countries in a safe and orderly fashion. However, ing the underlying drivers behind migration, including
this means that the remaining 20 per cent do not. In deep inequalities, and combating human smuggling and
the words of Secretary-General António Guterres: “We trafficking in people.”93
need more effective international cooperation and a
more compassionate approach to migration. This means For high-income countries between 2000 and 2020, the
managing borders humanely, fully respecting the human contribution of international migration to population
91 Weather-related disasters increase over past 50 years, causing more damage but fewer deaths | World Meteorological Organization (wmo.int)
92 
93 Secretary-General’s remarks at the International Migration Review Forum | United Nations Secretary-General

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 65
cases poverty, saw their livelihoods undermined. Some
937,000 people in the country were newly displaced by
disasters in 2020 and over 3 million people suffered from
food insecurity. These adverse impacts of climate change
Fact
have contributed to people’s decisions to leave their
homes and join the “migrant caravans” headed towards
the north of the continent, crossing countries such as
Over the next few decades,
Guatemala and Mexico.97
migration will be the sole driver
of population growth in
In some cases, migrant smuggling comes into play,
high-income countries.
although the data are shrouded in considerable uncer-
tainty. According to rough estimates, for 2016 there were
more than 1.5 million. The revenues generated account
for several billion USD for the smugglers. These numbers
will rise as population increases and as conflict and socio-
economic or environmental conditions create the neces-
sary triggers.
growth (net inflow of 80.5 million) exceeded the balance
of births over deaths (66.2 million). Over the next few
3 .6 .2 Space and migration
decades, migration will be the sole driver of population
growth in high-income countries. By contrast, for the Satellites can play an important role in tracking migration
foreseeable future, population increase in low-income flows and provide data to feed early warning systems
and lower-middle-income countries will continue to be that can alert in advance of the onset of a trigger event.
driven by an excess of births over deaths.94 Researchers and involved operators increasingly rely
on new data sources, such as mobile phones, social
In 2020, there were 281 million international migrants, media and satellite imagery, to understand international
135 million female, 146 million male.95 Also, in 2020, migration and human mobility. Those “big data”, once
30.7 million people were internally displaced by conflict and adequately analysed, complement information from tradi-
violence and 9.8 million by natural disasters. The number tional sources, such as national population censuses, sur-
is expected to increase as population grows, leading to veys and administrative sources, and they are recognized
unprecedented migration patterns. For example, at pres- by organizations such as the International Organization
ent, the vast majority of people who are moving because for Migration’s Global Migration Data Analysis Centre,
3 .6 THE MiGRATiON CHALLENGE of the impacts of climate change are displaced within as “particularly promising for the study of migration-
their own country. People and communities moving across related phenomena” . For instance, call records from
AND THE ROLE OF EU SPACE
borders due to the effects of climate change are smaller mobile phones combined with satellite data can be used
in numbers but face a critical legal protection gap. Since to map movements between cross communities98 and to
, Angolan citizens started crossing the focus the delivery of humanitarian help where it is most
border into Namibia in search of food, water, health care needed. It is also a tool to assess informal settlements.
and employment because of the drought in their country.96
Concerning the smuggling of migrants, GNSS data
In , Honduras was hit by two consecu- can be used for tracking location and device history to
tive hurricanes – Eta and Iota – which caused massive uncover smuggling routes. Moreover, it is possible to use
displacement and significant damage and destruction optical and radar satellite technology to locate vessels
to crops and harvests. Families already facing economic suspected to be engaged in people smuggling that often
hardship due to the COVID-19 pandemic and, in some put the lives of migrants in danger.
94 World Population Prospects 2022
95 UN DESA Policy Brief No. 133: Migration Trends and Families | Department of Economic and Social Affairs
96 Displacement in a Changing Climate: Localized humanitarian action at the forefront of the climate crisis - Mozambique | ReliefWeb
97 Ibid.
98 Migration Data Portal: Big data, migration and human mobility (migrationdataportal.org)

66 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
Ô After the migration phenomenon, Copernicus data
3 .6 .3 EU Space specific support
can contribute to the development of the intelli-
Specifically, satellite data provided by Copernicus and gence information required to evaluate the effec-
Galileo can address the migration challenge throughout tiveness of the humanitarian response following
its entire life cycle: migration-related events induced by, for example,
natural disasters.
Ô Before the migration phenomenon:
To refer to some practical examples, Copernicus Sentinel-1
• In a long-term perspective, Copernicus data pro-
and -2 satellites, possibly combined with very high-
vide relevant information to support the prediction
resolution data, provide radar and optical data that can
of future mass migration. For example, by providing
identify and monitor migration routes, identify dwelling
vegetation, phenological and productivity indices,
structures, including the temporary ones and overall
Copernicus contributes to determining the extent
enable applications such as refugee camps, population
to which an area could support human life and
counting, human displacement monitoring, informal
predicting desertification, deforestation and the
settlements mapping as well as mapping and manage-
long-term effects of pollution and climate change.
ment of refugee camps.
These predictive analyses can support policymakers
in forecasting future emergencies and undertaking
In this context, it is worth mentioning the GHSL (Global
the needed mitigation measures in due time.
Human Settlement Layer) product of the Copernicus
• In a medium to short-term perspective, Earth Emergency Management Service99 that is supported
observation and Copernicus data can contrib- by the Joint Research Centre (JRC) and the DG for
ute to preparing the stakeholders involved to Regional and Urban Policy (DG REGIO) of the European
put in place precautionary measures in the face Commission, together with the international partnership
of potential disasters. Indeed, although some GEO Human Planet Initiative.100 GHSL provides open and
geohazards or weather and climate-induced free data and tools for assessing the human presence and
(e.g., floods, drought, landslide, tsunami, fires) and settlements on the planet. This is in the form of built-up
human-made disasters (e.g., hazardous material maps, population density maps and settlement maps. This
spills) can be precisely predicted or avoided, by information is generated with evidence-based analytics
combining multiple sets of information, satel- and knowledge using new spatial data mining technolo-
lite data can contribute to highlighting specific gies, also leveraging the Exposure Mapping (Copernicus
risks over given areas and thus support involved GHSL), a new component in the Copernicus Emergency
organizations (e.g., United Nations aid agencies, Management Service101 intended to periodically produce
non-government organizations, national govern- global geospatial information on human settlements in the
ments, military and the private sector) to address form of built-up area and population grids.
mission-critical disaster preparedness, for exam-
ple, by pre-positioning emergency equipment and Since migration phenomena and humanitarian crises are
solutions, or taking anticipatory measures such as sometimes induced by natural (e.g., floods, droughts, land-
evacuations slides, tsunami) or human-made disasters (e.g., hazardous
material spills), Copernicus satellites and in situ data allow
Ô During the migration phenomenon, both EGNSS
us to assess the expected impact of those phenomena
and Copernicus can assist the national, international
and support preparedness-related activities, for example
and private organizations involved by providing the
by pre-positioning emergency equipment and solutions
necessary humanitarian response, both in terrestrial
or by implementing preparatory measures. The relevance
and marine environments; and
of Copernicus data and services (in particular CEMS) to dis-
aster management, emergency response and humanitarian
aid challenges is further elaborated in section 3.5.2.
99 Global Human Settlement - GHSL Homepage - European Commission (europa.eu)
100 GEO Work Programme (earthobservations.org)
101 

Food security Water mana E g n e a v m n ir e d o n n c t m l i m en a t t a e l c D i m h i a s a p a n n a s g r d c t e e e t s e r p m m o e n a r s n g e a e g n M e c F y m oigo e rd n a t tsieocnurity UWr 3 abt . ae nri zma HatinOoan E g W n e Ea v m nn ir E e ed o n r nU gc t m l yi m e S n a P t t a eA l c D i m C h i a s a p E a n n a s g r d c t e A e e t s e r p Dm m o eD n a r s n g e R a e g n E M e c S y m ig S e r n a E t ti S on TH U E r b i a D ni E za NtioT n i F E i n E e D rg y SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 67
O O p p e e E O n n X S S S - e e H N r r H C v v I M i i B A A c c A S S e e IT 2 F F 3 o o o o . d d s s e e c c E F u u r r O X i i t t y y W W A R a a M t t e eT r r m mP H a aL n n E a a E E Eg g n ne e M S a a v vm m n n i i r r e e d d o o O O I On n n n c cG t t m m l l p p i i m m F e e e e R n n a a O n n t t t t a a e e A R l l S S S c c D Di i T Em m h h - e e i i a a N s s a a p p r r I L a a n n H C n n a a v v O s s g g M r r d d c c t tE e e i i A Ae e e e t t c c s s e e r r A p pN V e S S e m m m m o o e eA n n a a r r s sn n g g C e ea a e e Ng g n n H M M e e c c F F C y y m m o oi i g gAo o e e r r E d d n n a a t t L t ts s i ie eo o O L c cn nu u E r r F i i t t N y y U UW W E r ra ab bGt ta a U e e • n nr r E i i z zm m a aSa at t i in n G o o P a an n E E g g A a n n e e E Ea a v v m m ln nn n i i i C r r e e l e ed d o o e n n r r n n g gc c E t t m m o l l y yi i m m e e C n n a a S t t t t a a e e A O l l c c D D i i m m h h R i i a a M s s a a p p a a n n / n n a a s s g g R r r d d c c t t e e e e e e P t t s s e e e r r p p m m O m mo o t e e n n u a a r r s s n n g g Ne e r a a e e n g g n n M M E e e c c y y m m L i i g g N e e i r r n n n a a t t t t T k i i o o S n n S e S U Ur E v r r b b R i a a c n n V i i e z z a a It t ( i i C o o R n n E L E ES S n n) e e r r f g g o y y r fast localization, including the
new functionality that informs the user that the alert has been detected
HPARSS HPARSS and localized
Open Service Open Service
• Open Service, for example, part of telematics solutions, navigating
OS-N HSMAA ARS OS-N HSMAA ARS drones for rapid mapping, device location history to uncover smuggling
routes or gathering crowdsourced location data to complement Earth
OS- E N D C C S P P S MO A A A A R R o A R S S S S S S L Food security Water mana E g n e a v m n ir e d o n n c t m l i m en a O t t a e l S c D i m h - E i a N s a p a n D C C nS a P P s g S M r d c O t e A A A A e R R e t o s e r A p R S S S S S S m L m o e n a r s n g e a e g n M e c F y m oigo e rd n a t tsieocnurity UWrabtae • nri zmaatin o P u h oans u E g R b n e e m Ea S s v m nn i r e r e ed o s a w n r r n gc t n v m t l yi i m h t a i e t n h a a t a t t i a e t o r la c D i i m r h n n a i e a s a p n a n n a q e d s g r d c t e e e t a n u a s e r p m i c t i m o d r a e r n a e r ,s yn g e a e p s h g n e M e ct i y m g e a ig e d r h r n a c t t ih c n on o a a n v n i t U g d i r n b a a r u t n e i i i z o t sa y tc n io u s n s u e e E c n r o e h v r r g i a y c p s e o fi f li o r c e r e g b o ri v g e a r d n e m , e h n e t a a lt l h a u se th rv o i r c i e ze , d
SOARS SOARS
Open SeCrLvMicSe Open SeCrLvMicSe • CSS: Support to European Union External Action component can, for
instance, provide refugee or internally displaced people (IDP) camp
CMEH S MOA oSSS L CMEH S MOA o SSSL analyses that use a combination of new and past satellite imagery to
measure and monitor the changes in the size and distribution of IDP
EDAS EDAS
OSC-NASMMoASL OSC-NASMMoASL or refugee camps. The main aim is to support accurate assessments
of needs, in order to enable a proportional and adapted humanitarian
CEDCLCMAA3SSSS CEDCLCMAA3SSSS response, but other questions, such as assessing the security and safety
and the morphology of the camp, can also be addressed.
CMC C EE LPM M MRSS S S CMC C EE LPMM MRSS SS • CSS: The border surveillance component supports border management
authorities in their efforts to assess risk and detect irregular migration
CM
CA ESC
M
MASRS
S
S
CM
CA ESCM MASRSS
S
and cross-border crime
• CSS: The Copernicus Maritime Surveillance (CMS) component provides
CopernicuCs AdC MO a3t SS Sa CopernicuCs AdC Ma O 3tS SS a customs or coast guard authorities with the monitoring, identification
and early warning of potentially suspicious vessels involved in trafficking
CE C M 3S S CE C M 3 S S and smuggling
GOVSATCOM GOSVoLSATCOM SoL
• CEMS, for example, can be activated for risk and recovery or rapid map-
CSS CSS
C E E D M A S S C E E D M A S S ping to assess the situation in a refugee camp after a fire event
#EUSpace #EUSpace • C3S climate change data, in combination with other data such as soci-
Copernicus data Copernicus data
Synergies SyCnSeSrgies CSS oeconomic contextual information can be used to understand, quantify
CLMS CLMS
and predict climate-induced migration flow effects
Copernicus data Copernicus data
GOVSATCOM C L GM im OE i M t V e S d S r A e T le C va O nc M e/contribution C L M im E i M tSeiS dg nreifilceavnatn creel/ecvoanntcrieb/uctoionntribution Significant relevance/contribution
Used as a common communication channel for various actors
G#EOUVSSpAaTcCeO M G#CAEOMUVSSSpAaTcCeO M CAMS
Synergies Synergies • Management of refugee camps • Sea border surveillance
C3S C3S
#EUSpace #EUSpace • Support to asylum operations (e.g., trafficking boats, tracking
Synergies Synergies no AIS ships)
LCimEiMteSd relevance/contribution LCimEiMtSeiSdg nreifilceavnatn creel/ecvoanntcr•ieb /uctoSionuntrpibpuotirotn to emSiegrngifiecnacnyt rteeleavman/ce/contribution
vehicles (e.g., reach back and • Institutional and diplomatic
CSS CSS local network capability) support
Limited relevance/contribution LimitSeidg nreifilceavnatn creel/ecvoanntcr • ieb /ucto L ion a nt n ri d bu b ti o on rder s S u ig rv n e ifi i c ll a a n n t c r e el e vance/contrib • ut io C n ybersecurity (e.g., during
Copernicus data Copernicus data (e.g., trafficking vehicles) migration operations)
• Pre-frontier intelligence • Support to multiple crisis
(e.g., illegal routes) management zones
GOVSATCOM GOVSATCOM
#EUSpace #EUSpace • EGNSS, Copernicus and GOVSATCOM complementarity. For example,
Synergies Synergies EGNSS and GOVSATCOM support emergency vehicles and the team are
supported by geo-intelligence derived from Earth observation data
• Some emerging applications, such as combining crowdsourced data from
Limited relevance/contribution LimitSeidg nreifilceavnatn creel/ecvoanntcrieb/uctomionntoribbiuletio pnhoneSsi,g cniofimcapntl eremleevnanticneg/c oEnatrrtibhu otiobnservation data
Limited relevance/contribution Significant relevance/contribution

68 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
Additionally, Copernicus provides a specific service by The relevance of the four EU Space components services
providing information in response to Europe’s security (Copernicus, Galileo, EGNOS and GOVSATCOM) for the
challenges called Copernicus Security Service (CSS).102 migration challenge is assessed in exhibit 23, including
It improves crisis prevention, preparedness and response examples of products or applicability for services with
in three key areas: high relevance.
Ô Border surveillance. Data from Earth observation sat-
Exhibit 24 summarizes all the Copernicus and EGNSS
ellites is combined with other surveillance sources,
applications – as presented in the EUSPA EO and GNSS
such as ship reporting systems and other intelli-
Market Report – capable of tackling the migration
gence, to support border management authorities
challenge.
in their efforts to assess risks and detect irregular
migration and cross-border crime.
Ô Maritime surveillance. Supports users by providing 3 .6 .4 Use cases
a better understanding and improved monitoring
of activities at sea that have an impact on maritime Earth observation helps to understand,
safety and security, fisheries control, marine pollution, quantify and predict migration flows
customs and general law enforcement, as well as the induced by climate change in Africa
overall economic interests of the European Union.
DeepCube – “Explainable AI pipelines for big Copernicus
Recognizing that human activity at sea is intrinsically
data” – is a three-year project funded by the Horizon 2020
dynamic, the service aims to provide timely, rele-
programme of the European Union under the topic
vant and targeted Earth observation information to
“Big data technologies and artificial intelligence for
Member States and European Union bodies.
Copernicus”.
Ô Support to European Union External Action assists
the European External Action Service and Member The project unlocks the potential of Copernicus data,
States’ security stakeholders in crisis or emerging leveraging on advances in the fields of artificial intel-
crisis situations, for instance, when undertaking ligence and the Semantic Web. The ultimate goal of
peacekeeping operations, conflict prevention DeepCube is to address new and ambitious problems
activities or assessing risks for global and trans- with high environmental and societal impact, enhance our
regional threats leading to destabilization. This service understanding of Earth’s processes that are correlated
can provide rapid, on-demand geospatial information with climate change, and generate high business value.
for monitoring events or activities outside Europe that
may have implications for European and global security. DeepCube develops architectures that extend to
non-conventional data and problem settings, such as
In addition, satellite data from Copernicus and EGNSS Interferometric SAR, social network data and industrial
provide important support for humanitarian organiza- data, and introduces a novel hybrid modelling paradigm
tions in the field. For example, EGNSS being a core for data-driven AI models that respect physical laws,
component of telematics applications, by enabling rapid opening-up the deep learning black box through explain-
mapping products to facilitate the deployment of aid and able AI and causality.
permitting the functioning of search and rescue beacons,
it can permit the fast localization of unseaworthy ships The DeepCube technologies are showcased in
carrying migrants and refugees. six use cases:
Finally, GOVSATCOM can complement both Copernicus Ô Forecasting of localized extreme drought and heat
and EGNSS by underpinning a myriad of applications such impacts in Africa
as the management of refugee camps, support to asylum
Ô Climate-induced migration in Africa
operations or land/sea border surveillance. GOVSATCOM
can provide a common communication channel for various Ô Fire hazard short-term forecasting in the
actors involved in the operation or processes. Mediterranean
102 For more information: 

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 69
EXHIBIT 24 . LIST OF EGNSS AND COPERNICUS APPLICATIONS
ADDRESSING THE MIGRATION CHALLENGE
MARKET SEGMENT APPLiCATiON DOMAiN EXAMPLES OF SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS
EO human displacement monitoring
Management of refugee camps
Migration and settlement
Population counting
Telematics for humanitarian aid
EMERGENCY Post-event analysis Post-event analysis
MANAGEMENT AND
HUMANiTARiAN AiD Preparedness Preparedness
Rapid mapping Rapid mapping
Situational awareness supporting search and
Search and rescue
rescue
MARiTiME AND
Vessel tracking Dark vessel monitoring
iNLAND WATERWAYS
Copernicus application EGNSS application Synergetic application (combined use of Copernicus and EGNSS)
Ô Global volcanic unrest detection and alerting The issue is that this kind of cause-effect chain is not
assessed empirically from reliable data or by employing
Ô Deformation trends change detection for critical
rigorous advanced statistical tools. Currently, there is
infrastructure monitoring
no theoretical approach that adequately represents the
Ô Copernicus services for sustainable and causal mechanisms through which climate change induces
environmentally-friendly tourism human displacement and migration flows. This climate-
induced displacement problem needs to be tackled with
Climate-induced displacement is a significant issue:
advanced AI methods of regression, interpretability and
25 million displacements per year, 95 per cent from
causality.
vulnerable regions.103 Use case “Climate-induced migra-
tion in Africa’’ is focused on uncovering the underlying
mechanisms of how changing climate conditions cause This use case approaches the issue in three main steps,
migration through modern observational causal inference yielding a set of useful products: the harmonization of
models to understand, quantify and predict migration explanatory data from diverse Earth observation and
flow effects from socioeconomic contextual information, non-Earth observation data sources; the derivation of
as well as from environmental variables extracted from causal graphs by the systematic characterization of data
Earth observation data. dependencies and deployment of causal inference meth-
ods; and the translation of causal graphs into explanatory
There is a growing body of scientific evidence on the link narratives, storylines and prediction models taking into
between climate change, conflicts and forced migration. account only causally relevant features.104
103 
104 

70 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
capacities and high-resolution city-scale modelling focus-
Earth observation in support of decision
ing on the following applications: air quality and health,
makers to increase urban resilience
urban growth and migration.
According to the United Nations 2018 Revision of World
Urbanization Prospects,105 in today’s increasingly global Ô Migration. The SMURBS project explores a novel
and interconnected world, more than 55 per cent of the field: Earth observation supporting certain aspects
world’s population lives in urban areas. By 2050, urban- of the European migrant crisis. The vulnerability of
ization is expected to further increase by 66 per cent.106 refugee hotspots and hosting campuses to natural
Under these circumstances, sustainable development and human-made disasters will be at the epicentre
challenges will increasingly concentrate in cities. This is of SMURBS efforts, contributing to the current lack
where the SMURBS project comes in. of concrete criteria for location appropriateness. The
project strives to identify patterns and processes in
Under the umbrella of the ERA-PLANET Network,107 the support of decision makers to prepare for, with-
SMURBS project aims at setting the stage for the inte- stand and respond faster to the increasing migration
gration of still fragmented Earth observation resources process.108
to promote and coordinate the “smart city” concept
Ô Urban growth. SMURBS exploits the capacity pro-
into a European network of cities, serving the need for a
vided by the Copernicus Land Monitoring Service
common approach to enhance environmental and soci-
and the Sentinel-2 mission, as well as the availability
etal resilience to specific pressures. The project endeav-
of high- and very high-resolution imagery to define
ours to increase urban resilience by targeting challenges
updated urbanization indicators, to adopt state-
with respect to air quality, urban growth, disasters and
of-the-art classification schemes and to develop
relevant impacts and more entangled issues such as the
urban metrics for efficient city management meth-
migration crisis and the health implications of such envi-
ods, addressing soil sealing and the urban sprawl
ronmental pressures.
phenomenon.
SMURBS leverages Copernicus and brings together Ô Air quality and health. The seamless bridging of
different Earth observation platforms, namely in situ net- regulatory networks with IoT/smart sensors and
works, satellites, state-of-the-art models and new tech- supersites is the direction that SMURBS engages
nologies (e.g., UAVs, smart sensors), while also engaging in to deliver, inter alia, monitoring of pollutants of
citizens in collecting and sharing data. Its partners refocus emerging importance (e.g., PM1, black carbon)
their high degree of Earth observation expertise on and near real-time source apportionment. New
the urban scale and set the stage to exploit synergies advances, like monitoring the oxidative potential of
between the various Earth observation resources. The aerosol in urban environments, in conjunction with
project maps “what is already out there” and “what the supplementary health indicators, are being uti-
users want” to stimulate strategic planning and decision- lized to delineate cause-effect relations. Moreover,
making by key stakeholders. To sum up, SMURBS the exploitation and contribution of Copernicus
unfolded the full range of technologically available Atmosphere Monitoring Services will further support
methods for the next generation of urban monitoring the air quality objectives.
105 
106 Demographic Trends and Urbanization, World Bank Group, 2020. 
tail/260581617988607640/demographic-trends-and-urbanization
107 
108 

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 71
3 .7 THE URBANiZATiON CHALLENGE
AND THE ROLE OF EU SPACE
3 .7 .1 introduction cities with fewer than 1 million inhabitants, many of them
located in Asia and Africa. While one in eight people live
According to Secretary-General António Guterres “Cities
in 33 megacities worldwide, close to half of the world’s
are central to virtually every challenge we face – and
urban dwellers reside in much smaller settlements with
essential to building a more inclusive, sustainable and
fewer than 500,000 inhabitants.110
resilient future. They have been at the front line of the
COVID-19 pandemic. As we look to recover, promoting
However, challenges remain and, in 2020, data from
more inclusive, gender-responsive urban infrastructure
1,510 cities around the world indicate that on average
and services will be critical to give all people – especially
only about 37 per cent of their urban areas are served
young people, women and girls – access to a better
by public transport, measured as a walking distance of
future”. Today more than 55 per cent of the world
500 m to low-capacity transport systems (such as buses
population lives in urban areas, however, this amount is
and trams) and/or 1,000 m to high-capacity systems (such
expected to rise significantly and, by 2050, two out of
as trains and ferries).111 Furthermore, access to health-
three people on Earth will live in cities. Currently, the
care or education centres, the need of waste manage-
world’s cities occupy just 3 per cent of the Earth’s surface,
ment solutions adapted to population growth or increase
but account for 60–80 per cent of energy consumption
in air pollution are challenges that need to be addressed
and 75 per cent of carbon emissions.109
as the population of the cities surges. Those challenges
represent even a bigger burden for disabled people.
According to data from 2018, by 2030, the world will
According to the United Nations, approximately 15 per
have 43 megacities, each with over 10 million inhabit-
cent of the world’s population lives with some form of
ants, and most of them in developing regions. However,
disability. Considering that these figures are expected
some of the fastest-growing urban agglomerations are
to increase even further in the future due the fact that
disabilities are often associated with age and that life
expectancy overall is increasing, predictions suggest that
around 1 billion disabled individuals will be living in urban
centres by 2050. Available evidence reveals a widespread
lack of accessibility for disabled persons in built environ-
Fact
ments, from roads and housing to public buildings and
spaces and to basic urban services such as education,
transportation, emergency and disaster response, access
World’s cities occupy just 3% of
to information and communications.
the Earth’s land, but account for
60-80% of energy consumption
Each of those is a complex issue per se, with different driv-
and 75% of carbon
ing factors and each requires a complex analysis. In some
emissions.
cases, the trend is driven by the increase in population: for
example, if everyone in the world generated waste at the
current average OECD per capita rate (data from 2020),
total world waste generation would rise to 4.2 billion
tons. This could equate to around 42 billion cubic metres
of municipal solid waste each year.112 Although there has
been a decrease in the generation of waste per capita in
109 GOAL 11: Sustainable cities and communities | UNEP - UN Environment Programme
110 68% of the world population will be living in urban areas by 2050, according to UN | UN DESA | United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
111 — SDG Indicators (un.org)
112 ES_W&S_2010_print (colours)_ES_Slums_28/8 (unhabitat.org) and Waste - Municipal waste - OECD Data

72 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
OECD countries, total waste generation has increased map every school in the world. The data generated and vis-
from 652,000 tons in 2000 to 732,000 tons in 2020, with ualized through an online platform will help identify where
population growth driving the trend, although the rela- the gaps and information needs are, serve as evidence
tionship is not linear. In other cases, policy mechanisms when advocating for connectivity and help national govern-
can decouple from population growth. For what concerns ments optimize their education systems.
air pollution, the impact of population growth is unclear,
as there are countries where population growth and air In short, satellite data can help cities to become more
pollution produced opposite trends.113,114,115 resilient, sustainable and safe for their citizens, to ensure
their capability to address the problems associated with
urbanization, such as high population density, unsafe
3 .7 .2 Space and urbanization infrastructure, pollution, slum creation and congestion.
The increasing availability of satellite imagery is now
allowing service providers and researchers to use
3 .7 .3 EU Space specific support
standardized approaches to define, measure and com-
pare urban areas globally. For example, scientists have In the context of the urbanization challenge, EU Space
developed approaches based on night-time lights – the data can provide valuable support in fulfilling the follow-
artificial light sources visible in satellite images taken at ing needs:
night – to map and measure human settlements. A new
approach, developed by the European Commission, Ô Up-to-date and reliable information to ensure the
the World Bank, OECD, UN-Habitat and FAO, has been appropriate decision-making around urban plan-
endorsed by the United Nations Statistical Commission in ning and the related interventions so as to ensure a
. This method, called the “degree of urbaniza- balance between short-term needs and the long-
tion”, combines census data with a map of built-up areas term desired outcomes of a competitive economy,
derived from satellite imagery to produce a population high quality of life and sustainable environment
distribution map for the globe. Criteria based on popula-
tion size and density are then applied to delineate cities, Ô Satellite data and services capable of ensuring the
towns, suburbs and rural areas on the map.116 development of solutions that improve the cities
operations with regard to the provision of basic
This data set is extremely useful and can complement services and make citizens lives better
others that provide insights for data-driven policymaking.
Earth observation data permit the measurement of subsid- For example, Urban Atlas,118 a local component of the
ence in urban areas, urban growth and provide assistance Copernicus Land Monitoring Service (CLMS), provides
for urban planning to name a few applications and, when urban planners and decision makers with reliable base-
combined with positioning data, lead to road usage, traffic line information about land use and urban development
estimates and enable the possibility of measuring the patterns (useful for cross-country or cross-region compari-
effect of policy measures (e.g., COVID-19 lockdown) some- son). Such a product has been available since 2006 and its
times by means of new detection methods.117 latest version provides very high-resolution pan-European
land cover and land-use data generated for cities and
Another example of a data set to assist decision makers in surroundings according to the functional urban areas for
the allocation of resources is the one developed by UNICEF the EU27, EFTA countries, the West Balkans, Türkiye and
Innovation, which is building a tool using high-resolution the United Kingdom.
satellite imagery and applying deep learning techniques to
113 Frontiers | Does the New Urbanization Influence Air Quality in China? (frontiersin.org)
114 Air pollution levels rising in many of the world’s poorest cities (who.int)
115 acp-2021-739.pdf (copernicus.org)
116 Using Satellite Imagery to Measure Urbanization | PennIUR (upenn.edu)
117 Imprints of COVID‐19 Lockdown on GNSS Observations: An Initial Demonstration Using GNSS Interferometric Reflectometry - Karegar - 2020 - Geo-
physical Research Letters - Wiley Online Library
118 The service is available at 

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 73
The extensive amount of reliable data provided under the Ô Smart cities operations. Galileo is being used
Urban Atlas product allows public authorities and plan- to ensure efficiency in streetlight and waste
ners to better understand changes, pressures and needs management.
within urban communities and thus, more adequately
Ô Infrastructure planning. Copernicus provides the
plan. Many local, national and supranational authorities
foundation of all the technical analyses needed
are currently using the CLMS Urban Atlas to monitor and
before building given infrastructure such as bridges,
evaluate various kinds of developments, such as the spa-
pipelines or buildings (e.g., related to permits, site
tial extent and distribution of residential buildings, logis-
selection or vulnerability). This is extremely relevant
tics hubs and industrial parks or retail areas. For example,
in cities developing at fast pace or in old cities that
the City of Prague leveraged Copernicus to gain a more
have been developed in an uncontrolled manner in
realistic picture of land-use development over time.119
the past.
Such comparisons showed the trends in development and
provided guidelines for future planning policies. Ô Galileo is a key component of city telecommunica-
tion infrastructure, allowing for efficient timing and
On a global scale, the GHSL (Global Human Settlement synchronization of telecommunications networks.
Layer) component of CEMS, which was already men-
Ô Satellite-based technologies also offer a fundamen-
tioned in the section related to the migration challenge,
tal contribution to the preservation and sustainable
helps to improve the collective understanding of the
management of cultural heritage sites .
process of urbanization. GHSL provides key resources
such as open and free data, visualization and tools related
Equally, if not more importanty, Galileo and Copernicus
to the degree of urbanization, population and settlement
enable many applications in the consumer solutions
analysis. Since 2021, Exposure Mapping (Copernicus
and tourism and health domain capable of facilitating
GHSL) has been introduced as a new CEMS component
our way of living in cities that are set to become more
that produces global geospatial information on human
and more densely populated. Navigation and tracking
settlements in the form of built-up area and population
services enabled by Galileo have become fundamental
grids.
tools which enable efficient and sustainable commuting,
transportation and delivery of goods between different
With reference to the second need, Copernicus and
places. Galileo is also a pivotal component of safety-
especially the positioning capability provided by Galileo
and health-related tools and applications such as eCall,
effectively empowers many solutions that support local
emergency numbering such as 112 and mHealth devices.
authorities and private companies in providing efficient
Finally, many businesses also rely on EU Space data to set
and cost-effective services and overall make the lives of
up workforce management schemes.
citizens easier. City managers are indeed increasingly
seeking to use space data solutions to achieve climate-
The relevance of the four EU Space components services
neutrality and climate-resilience targets with Copernicus
(Copernicus, Galileo, EGNOS and GOVSATCOM) for the
and Galileo enabling applications in the field of:
urbanization challenge is assessed in exhibit 25, including
Ô Environmental monitoring. Copernicus is being used examples of products and applicability for services with
with Galileo to monitor the air quality in cities or to high relevance.
support urban greening applications.
119 Source: The ever-growing use of Copernicus across Europe’s regions - A selection of 99 user stories by local and regional authorities, NEREUS, EC,
ESA 2019.

74 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
O O O p p p e e e n n n S S S e e e r r r H v v v i i i A c c c e e S e E XH F F F F o o o o I o o o o B d d d d s s s s I e e e e T c c c c u u u u r r r r i i i i 2t t t t y y y y W W W W 5 a a a a . t t t t e e e e r r r r m m m m a a a a E F n n n n a a a a O X E E E E g g g g n n n n e e e e A a a a a R v v v v m m m m n n n ni i i i r r r r e e e e d d d d M o o o o n n n n n n n n T c c c c t t t t m m m m l l l l i i i i P Hm m m me e e e n n n n a a a aL E t t t t t t t t a a a a e e e e E l l l l c c c c D D D D i i i i m m m m U h h h h S i i i i a a a a s s s s a a a a p p p p a a a a n n n n n n n nR a a a a O O O s s s s g g g g r r r r O d d d d c c c c t t t t e e e e e e e e e e e e t t t t B s s s se e e e p p p r r r r p p p p m m m m Fm m m m e e e o o o oA e e e e n n n n n n n a a a a r r r r s s s s n n n n Rg g g g N e e e e a a a a S S S e e e e g g g g E n n n n e e e I M M M M e e e e c c c c Z y y y y m m m m r r r L H i i i i v v v g g g g e e e e A E r r r r i i i A n n n n a a a a c c c t t t t t t t t T V e e S e i i i i o o o o n n n nA IO N N U U U U F F F F C r r r r o o o o b b b b o o o o a a a aC E d d d d n n n n i i i i s s s s z z z z He e e e a a a aO c c c c t t t t i i i i u u u u o o o o A r r r r n n n n F i i i i t t t t y y y y L W W W W E E E E E L n n n n a a a a e e e e t t t t E U e e e e r r r r • g g g g r r r r y y y y N m m m m S a a a aG n n n n O i o P n a a a a E E E E g g g g r A g E p n n n n e e e e a a a a P v v v v m m m m e n n n n i i i i C r r r r i e e e e d d d d P o o o o n n n n n n n n n n E c c c c P t t t t c m m m m l l l l i i i i S m m m m r - e e e e e C R n n n n e a a a a t t t t t t t t a a a a a e e e e T r O l l l l v s c c c c D D D D K i i i i m m m m h h h h i e i i i i a a a a c M s s s sa a a a , p p p p a a a a n n n n s n n n n e a a a a s s s s g g g g u r r r r d d d d c c c c t t t t e e e e e e e e t e e e e P t t t t s s s s e e e e s i r r r r h p p p p m m m m n e Om m m m o o o o e e e e e n n n n d a a a a r r r r G s s s s n n n n g g g g N e e e e p a a a ae e e e f N g g g g n n n n e o M M M M E e e e e c c c c y y y y m m m m S r r i i i i N g g g g f e e e e S r r r r o a n n n n a a a a t t t t t t t t T r i i i i m o o o o m m S n n n n u y a S l r n t U U U U i E i a r r r r c - b b b b d c R e a a a a n n n n o V i i i i o z z z z o n a a a a I f t t t t f s i i i i C o o o o a t a n n n n e E p u E E E E l S g p l n n n n a e e e e m l r r r r t i g g g g c i y y y y o e a n n ti t o a a n n ti s d o s n m u t c u e h l c t i a h -f s n r i e m q q u a u e p e s p n s i c n u y g c , p h G o a s I s S i t R i o o T r n K -
HAS HAS cadastre measuring but also provides precise T and S for telco incl. 5G
HAS HAS
OpeOn SS-eNrvMicAe OpeOn SS-eNrvMicAe but is also enabler of eCall and 112
O O O S S S - - - N N N H C C C C S P P P M M M A A A A A A R R R A A A R S S S S S S S S Food security Water mana E g n e a v m n ir e d o n n c t m l i m en a t t a e l c D i m h i a s a p a n n a s g r d c t e e e t s e r p m m o e n O O O a r s n g e a S S S e g n - - - M e c N N N y m H C C C C iS P P P g M M M e A r A A A AA R R R n a tA A A t R S S S S S S S S ion UFroboadn iszeactiuor nit y WEnaeter • • gr y man O t H s m a i e E g o A S an e r a n v m v n - S n ir N se d io a c n, n w c t g M e m l i i m n ie e ln fa A l c m o t t a e o l l u r a c e D i f m h d f n i a a n s a p e a n n i p da t s gn r d r c t e e p e t g os e C rg p m l m r o i l A e a c n o a r l s n g u a o e S b a e t tg n c a i o M e c i o a n y m l i n gt n ec a ri o n a o r s n t t e m i o n d s a nu - o s b f c e u r a h U e s s r r e b o a e u a - n s d b r o iz b a u n f s t - a i s a o e c n t n v h r n i v a E r g e i o n r ce a s g b re s g t e i o y s o t t o 2 n s 0 s o c p f m o U o h A fi i V g ng s h , - t a G o c I c S v u a m r r a io a c p u y p s p i a n o p g s p i , t l i a i o c s n a s i - e n t g
SAR SAR
SAR SAR
PRS PRS
Open Service Open Service
OS OS
• OS and EDAS offer real-time and free-of-charge improved GPS
OS OS
H SOA A R SS H SOA A RSS (GPS + Galileo in future) positioning service over Europe, used for GIS
SoL SoL
mapping or asset management
SoL SoL
OS-
E
N
D
SMOA oASS L OS-
E
N
D
SMOA oASS L
EDAS EDAS
EDCSAA oSS
L
EDCS AAo SSL
CLMS CLMS
CLMS CLMS
CEDL P MARSS S CEDL P MARSS S • CAMS provide daily analyses and forecasts of worldwide long-range
CMEMS CMEMS levels and transport of atmospheric pollutants
CMEMS CMEMS
CMESMARS CMESMARS
• C3S, for example, provides climate data that can be downscaled for met-
CCALMMSS CCALMMSS
ropolitan areas to generate projections of urban heat island effect
CAMS CAMS
CM CA ECM MO 3SSS S CM CA ECM MO 3SS S S • Sentinel-2 data is further applied to mapping green urban areas, urban
C3S C3S sprawl, and classification of (urban) land use
C3S C3S
CCAESMMoSSL CCAESMMoSSL • The European Ground Motion Service (EGMS) of CLMS or Sentinel-1
CEMS CEMS supports InSAR monitoring of urban infrastructures such as tunnels,
CEMS CEMS
EDCCA3SSSS EDCCA3SSSS bridges and roads, sewage collection systems, identifying potential
CSS CSS displacement or ground motion
CSS CSS
CopernicuCsC EdL M MatS Sa CopernicuCsC EdL M MatS Sa • CLMS with Urban Atlas provides harmonized landcover and land-use
Copernicus data Copernicus data
Copernicus data Copernicus data maps or information about the population of several hundreds of cities in
CSS CSS
CMEMS CMEMS the European Union and EFTA countries, as well as specialized products
GOVSATCOM GOVSATCOM such as the “Small Woody Features” high-resolution layer
GOVSATCOM Copernicus data GOVSATCOM Copernicus data
GOVSATCOM CAMS GOVSATCOM CAMS
#EUSpace #EUSpace
#SEynUeSrpgaiecse C3S #SEynUeSrpgaiecse C3S • Communication services for local governments and institutional network
G S #EO yn UV e SS r pA g aT ie cC s eO M G S #EO yn UV e SS r pA g aT ie cC s eO M management or telecommunications infrastructure monitoring
Synergies Synergies
CEMS CEMS • Maintaining public order and ensuring public safety
#EUSpace Limited rel#evEaUncSe/pcaoncterib ution SignifiLcimanitte rde lreevleavnacnec/ceo/cnotrnibtru•ibt iuotnWionelfare suppoSrigt n(iefi.cgan.,t prerlievvaatnec ec/ocmonmtriubnuticioantion support)
Synergies LimCitSeSd relSevyannecer/gcoientsribution SignifiLcimaCnittSe Srde lreevleavnacnec/ceo/cnotrnibtruibtiuotnion Significant relevance/contribution
Limited relevance/contribution SignifiLcimanitte rde lreevleavnacnec/ceo/cnotrnibtru•ibt iuotnIinonformation asSsigunriafincacnet sreelrevviacnecse/contribution
Copernicus data Copernicus data • Rail traffic management
Limited relevance/contribution SignifiLcimanitte rde lreevleavnacnec/ceo/cnotrnibtru•ibt iuotnIinontelligent tranSisgpnoifircta snyt sretelemvasn caell/ococnattriiobnution
• Machine to machine low data rate applications (e.g., IoT)
GOVSATCOM GOVSATCOM
#EUSpace #EUSpace • EGNSS and Copernicus complementarity, e.g., in urban planning, various
Synergies Synergies geo/GIS data layers that are either created using GNSS or Earth observa-
tion are be used
Limited relevance/contribution SignifiLcimanitte rde lreevleavnacnec/ceo/cnotrnibtruibtiuotnion Significant relevance/contribution
Limited relevance/contribution Significant relevance/contribution

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 75
EXHIBIT 26 . LIST OF EGNSS AND COPERNICUS APPLICATIONS
ADDRESSING THE URBANIZATION CHALLENGE
MARKET SEGMENT APPLiCATiON DOMAiN EXAMPLES OF SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS
AViATiON AND
Navigation Open drone navigation
DRONES
Mapping and GIS
Corporate
Workforce management
Air quality monitoring
mHealth
Safety and emergency
Health and lifestyle
Social networks
CONSUMER
Sport, fitness and wellness incl. specialist support tracking
SOLUTiONS,
UV monitoring
TOURiSM AND
HEALTH
Navigation for smartphone users
Navigation and tracking Personal and asset tracking
Visually impaired support
Robotics Consumer robotics
Tourism Points of interest
Environmental monitoring Environmental impact assessment of infrastructure
Permitting
Infrastructure planning Site selection and planning
Vulnerability analysis
Construction operations
Monitoring of impact of human activities on infrastructures
Infrastructure construction and
Oda support monitoring
iNFRASTRUCTURE monitoring
Post-construction operations
Pipeline monitoring
Data centre
Digital cellular network (DCN)
Timing and synchronization of Professional mobile radio (PMR)
telecommunications networks Public switched telephone network (PSTN)
Satellite communication (SATCOM)
Small cells
Passenger information systems
Attractiveness enhancement
Public transport – tram and light rail
RAiL
Train driving optimization Rail fleet management
Bike-sharing
Fleet management systems Public transport – buses
ROAD AND Road fleet management
AUTOMOTiVE
Navigation (IVS and PND)
Smart mobility
Congestion control
continued
Copernicus application EGNSS application Synergetic application (combined use of Copernicus and EGNSS)

76 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
EXHIBIT 26 . LIST OF EGNSS AND COPERNICUS APPLICATIONS
ADDRESSING THE URBANIZATION CHALLENGE (continued)
MARKET SEGMENT APPLiCATiON DOMAiN EXAMPLES OF SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS
Air quality monitoring in urban environments
Environmental monitoring Urban greening
Urban heat islands
Smart streetlights
Smart cities operations
URBAN Smart waste management
DEVELOPMENT AND
CULTURAL HERiTAGE Cultural heritage monitoring
Informal dwellings
Urban planning and Real estate
monitoring Surveying and mapping
Urban modelling, 3D modelling, digital twins
Urban planning
Copernicus application EGNSS application Synergetic application (combined use of Copernicus and EGNSS)
3 .7 .4 Use cases BUILDSPACE services will be validated and assessed in
four European cities with different climate profiles. The
Enabling innovative space-driven services digital twin services at building level will be tested during
for energy-efficient buildings and climate the construction of a new building in Poland, and the city
resilient cities services validating the link to digital twins of buildings will
be tested in three cities (Piraeus, Riga, Ljubljana) across the
The Horizon Europe BUILDSPACE project aims to couple
European Union. BUILDSPACE will create a set of replica-
terrestrial data from buildings (collected by IoT platforms,
tion guidelines and blueprints for the adoption of the pro-
BIM solutions and others) with aerial imaging from drones
posed applications in building resilient cities in general.120
equipped with thermal cameras and location annotated
data from satellite services (i.e., EGNSS and Copernicus)
Decision toolbox for cities to improve air
to deliver innovative services for building and urban stake-
quality, biodiversity and human well-being,
holders and support informed decision-making towards
and reduce climate risks by planting more
energy-efficient buildings and climate resilient cities.
trees in our cities
The platform intends to allow integration of these hetero- Rapid urbanization often triggers serious problems: poor
geneous data and will offer services at the building scale, air quality, noisy surroundings and lack of recreational
enabling the generation of high fidelity multi-modal digi- spaces are among the biggest issues for the urban popula-
tal twins and at the city scale, providing decision support tion. Many cities have indeed few green areas and consist
services for energy demand prediction, urban heat and of too much “concrete jungle” which makes for a harsh
urban flood analysis. The services will enable the identi- environment for all living things. With the changing climate,
fication of environmental hotspots that increase pressure the weather is expected to become more extreme.
on local city ecosystems and raise the probability of dis-
asters (such as flooding) and will issue alerts and recom- One such effect will be urban heat islands, which will
mendations to local governments and regions for action be even more profound, with heatwaves expected to
(such as the support of policies for building renovation in increase 3 to 10-fold by 2100 in many regions throughout
specific vulnerable areas). midlatitudes, even if the Paris Agreement goal of limiting
120 Enabling Innovative Space-driven Services for Energy Efficient Buildings and Climate Resilient Cities | EU Agency for the Space Programme (europa.eu)

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 77
global warming to 2°C is met.121 A way of tackling all 100KTREEs will develop a mapping and modelling
these issues is to plant more trees within the urban fabric toolbox to optimize the planting of trees and to monitor
– a well-recognized and relatively cheap and efficient the health of the trees, based on Copernicus and in situ
measure for cities to adapt to future climatic challenges. data. By assigning monetary value to the key attributes
of a tree, e.g., pollution absorption, cooling effects, noise
In view of this, the ambition of the Horizon Europe abatement, flood risk reduction and increased biodiver-
100KTREEs project is to make cities better and healthier sity, a number of business cases will be developed for our
places to live by encouraging municipalities to plant more two partner cities, Copenhagen and Sofia. Such business
trees and optimize the impact of tree planting. The team cases will also be used to attract third-party financing. By
will support cities by mapping the existing trees and by means of a crowd science app, the project will engage
showing a solid business case for planting new trees, with citizens and create awareness of the wonders of
as well as attracting third-party sponsorship to make it trees, also extending to improved life quality and mental
happen. health impacts.122
3 .8 THE ENERGY CHALLENGE
AND THE ROLE OF EU SPACE
3 .8 .1 introduction
“Fossil fuels are a dead end –
As population grows, the use of energy will increase, in
for our planet, for humanity,
fact, the energy consumption rate has already increased
and yes, for economies.”
67 per cent in the period 1990–2019,123 approximately
15 per cent more than the increase in population over
António Guterres,
the same period. Since the second industrial revolution,
Secretary-General of the United Nations
modern society has become more and more dependent
on electricity and, in turn, the use of electric power has
enabled accelerated development. In the 2030 Agenda for more renewable energy to reduce emissions and miti-
for Sustainable Development, adopted in 2015, energy gate climate change.
is covered by SDG 7, “Affordable and Clean Energy”,
laying out clear targets on energy efficiency, reliability, Currently 91 per cent of the world population has access
research, infrastructure and, the use of renewable sources to electricity but only 18 per cent of the total final energy
of energy to be achieved by 2030. Emphasis is made on consumption comes from renewable sources.124 It is worth
renewable energy by Secretary-General António Guterres noting that between 2010 and 2020, every region in the
“Fossil fuels are a dead end – for our planet, for human- developing world showed consistent progress in electri-
ity, and yes, for economies. A prompt, well-managed fication. Sub-Saharan Africa remained the least electri-
transition to renewables is the only pathway to energy fied region. Among people without access to electricity,
security, universal access and the green jobs our world around 75 per cent – about 568 million people – lived
needs”, linking the transition to renewables to energy in sub-Saharan Africa in 2020. Electricity access in that
security. Therefore, this challenge is dual, not only is there region rose from 46 per cent in 2018 to 48 per cent in
the need for more energy, as energy demands grow 2020, an annual growth rate of one percentage point.125
faster than the population increase, there is also the need
121 Probabilistic projections of increased heat stress driven by climate change | Communications Earth and Environment (nature.com)
122 Decision Toolbox for cities to improve air quality, biodiversity, human wellbeing and reduce climate risks by planting more trees in our cities | EU Agency
for the Space Programme (europa.eu)
123 2019 Energy Statistics Yearbook (un.org)
124 SDG 7 progress
125 sdg7-report2022-executive_summary.pdf (esmap.org)

78 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
To this end, EGNSS and Copernicus play a role in many
3 .8 .2 Space and energy
applications related to renewable energy. For example,
Earth observation and Global Navigation Satellite EU Space data and services can be used to identify opti-
Systems are able to support rural electrification planning, mal sites for renewable energy and to assess the energy
renewable energy resource assessment, distributed gen- output potential – one of the first steps to undertake
eration, and grid operation and reliability among others. when planning solar and wind power plants or marine
There are many existing applications for space-based renewable energy installations that is essential for defin-
data, such as the use of night-time lights imagery for esti- ing the viability of a project. In this domain, Copernicus
mations of rural electrification, Earth observation-derived provides a wealth of data (from past, current and fore-
normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) products casts) about solar radiation, wind, ocean waves, currents
for vegetation monitoring for overhead transmission line and temperature but also other variables useful for main-
management, solar radiance or sea currents/waves data tenance, such as information about dust and aerosol or
for renewable energy project planning, monitoring and pollen. Copernicus data and information can also support
operations, and nowcasting for extreme weather events hydropower utilities by assessing future reservoir levels or
and other disaster monitoring which can hinder energy river flows from snow and ice products.
production. These and other applications can enhance
energy security through improved governance of and Copernicus and EGNSS can also support biomass produc-
access to modern and reliable electricity, renewable tion monitoring and allow the tracing of biomass along
energy management, and disaster risk assessment in the value chain. Reflected GNSS (GNSS-R) signals also
developing nations, paving the way for more sustainable have potential in the energy domain. For example, by
social and economic development.126 producing scatterometry models also in the presence of
challenging atmospheric conditions such as clouds and
rain, GNSS-R is employed to determine ocean roughness,
3 .8 .3 EU Space specific support wind speed and wind direction, thus supporting logistical
planning in offshore energy.129
The world is set to face several energy-related issues in
the upcoming years. Among these, the two major ones
In addition, satellite technologies can assist various stake-
relate to an energy supply shortage and the environmen-
holders such as governmental authorities, energy and
tal impact associated with conventional energy sources.
utility companies, energy traders, supply chain managers
and mining companies in undertaking many energy-
In this respect, the European Green Deal has already
related tasks and analyses. To mention some, EGNSS and
accelerated the use of renewable energy, the diversifi-
Copernicus can be employed within energy network fidelity
cation of energy supplies and a reduced dependency on
applications to contribute to the monitoring of critical infra-
fossil fuel markets (in particular, oil and gas). In addition,
structures such as energy networks. In particular, Galileo
in response to the global energy market disruption, the
provides accurate and secure timing and synchronization
European Commission presented the RePowerEU Plan127
for phasor measurement units (PMU) – an emerging tech-
on 18 , which addresses the Union’s green
nology that is essential for various smart grid applications.
ambitions through energy savings, diversification of
energy supplies, and accelerated roll-out of renewable
Furthermore, Copernicus and EGNSS assist other directly
energy to replace fossil fuels in homes, industry and
or indirectly energy-related segments and their applica-
power generation. In this context, the Commission
tions along their entire life cycle, such as the oil and gas
proposed to increase the headline 2030 target for
and mining industry: from site selection planning to mine
renewables from 40 per cent to 45 per cent under the
surveying applications. For example, augmented GNSS
‘’Fit for 55’’ package.128
solutions leveraging the Galileo signal enable the accu-
rate guidance of heavy mining machinery, while thanks
to its capacity to detect landscape changes, Copernicus
126 Frontiers | Using Earth Observation to Help Developing Countries Improve Access to Reliable, Sustainable, and Modern Energy (frontiersin.org)
127 
128 
129 

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 79
also supports governmental authorities in monitoring Finally, GOVSATCOM can play an essential role in the
illegal mining activities, while also, over Europe provid- energy segment, enabling remote control of renewable
ing ground motion data and land-use/land cover data to energy plants and underpinning applications such as
inform impact assessments. energy network operation and (conditions) monitoring
O O O p p p e e e O O n n n S S S S S - - e e e N N r r r H H H C C P v P v v M M i i i A A A A A R R c c c A A S S S e S S S e S e F F F F o o o o o o o o d d d d s s s s e e e e A s l a E c c c c o mu u u u g X l r r r r w i i i i s t t t t e y y y y a o H W W W W - m r ca a a a , I t t t t t e e e e o B i e r r r r n c m m m m s I n i T t a a a a t a t n n n n y a a a a G n 2 E E E E g g g g o n n n n e e e e o a a a a 7 N v v v v m m m m f u n n n n i i i i p r r r r . e e e e d d d d o o o o t r S n n n n n n n n c c c c e h b t t t t m m m m l l l l S i i i i m m m m r o e e e e a E F n n n n aa a a a s n r t t t t t t t t O X a a a a e e e e t e e l l l l i c c c c D D D D i i i i A e o m m m m c h h h h R i i i i a a a a s s s s l a a a a p p p p e n n a a a a n n n n i M n n n n a a a a g s s s s g g g g r r r r d d d d T c c c c i v t t t t e e e e s e e e e e e e e t t t t v s s s s e e e e h P r r r r i H p p p p m m m m e r s m m m m o o o o t o L e e e e n n n n u E a a a a r s r r r r s s s s n n n n g g g g E s n e e e e c a a a a e e e e f g g g g E n n n n S m h o c M M M M e e e e c c c c N y y y y m m m m a i i i i r O O O g g g g O e a e e e e r r r r n n n n n E a a a a m s p p p n t t t t t t t t F i i i i e e e R o o o o s t sn n n n o O O n n n , u G R m r S S s S S S p E e Y - - e e e a U U U U a N N p L r r r r r r r H H H t C C r b b b b e v P v P v M M C o E e a a a a t i i i A A A A A R R n n n n f c c c l r V i i i i A A fi H s S e S S S e S S S e z z z z l t a a a a i t A c t t t t t A i i i i ro o o o t e i e n n n n N e h L e n d e E E E EF F F F L C n n n no o o o t t E a e e e eo o o o l r E r r r rd d d d i g g g g t e o N g y y y ys s s s a e e e e m O p h c c c c G u u u u c e t r r r r F o i i i i E a s t t t t r y y y y t W W W W , n a E e a a a a i t t t t t U n s e e e e i • • m o r r r r u m m m m w S n p a a a a a n n n n O f ( O P . h p n c a a a ao E E E E g g g g A i o p S - r n n n n o e e e e c a a a a v v v v m m m m n - C e n n n n i i i i P h r r r r r N e e e e d d d d o o o os t n n n n n M n n n n E c c c c t t t t t M m m m m l l l l r i i i i S m m m m U e e e e u C n n n n e a a a a A c t t t t t t t t a a a a e e e e r O i t l l l l n v a c c c c i D D D D i i i i m m m m o h h h h i u T ( e n i i i i M a a a ac s s s s a a a a s p p p p C n a a a a n n n n n n n n s n d h e a a a a m s s s s g g g g r r r r d d d d c c c c t t t t e e e e e o P e e e e e e e e et t t t s e s s s s e e e e a C a r r r r p p p p u m m m m d p O r m m m m o o o o l r r A e e e e r g r n n n n t a a a a e r r r r e e v s s s s n n n n N b g g g g e e e e S y g a a a a e r e e e e a l g g g g y n n n n e n E y r d M M M M e e e e c c c c i c n i y y y y m m m m v i i i i i i d N g y h n g g g g c e e e e c a r r r r s n n n n g u a a a a r a r p T t t t t n t t t t i e i i i i) s l o o o o o d r S l c a n n n n o , e r e s v o G n S p e i U U U U r d g o E o a r r r r t b b b b e s r f R e h l a a a a e i i s n n n n e t l t V i i i i e i z z z z i n h v s o a a a a I r o t t t t e e C e i i i i o n o o o o a r , n n n n w b i E y s n f E u o E E E E s a S g a n n n n G s e u e e e e b c t r r r r d g g g g s r n c l N y y y y e s u u e E e r O r s e i U a d n s n S t g a e S i e n g a t p T r h a n g e a e i a d n y x c n s c h e d G o t o i p s b n c O S p s o e i t t t o V r m h r o 2 a u S a fi p t c 7 A t o t n o c T i b g r o a n s C e n n . o e O l p f o n b h T M t w e s a a . u s ) s n e s f e d e o r d r v S i t c h e e s
OS-NSMAAR OS-NSMAAR in (smart) grids
SAR SAR
Open Service Open Service • HAS provides high-accuracy positioning for UAVs that can be used for
CAS CAS
OS OS mapping, inspection, etc.
HOASS HOASS
PRS PRS
SoL SoL
OS-NSMoAL OS-NSMoAL
SAR SAR
EDAS EDAS
EDCAASS EDCAASS
OS OS
CLMS CLMS • CAMS, for example, provides solar radiation data important for site
PRS PRS
CLMS CLMS selection, energy potential estimation, planning and operating of solar
SoL SoL
CMEMS CMEMS installations; Also, information about dust and pollen for maintenance
SAR SAR
CMEMS CMEMS • CMEMS, for example, provides data about ocean waves, ocean currents
EDAS EDAS
CAMS CAMS or temperature useful for marine renewable energy
CAMOSS CAMOSS
• C3S Energy operational service delivers key information about
CLCM3SS CLCM3SS
climate-related indicators relevant for the energy sector
CS3oSL CS3oSL
• CLMS, for example, Copernicus Digital Elevation Model (DEM) or infor-
CMCEEMMSS CMCEEMMSS
mation about land use/landcover useful for renewable energy impact
CEEDMASS CEEDMASS
assessments, as well as the European Ground Motion Service
CACMSSS CACMSSS
CSS CSS
CLMS CLMS
Copernicus dCa3tSa Copernicus dCa3tSa
Copernicus data Copernicus data
CMEMS CMEMS
CEMS CEMS
GOVSATCOM GOVSATCOM • Remote control of renewable energy plants
GOVSATCOM CA C M S S S GOVSATCOM CA C M SS S
• E nergy network operation and (conditions) monitoring for grid operators
#EUSpace C3S #EUSpace C3S or renewable energy
Copernicus data Copernicus data
S#EynUeSrpgaiecse #SEynUeSrpgaiecse • Institutional and diplomatic support
Synergies CEMS Synergies CEMS
• Civil-military interaction (e.g., protection of key energy infrastructures)
GOVSATCOM GOVSATCOM
LimCitSeSd relevance/contribution Significant releLvaimnCciteSe/Sdc orenltervibauntcioen/contr•ib utRioPnAs/UAV surSviegnililfiacnacnet relevance/contribution
Limited relevance/contribution Significant releLvaimncitee/dc orenltervibauntcioen/contr•ib utMionission locatiSoingn sifiucpapnto rretlevance/contribution
#EUSpace Copernicus data #EUSpace Copernicus data • Support to multiple crisis management zones
Synergies Synergies
• S upport to emergency team/vehicles (e.g., reach back and local network
capability)
GOVSATCOM GOVSATCOM
Limited relevance/contribution Significant releLvaimncitee/dc orenltervibauntcioen/contribution Significant relevance/contribution
#EUSpace #EUSpace • EGNSS, Copernicus and GOVSATCOM complementarity, e.g., EGNSS
Synergies Synergies for secure and reliable T and S in smart grid, GOVSATCOM can provide
a backup system for the terrestrial network or enable remote control
of wind farms, while boosting the interconnectivity and digitization of
Limited relevance/contribution Significant releLvaimncitee/dc orenltervibauntcioen/contributpioonwer grids, CSiogpnieficrnanict uresl etvhaennc ec/aconn btreib uutsioend to assess energy potential,
and supply and demand
Limited relevance/contribution Significant relevance/contribution

80 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
EXHIBIT 28 . LIST OF EGNSS AND COPERNICUS APPLICATIONS
ADDRESSING THE ENERGY CHALLENGE
MARKET SEGMENT APPLiCATiON DOMAiN EXAMPLES OF SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS
Energy network conditions monitoring
Energy network fidelity
Phasor measurement units (PMU)
ENERGY AND RAW Market intelligence Supply chain insights
MATERiALS
Power plant design optimisation
Renewable energy Renewable energy assessment potential and forecast
Risk assessment for energy assets
MARiTiME AND Metocean (meteorology over oceans, and offshore
Ocean services
iNLAND WATERWAYS weather and sea state monitoring)
Copernicus application EGNSS application Synergetic application (combined use of Copernicus and EGNSS)
3 .8 .4 Use cases The Horizon Europe RESPONDENT project comes
to address the challenges of RES power generation
Renewable energy sources power forecasting, demand forecasting, smart power grid
forecasting and synchronization for smart monitoring and supply/demand balancing. An AI/ML RES
grid networks management power generation forecasting algorithm is proposed,
exploiting both Copernicus and site-specific weather
Renewable energy sources (RES) play a major role in the
data, along with renewable energy power conversion
transformation to a climate-neutral economy. Their integra-
models. Furthermore, an AI/ML – Multiphysics model for
tion into the power grid is pivotal to the green transition
the power demand of certain communities is also devel-
and to the decarbonization of the energy sector. However,
oped. Lastly, RESPONDENT will build a Galileo-enabled
as the most used RES (solar, wind and hydropower) are
PMU and develop a monitoring module to test and verify
also weather-dependent, their power generation capacity
the advantages the Galileo timing and synchronization
varies according to the local microclimatic conditions.
services offer in smart grid monitoring, power balancing
and overall operation.130
This power production variability makes RES challenging
to integrate into the power grid and to provide seamless,
stable and secure amounts of power. On the other hand,
A dedicated solution for electrical power
power demand also affects the power grid operation,
network maintenance and upgrade
since there must always be a supply/demand balance
in the power grid. Grid power imbalances can cause Access to electricity is a big challenge worldwide, affecting
frequency fluctuations and other unwanted transient 775 million people.131 Also, according to the International
phenomena, which can compromise grid stability and Energy Agency (IEA), the number of people around the
operation. For that matter, advanced grid monitoring world who live without electricity is set to rise by nearly
techniques have been developed, employing phasor 20 million in 2022, the first global increase since IEA began
measurement units (PMUs) to measure the electrical tracking the numbers 20 years ago. IEA stated that the
signals in a precise and synchronized way, based on a rise is mostly in sub-Saharan Africa, where the number of
reliable timing reference. people without access is nearly back to its 2013 peak.
130 Renewable Energy Sources Power FOrecasting and SyNchronisation for Smart GriD NEtworks MaNagemenT | EU Agency for the Space Programme
(europa.eu)
131 

3 . HOW EU SPACE ADDRESSES THE iDENTiFiED SUSTAiNABiLiTY CHALLENGES | 81
Nowadays, emerging countries face a pre-existing AMPERE proposes a solution based on a GIS Cloud map-
infrastructure whose topology is unknown and request ping technology, collecting on field data acquired with
new technologies to support them for maintenance and optical/thermal cameras and LiDAR installed on board a
planning of new deployment. remote piloted aircraft (RPA). An RPA will be able to fly
over selected areas performing semi-automated oper-
In this context, the H2020 AMPERE (Asset Mapping ations to collect optical and thermal images as well as
Platform for Emerging countRies Electrification) project 3D LiDAR-based reconstruction products. Such products
aims at providing an important contribution to decision are post-processed at the central cloud GIS platform,
makers and stakeholders, planning cost-efficient mainte- allowing operators to plan and monitor activities by
nance and new affordable strategies. means of visualization and analytics tools that can resolve
data accessibility issues and improve the decision-making
The purpose of the AMPERE project is to provide a ded- process. In such a context, EGNSS represents an essential
icated solution for electrical power network information technology ensuring automated operations in a reliable
gathering. It will support decision-making actors (e.g. manner and guaranteeing high performance.
institutions and public/private companies in charge of
managing electrical networks) to collect all the informa- These aspects confer to the AMPERE project a world-
tion needed to plan electrical network maintenance and wide dimension, with European industry in the clear role
upgrade. of bringing innovation and know-how to allow network
intervention planning with a limited afforded financial risk,
Indeed, the challenge facing such communities goes above all for emerging non-European countries.132
beyond the lack of infrastructure assets. What is needed
is a mapping of already deployed infrastructure (not
known) to perform a holistic assessment of the energy
demand and its expected growth over time.
132 H2020 AMPERE (h2020-ampere.eu)

Khurdopin Glacier, Shimshal Valley.
Photo credit: Nasa, Landsat 8 - OLI

4 . FiNAL REMARKS
The world population has reached the 8 billion milestone. The challenges represented in this report correspond to
According to the current scenarios, the population will those where the usage of space technologies, data and
continue to grow in the coming years, reaching a peak of infrastructure can be maximized through the lens of the
between 9 billion and 11 billion between 2050 and the “Space2030” Agenda, and therefore, do not constitute
end of the century. This increase in population creates an exhaustive list of challenges that the world faces.
challenges and opportunities which need to be addressed
through the correct policies to ensure development while This report continues the work carried out by UNOOSA
addressing the sustainability of activities of humankind. and EUSPA (formerly GSA) to inform decision makers
Space-based data and services can support the ‘’8 billion of the benefits of Earth observation, GNSS and satellite
world’’ challenges and the successful implementation of communications, and how these technologies can be
the global agendas as described in this document. leveraged through concrete examples and use cases. This
document does not provide an extensive view, but an
The challenges have been derived from an analysis of the overview of what the current technologies are capable of.
“Space2030” Agenda, in particular the objective 2
“Harness the potential of space to solve everyday chal- Following the success of the report entitled European
lenges and leverage space-related innovation to improve Global Navigation Satellite System and Copernicus:
the quality of life” and validated by independently Supporting the Sustainable Development Goals. Building
establishing the links between the “Space2030” Agenda Blocks towards the 2030 Agenda published in 2018,
and other global agendas, namely the 2030 Agenda for UNOOSA and EUSPA signed a memorandum of under-
Sustainable Development, the Sendai Framework Disaster standing in to continue the cooperation,
for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, the Paris Agreement shortly after the “Space2030” Agenda was adopted,
and the New Urban Agenda. Through this approach, eight enabling the possibility of creating a report to ana-
challenges for an 8 billion world were determined: lyse the impact of selected technologies vis-à-vis the
“Space2030” Agenda.
1 . Food security
2 . Water management This report aimed to assess from both a descriptive view-
point and by means of tangible use cases how the use of
3 . Environmental impact and climate change
core space-based technologies, namely Earth observa-
4 . Disaster management and emergency response
tion, GNSS and SATCOM, and its EU Space components
5 . Migration (Galileo, EGNOS, Copernicus and GOVSATCOM) support
6 . Urbanization the challenges of a world hosting 8 billion people,
through the overarching objective 2 of the “Space2030”
7 . Energy
Agenda, in line with the mandate given to the Office by
8 . Health

84 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
its implementation plan in promoting and facilitating the supporting global scientific, academic and research activ-
use of space-based solutions, including in the implemen- ities, collaborating with other international agencies and
tation of the “Space2030” Agenda. The Office should entities to promote interconnectivity with other space
continue, within its mandate, functions and existing systems, supporting non-European Union partner coun-
resources to pursue partnerships, including with research tries in developing a favourable ecosystem for EU Space
institutions, academia, industry and the private sector, to components market uptake, monitoring and analysing the
provide broader opportunities to access space for pur- international EU Space components market and raising
poses of science, innovation, research and development, awareness of EU Space components through events,
education and capacity-building. In that regard, it should conferences and workshops across the globe.
implement activities to promote the use of space-based
applications and technologies to support Member States For each of the sustainability challenges identified, a
in meeting the objectives of the global development description of the challenge has been provided with a
agendas. general description of the role of Earth observation, satel-
lite communications and GNSS, followed by the analysis
It also aligns with the role of EUSPA in facilitating of their relevance in tackling the sustainability challenges.
and promoting international industrial cooperation, The analysis has been performed at two levels: first, at
EXHIBIT 29 . EU SPACE COMPONENTS RELEVANCE AND CONTRIBUTION
TO ‘’8 BILLION PEOPLE’’ CHALLENGES
SUSTAiNABiLiTY #EUSpace
GOVSATCOM
CHALLENGE Synergies
Migration
Environmental impact and
climate change
Energy
Disaster management and
emergency response
Urbanization
Food security
Water management
Health
While the Health challenge was not detailed in this report – as plenty of health-related reports have been published recently – this challenge is analysed
in this summary table for the sake of completeness, including examples of applications mentioned in this section.
Low relevance/contribution Significant relevance/contribution

4 . FiNAL REMARKS | 85
the EU Space components level, also including a focus global and regional trends. Climate change requires data-
on their specific services,137 and secondly, at the applica- driven approaches and methods for proper modelling and
tion level, identifying Galileo, EGNOS, Copernicus and monitoring to provide past, current and future climate
GOVSATCOM and their synergetic relevance and contri- information to support policy and decision-making. For
bution to the ‘’8 billion world’’ challenges. example, more than 50 per cent of essential climate var-
iables are only measurable from space. Policymakers can
The overview of the relevance of EU Space components use Copernicus data to ensure compliance with regula-
and its synergies is illustrated in the exhibit 29. tions for abating carbon emissions and therefore GHGs
and the contribution of these gases to climate change.
It has been determined that EGNSS and Copernicus For example, the capability to monitor climate indicators
support all seven challenges analysed in detail within this such as global temperature, carbon dioxide, methane, sea
report, while GOVSATCOM contributes to six challenges. level and ice extent over time is a key feature enabled by
Although each of the EU Space components can contrib- the Copernicus C3S service that can help policymakers
ute to the “8 billion challenges’’ separately, the full poten- to address future actions and it is a recurring capabil-
tial is unleashed due to synergies and complementarity: ity across other challenges (i.e., in water management,
migration and disaster management). Copernicus services
Food security. A good example of synergies between C3S, CLMS, CEMS and CAMS serve as the backbone for
the systems can be found when it comes to the food the monitoring of climate in a wide range of applications
security challenge. In precision farming, georeferenced across different areas including GHG emissions, forest
NDVI maps derived from Copernicus Sentinel images are monitoring, soil carbon capture, soil moisture, ice and
combined with highly accurate Galileo-based machine snow extent, pollen concentrations, UV indexes, extreme
positioning in variable rate application systems that make weather events such as flooding, heatwaves, fires detec-
agriculture more resource-efficient and reduce its environ- tion and monitoring. The contribution of GNSS is related
mental impact. In this context, EGNSS and Copernicus to GNSS Radio Occultation and GNSS Reflectometry
provide farmers with the tools needed to maximize Techniques supporting the modelling and estimation of
agricultural output. information relevant to climate such as soil moisture, veg-
etation, snow and sea ice. GOVSATCOM can be used to
Water management. The Space4Water portal maintained address climatic emergencies related to extreme events.
by UNOOSA and supported by PSIPW provides a good
overview of what space can do for water management Nevertheless, the added value of EU Space data at user
and it is an excellent entry point. EU Space data also level goes beyond the monitoring of natural phenomena
proved to be relevant in addressing the water chal- as it provides a direct, relevant information for decision-
lenge: the data generated by Copernicus services CLMS, making to meet the expectations of the world of tomorrow.
CMEMS and C3S provide the stakeholders involved
with the fundamental intelligence needed to understand Disaster management and emergency response. Space
the Earth’s water cycle and thus ensure the safe usage is crucial for disaster management and emergency
of water, both regarding the water intended for human response as has been proven during the almost 20 years
consumption and the diffusion of harmful waterborne of operations of UN-SPIDER. UN-SPIDER was the first to
diseases such as Escherichia coli. GOVSATCOM, on the focus on the need to ensure access to and use of space
other hand, offers many solutions to ensure the continuity technologies during all phases of the disaster manage-
of water-related critical infrastructures. ment cycle, including the risk reduction phase which is
crucial for reducing the losses of lives and property. In
Environmental impact and climate change. In particular, terms of systems, when disaster strikes, public author-
EU Space data and services have been assessed as useful ities can rely on Copernicus to detect and monitor
in addressing a key challenge such as environmental the evolving situation. On the ground, firefighters and
and climate change where the possibility to perform emergency first responders use EGNSS to safely guide
spatio-temporal analyses enable relevant environmental themselves or drones through the smoke, fog or flames.
monitoring tools and climate indicators to determine In addition, GOVSATCOM can be used for applications
137 The analysis at the level of EU Space components includes not only operational services but also services that will be rolled out soon.

86 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
such as coordinating emergency response actors in the effect, to mention just a few. EGNSS is then essential for
communications-denied environment, early warning GIS, cadastre and asset mapping, infrastructure construc-
systems, satellite radio broadcasting for sharing emer- tion and monitoring but is also fundamental for smart city
gency messages with the population or smart emergency operations.
response vehicles. We can take another example, mar-
itime emergencies. First, Copernicus provides the near Energy. Within energy, EGNSS is a vital component to
real-time data needed to evaluate the state of the sea, ensure network synchronization, while Copernicus truly
currents and temperature. Galileo, on the other hand, allows the optimization of energy production within
makes navigation easier and more reliable, thanks to its renewable energy plants. For example, the Copernicus
accurate signals. Completing the maritime safety trifecta C3S energy operational service delivers key information
is GOVSATCOM, which ensures uninterrupted commu- for climate-related indicators relevant to the European
nications, even on the open seas. In addition, take for energy sector including data of electricity demand and
example the ground-breaking Galileo Return Link Service the production of power from wind, solar and hydro
(RLS), part of the Galileo SAR service. Thanks to the RLS, sources. While Copernicus CAMS solar radiation services
sailors in distress, when equipped with the appropriate provide historical values of global, direct and diffuse solar
beacon, will see a light verifying that their distress signal irradiance, as well as of direct normal irradiance. Finally,
has been received by emergency first responders and EGNSS and Copernicus are relevant enablers of many
that their location has been established. energy-related applications within the smart city concept
and will really contribute to ensuring a sustainable way
Migration. Specific use cases show the usefulness of of living in cities expected to become more and more
European Union space infrastructures to address the densely populated and prone to increasing mobility
migration challenge. GOVSATCOM, for example, by issues.
providing a common communication channel for various
actors involved in supporting orderly migration, represent- Health. While the health challenge was not analysed
ing a key element to ensure land/sea border surveillance in this report, as plenty of reports have recently been
and to support asylum operations. The Global Human released. Resolution A/RES/77/120 requests the Office
Settlement Layer provided by the Copernicus CEMS expo- for Outer Space Affairs to strengthen, within exist-
sure mapping component, provides open and free data ing resources, capacity-building and networking in
and tools for on-demand mapping and early warnings, to Africa, Asia and the Pacific, and Latin America and the
monitoring the presence of settlements and population Caribbean, through regional technical cooperation
including degree of urbanization, population size, popu- projects, and to support field projects for strengthen-
lation density in urban-rural areas. For example, it can be ing collaboration between the space and global health
used to understand how many people are living in certain sectors as an efficient strategy for making better use of
areas or how many settlements are affected by extreme space science and technology for access to global health
events and monitor spatio-temporal changes over time. for beneficiary States and taking better advantage of
In addition, the information is relevant for other challenge opportunities offered by bilateral or multilateral collabo-
domains such as urbanization, disaster management and ration. The establishment of the Space and Global Health
emergency response and climate change. Network and the Space and Global Health Platform,
based in Geneva, aims to promote effective collabora-
Urbanization. Space has supported urban development tion on space and global health issues. EU Space sup-
and data-driven decision-making concerning cities. The ports many applications across the health-care segment,
Copernicus GHSL (Global Human Settlement Layer) com- used by people and governments across the world.
ponent and Copernicus CLMS help to improve the For instance, Copernicus and Galileo provide essential
collective understanding of the urbanization process. contributions towards better responses to evolving global
They can be applied to mapping green urban areas, health-care needs. This covers examples of the way the
urban sprawl and population density, global land use, health-care ecosystem can benefit from medical drone
land cover classification and imperviousness. Additionally, deliveries (especially in remote areas), GNSS-IoT trackers
Copernicus CAMS provides daily analyses and forecasts adapted for ageing population needs and the way Earth
of atmospheric pollutants and C3S then provides climate observation data monitors can prevent future pandemics
data to generate projections of the urban heat island or outbreaks of (for example) mosquito-borne diseases.

4 . FiNAL REMARKS | 87
In addition, Galileo takes the emergency response to the In this context, with the Copernicus full, free and open
next level, as illustrated by the role of accurate posi- data policy, the European Commission seeks to facilitate
tioning in each step of the emergency response chain access to Copernicus data and information for inter-
(including access to automated external defibrillators and ested international partners. Administrative cooperation
supporting next generation (NG) 112 architecture. Finally, arrangements on Copernicus data access and Earth
GOVSATCOM can provide support to telemedicine, such observation data exchange have already been signed
as access to specialists that rely on information commu- with several countries: the United States, Australia, Brazil,
nication and technology, to the remotest of areas where Chile, Colombia, India, Serbia, Ukraine and the African
teams are deployed. The secured provision of telemedi- Union. Discussions towards similar cooperation have
cine is critical for saving lives. been started with other countries and regions (including
United Nations agencies and Asia-Pacific countries).138
Zooming in on the services of the four EU Space com- Another example, this time from the GNSS domain – the
ponents (EGNSS (Galileo and EGNOS), Copernicus, European Union cooperates with African countries wish-
GOVSATCOM) as illustrated in exhibit 10, the analy- ing to foster the development of SBAS – the European
sis revealed that four services (Galileo Open Service, Union is supporting the development of an autonomous
Copernicus C3S, CEMS and Copernicus data) contrib- SBAS system by the Agency for Aerial Navigation Safety
ute to tackling all seven challenges and that 10 out of in Africa and Madagascar (ASECNA), based on an inter-
17 services (>55 per cent) analysed support at least four national agreement in force since .139
challenges. More importantly, the joint use of the four EU
Space components services (synergies and complementa- Taking the “Space2030” Agenda as the basis, this report
rity) contributes to all the challenges. has identified challenges that can be supported by space
technology and provided an assessment of the benefits
At the application/user level, 118 out of the total of applying them in the context of an 8 billion world.
184 applications featured in 16 out of the 17 market Although it was elicited in the “Space2030” Agenda,
domains included in the EUSPA EO and GNSS Market after a thorough analysis conducted in this report, the
Report have been identified as fit to support the identi- conclusion is clear, space science and technology are
fied sustainable challenges. now intrinsic to our daily lives and bring an abundance of
unique and fundamental benefits to Earth and its popu-
In general, the four EU Space components provide a unique lation. Space tools are highly relevant for the attainment
set of services that complement each other or work in syn- of the global development agendas and their fulfilment
ergies, thus underpinning its overall contribution. The EU requires improved access to space-based data and appli-
Space contribution to the challenges is even more boosted cations and space infrastructure.
when adding to the EU Space Traffic Management with
SSA that ensure sustainable, safe and secure “space’’, and
the IRIS2 constellation that will offer enhanced space-based
secure communication capacities to governmental users,
businesses, while ensuring high-speed Internet broadband
to cope with connectivity dead zones.
To fully unlock the potential of space synergies at
continents and countries, the cooperation at different
levels between the systems (Earth observation,
GNSS, SATCOM, meteorology) and technologies (AI,
big data, …) and between the organizations (private and
public partnerships, networks of academia and entrepre-
neurs) is central and of paramount importance.
138 
139 

ANNEX .
DEFiNiTiON OF GNSS AND
EARTH OBSERVATiON
APPLiCATiONS
The list below provides the definition of all the applications featured in this report, as seg-
mented in the EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report/ ISSUE 1, explaining the use of Earth
observation, GNSS or both.
Earth observation application GNSS application
Synergetic application (combined use of Earth observation and GNSS)
AGRiCULTURE
Environmental monitoring
Carbon capture and content assessment: The monitoring of agricultural vegetation and grass-
land cover through Earth observation can help inform carbon sink capacity of different terrains.
Earth observation can also be used to monitor the maintenance of agricultural practices which
pertain to CO2 sequestration.
Environmental impact monitoring: Earth observation can be used to monitor greenhouse gas
emissions associated with agricultural activities; evaluate the impact of fertilization on the envi-
ronment; explore the potential of carbon sequestration in agricultural land cover; and assess the
level of biodiversity present in agricultural lands.
Natural resources monitoring
Biomass monitoring: The use of various optical measurements, including radar measurements
in situ sensors, enables Earth observation and GNSS to monitor the biomass present in a region.
This can help in understanding the capacity for CO2 absorption of a given ecosystem or poten-
tials for biomass energy production.
Crop yield forecasting: Earth observation facilitates remote-monitoring and forecasting of har-
vest potentials, while GNSS allows in situ positioning information of field sensors to feed forecast
information.
Soil condition monitoring: Earth observation enables monitoring of soil condition and moisture
levels. GNSS positioning help to identify the exact position of the soil samples sent to laborato-
ries. Soil condition monitoring is important for understanding the growth potential and health
status of plants.

90 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
Vegetation monitoring: Earth observation enables the monitoring of vegetation coverage and
health (through the generation of various indices such as NDVI). This information can be used to
understand land cover statistics and provide inputs for efficient farm management practices.
Operations management
Asset monitoring: GNSS provides insightful telematics data from tractors and other farm vehi-
cles/ assets to help increase efficiency when conducting operations, monitor workforce activity
and reduce costs.
Automatic steering: Automatic steering completely takes over steering of the farm equipment
from the driver allowing the operator to engage in core agricultural tasks.
CAP monitoring: The enforcement of certain agricultural practices mandated by the Common
Agricultural Policy, such as the maintenance of permanent grassland or the diversification of crop
species, can all be monitored and enforced using Earth observation data or geotagged photos
using GNSS.
Farm machinery guidance: GNSS positioning is used to assist drivers of farm machinery in
following the optimal path when conducting activities such as variable rate application, thus
minimizing risks of overlaps.
Farm management systems: Both Earth observation and GNSS can inform part of an overall
farm management system, considering various types of practical, operational and financial data to
help in the holistic management of a farm.
Field definition: Both Earth observation and GNSS allow for the precise measurement and defini-
tion of field boundaries.
Livestock wearables: Animals can be fitted with devices which use GNSS to track and monitor
their activity and health status.
Pastureland management: Earth observation can monitor the growth and maintenance of grass-
lands. Mowing and grazing activities on grassland can be detected and verified using Earth obser-
vation. Grasslands are also an important component of Natura 2000 areas and are monitored with
Copernicus Sentinel imagery with the EU Grassland Watch of the EC’s DG ENV.
Precision irrigation: Like the Variable Rate Application, precision irrigation combines GNSS
positioning with Earth observation information to distribute the appropriate amount of water for
irrigating crops.
Variable rate application: Variable rate application combines GNSS positioning with Earth
observation information to distribute varying amounts of agrichemicals and seeds across a given
area. Discrepancies in performance and areas of lower crop yields can be identified and specif-
ically targeted with extra input treatments (fertilizers, pesticides) or seeds by farmers. This can
help improve overall performance and reduce agricultural input usage.
Weather services for agriculture
Climate services for agriculture: long-term forecasting and monitoring of climate variables rele-
vant to agriculture using remotely sensed data. Air quality and land temperature can be under-
stood using Earth observation, which in turn can help in understanding how our climate could
affect future harvests and yields.
Weather forecasting for agriculture: short-term weather forecasting. Air quality, land tempera-
ture and cloud cover can all be understood using Earth observation, which in turn can help form
weather forecasts relevant to precise locations. This allows farmers to plan operations such as
irrigation or fertilizer scheduling.

ANNEX . DEFiNiTiON OF GNSS AND EARTH OBSERVATiON APPLiCATiONS | 91
AViATiON AND DRONES
Environmental monitoring
Aircraft emission measurement and monitoring enables monitoring of trace gas composition of
the Earth’s atmosphere at different altitudes to understand more accurately the impact aviation
has on the environment at those different altitudes.
Particulate matter monitoring: enables air traffic services to monitor particulates in airspace,
enabling them to provide avoidance instructions (e.g., to avoid volcanic ash clouds) and allowing
improved planning of routes and flight efficiency.
Navigation
Open drone navigation: Uncertified use of GNSS for very low-level navigation supporting func-
tions such as return to home, position holds, waypoint navigation, geo-awareness etc.
BiODiVERSiTY, ECOSYSTEMS AND
NATURAL CAPiTAL
Animal tracking for biodiversity purposes: GNSS-beacons are used to geo locate animals for
the purposes of monitoring migrations, habitats and behaviours.
Coastal ecosystems monitoring: Earth observation provides information on multiple parameters
needed to assess the conditions and the equilibrium in coastal ecosystems, such as coastal wet-
land loss, land-use cover and change, wetland mapping, coastal geomorphology, water optical
properties, waterbody nutrients (chlorophyll-a), littoral and subtidal habitat, erosion and sedimen-
tation mapping, long time series of ocean colour products including uncertainties estimates or
health issues such as algal bloom detection.
Snow and ice ecosystems monitoring: Snow and ice cover data (multispectral and thermal,
and to a lesser extent microwave), mapping the structural glaciology of big and small glaciers,
mapping of glacier change, conducting glacier inventories, mapping glacier thinning, measuring
thinning ice shelves, glacier velocity, mapping glacier landforms and measuring the ice-sheet bed.
Snow and ecosystem monitoring applications are also used in high-altitude environments.
Terrestrial ecosystems monitoring: Plant species respond differently to light emitted by the sun
or by various artificial energy sources, with specific reflection characteristics in the electromag-
netic spectrum. This makes Earth observation data of adequate spectral and spatial resolution
and a useful tool to distinguish different species. Advantages associated with using this method
include the reproducibility, transferability, and the increased possibility for quantification. Other
relevant data derived from Earth observation related to air/water quality complete the informa-
tion for the status/forecasting of the ecosystem.
Water ecosystems monitoring: Earth observation provides information on multiple parameters
needed to assess the conditions and the equilibrium in water ecosystems, such as: biogeochem-
ical analyses and forecasts for global and regional seas, topography, bathymetry, ocean colour,
sea-surface temperature, ocean currents, fish quantification, and others.

92 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
CLiMATE SERViCES
Climate change mitigation and adaptation: Various types of Earth observation data can
be used to aid formation of short and long-term climate change mitigation and adaptation
strategies.
Earth observation-based modelling: Many types of Earth observation data, despite being
unavailable for a long period, is used as an input into climate modelling. This results in computer
simulated dynamic projections of the Earth’s systems behaviour used for various purposes.
GNSS-based climate modelling: GNSS supports a range of geodetic applications that measure
properties of the Earth (magnetic field, atmosphere) with direct impact on the Earth’s climate.
Climate forecasting: Many types of Earth observation data can be used in climate forecasting
services. Air quality, land temperature and cloud cover can all be understood using Earth observa-
tion, which in turn can be built into the relevant models and contribute to climate forecasting.
Climate monitoring: Many types of Earth observation data can be used in climate monitoring.
Air quality, land temperature, cloud cover and several other parameters relevant for the climate
can all be understood with Earth observation data.
CONSUMER SOLUTiONS,
TOURiSM AND HEALTH
Corporate
Mapping and GIS: Smartphones enable users to become map creators because of the democ-
ratization of digital mapping. Mapping services comprise all consumer applications that draw on
Earth observation information for map features, which includes location or navigational services,
including navigation, tracking and local search and discovery applications.
Workforce management: Aims to manage employees working outside the company premises
and to improve operational efficiency.
Health and lifestyle
Air quality monitoring: Earth observation enables air quality applications which measure the
presence of harmful substances and particulate matter in the air (e.g., sulphur dioxide and PM
2.5). Measurements of air quality are used to inform analytics, such as air quality indexes, and to
provide recommendations to users (e.g., to stay indoors and keep windows closed if air quality is
very poor).
mHealth: In combination with other technologies, GNSS enables a vast array of applications from
patient monitoring to guidance systems for vulnerable groups (people with reduced mobility,
visual impairment and seniors).
Safety and emergency: GNSS, in combination with network-based methods, provides accurate
emergency caller location.
Social networks: Friend locators embedded in social networks use GNSS to facilitate keeping in
touch and sharing travel information.
Sport, fitness and wellness incl . specialist support tracking: GNSS enables monitoring of
users’ performance a variety of fitness applications. It records data such as real-time distance,
speed/pace, location, elevation, travelled distance, step counters to monitor users’ performance.
Speed and elevation charts are provided (includes running, biking, hiking, swimming, etc.).
A growing use of Earth observation information is embedded in outdoor apps to provide informa-
tion on snow coverage and depth, forest elevations, etc.

ANNEX . DEFiNiTiON OF GNSS AND EARTH OBSERVATiON APPLiCATiONS | 93
UV monitoring: Earth observation data is used in consumer UV monitoring applications to pro-
vide UV exposure, measurements for particular geolocations and to inform analytics about safe
levels of UV exposure.
This allows them to make recommendations for user behaviour (e.g., recommendations to remain
indoors when the UV index is very high).
Navigation and tracking
Navigation for smartphone users: Route planning and turn-by-turn instructions enabled by
GNSS for both pedestrian and road users through a smartphone.
Personal and asset tracking: GNSS facilitates innovative tracking solutions, including the deploy-
ment of local geofences that trigger an alarm when users leave a specific perimeter.
Visually impaired support: solutions providing turn-by-turn instructions based on GNSS posi-
tioning that help visually impaired people get around more easily.
Robotics
Consumer robotics: GNSS signals are used along with other sensors integrated in consumer
electronics for localization and navigation purposes. e.g., gardening robots, delivery robots, secu-
rity and surveillance robots, personal assistant robots, painting robots, automated guided vehicle/
logistics.
Tourism
Points of interest: Provides content relative to the end user’s location. Such location may include
location-based landmarks, restaurants, petrol stations, banks, ATMs, hospitals, etc.
Early warning
Early warning: The early warning subsegment comprises all applications related to forecasting
the likelihood of a disaster event using Earth observation sensor data, including disaster predic-
tion tools, risk indexes and early warning mass notification systems
GNSS-enabled ocean monitoring buoys: in combination with location (GNSS) intelligence.
Early warning is available for both natural and human-made disasters.
This application consists of multiple type of buoys, deployed at sea and in oceans, to provide
early warning for natural events following seismic activities (e.g., volcanoes, earthquakes, tsuna-
mis, floods, etc.).
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND
HUMANiTARiAN AiD
Migration and settlement
Earth observation human displacement monitoring: Monitoring of displacement patterns,
due to conflict or disaster for example, to plan humanitarian responses. Earth observation data
can be used to monitor migration routes, as well as for the identification or temporary dwelling
structures.
Management of refugee camps: Comprises applications where Earth observation data is used
for planning of camp layouts, and for the distribution of resources e.g., wells and medicine, by
displaying settlement concentrations and estimating population in different areas of a camp.
Population counting: Population estimation based on (semi-) automated dwelling counting from
very high-resolution optical satellite imagery, which can be used for vaccination campaigns for
example, in underserved areas as well as for emergency response planning.

94 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
Telematics for humanitarian aid: real-time satellite geo-positioning and fleet-management solu-
tions used by humanitarian organizations, non=governmental organizations and United Nations
agencies, as well as national or European Union agencies for their safety and security.
Post-event analysis
Post-event analysis: Post-event analysis includes all applications which rely on archival Earth
observation data to assess the impact of past disaster events, as well as those that compare the
impact of past disaster events to identify patterns, and those which assess the effectiveness of
disaster response and mitigation efforts.
Preparedness
Preparedness: Preparedness refers to a science-based set of actions, based on Earth observation
data and services, which are taken as precautionary measures in the face of potential disasters,
both natural and human-made. Typically, disasters (e.g., floods, drought, landslide, tsunami etc.)
nor human-made disasters (e.g., fires, hazardous material spills) can be precisely foreseen or
avoided but preparedness helps to minimize the eventual risks and initiate emergency actions.
Satellite solutions are being applied by the United Nations aid agencies, non-government
organizations, host-nation governments, military, and the private sector to address mission-critical
disaster preparedness and long-term development requirements. The main usage will be pre-po-
sitioning emergency equipment and solutions.
Rapid mapping
Rapid mapping: Use of geospatial information in support of emergency management activities
immediately following disaster (e.g., map the damage level in particular locations to inform emer-
gency response efforts including crowdsourced map updates facilitate deployment of aid).
Search and rescue
Beacons for aviation: Aircraft should be equipped with emergency locator transmitters (ELTs) or
a PLB that help search and rescue operations in the event of an incident. In line with requirements
in ICAO Annex 10 (and standards set in ICAO annex 6) as well as the implementation of the
Global Aeronautical Distress and Safety System, many ELTs utilize GNSS to report their position
when triggered.
Beacons for maritime: Ship and person-registered beacons, i.e., emergency position indicat-
ing radio beacons and personal locator beacons (PLBs) transmit, once activated, the necessary
information for rescue to authorities via COSPAS / SARSAT payloads carried by GNSS satellites.
The AIS-SART (Search and Rescue Transmitter) and AIS-MOB (Man Overboard) beacons not only
transmit the position of the person in distress, but also share this location through the Automatic
Identification System (AIS) with nearby vessels, by pinpointing an AIS distress signal onto the
nearby vessel’s Electronic Chart Display Information System.
Beacons on land: Climbers and hikers are advised to equip themselves with a PLB in case they
find themselves in distress.
Situational awareness supporting search and rescue: Earth observation services can assist
Maritime and Joint Rescue Coordination Centres in a wide range of activities at sea, including
support to search and rescue operations and exercises. Earth observation information, com-
bined with maritime data and external sources, can provide you with a better understanding and
improved monitoring of activities at sea (incl. detection of ships in distress, search and rescue
response support, etc.).

ANNEX . DEFiNiTiON OF GNSS AND EARTH OBSERVATiON APPLiCATiONS | 95
ENERGY AND RAW MATERiALS
Energy network fidelity
Energy network conditions monitoring: The situational awareness and monitoring capabilities
of Earth observation contribute through application such as monitoring the structural integrity of
assets including towers, poles, wind plants and solar plants; monitoring land subsidence around
energy infrastructure such as pipeline and plants, assessment of vegetation encroachments; and
allowing for asset condition management damages, degradation, corrosion, etc.
Phasor measurement units (PMU): GNSS provides accurate timing and synchronization for
PMUs, which are deployed across remote locations of the power network (nodes), improving the
reliability of power systems.
Environmental impact monitoring
Environmental impact assessment of energy and mineral resources plants: Earth observation
can support the mitigation of energy/mining effects of the environment through continuous mon-
itoring of relevant environmental characteristics and through the capacity of Earth observation
to detect changes. Relevant products and services include coastal ecosystems monitoring, water
quality monitoring, air quality monitoring, erosion monitoring, pollution monitoring, vegetation
monitoring, etc. In some cases, Earth observation-based products could also include the produc-
tion of environmental impact assessment “certificate”.
Market intelligence
Supply chain insights: Earth observation data support market analysts, traders, investors, energy
operators and regulators, governments, international banking institutions and citizens, to better
understand the new energy dynamics shifting under the pressure of climate change. AI and
advanced analytics are applied to Earth observation for applications such as reservoir monitor-
ing, heavy oil production mapping, underground gas storage, sophisticated methane-detection
technologies, etc.
Renewable energy
Power plant design optimization: Earth observation can help optimizing the design of renew-
able energy power plants (e.g., optimization of the positioning of solar panels, onshore and
offshore wind turbines, etc.). Relevant Earth observation-based products include terrain elevation
models, solar irradiance, wind speed, precipitation and climate conditions.
Renewable energy assessment potential and forecast: Prior to the selection of a power plant
site, Earth observation can contribute to the assessment of the potential of a given area based on
the analysis of historical data for example, wind, solar irradiation, ocean currents, ocean temper-
ature (e.g., for OTEC or SWAC) and snow cover. During the exploitation phase, Earth observa-
tion can help calculating daily production estimates based on plant characteristics coupled with
relevant forecasts. This includes for instance solar plant production estimates based on solar
irradiation forecasts or hydropower production estimates based on snow cover smelting.
Risk assessment for energy assets: Energy assets are exposed to a variety of natural risks which
can put at danger the people working on site or, damage equipment or negatively impact produc-
tion. Earth observation can contribute to the assessment of the level of risk to prevent/mitigate the
effects of adverse events on the exploitation of energy (incl. the protection of workers maintaining
offshore wind platforms for instance). Relevant Earth observation-based products and services
include the monitoring of dangerous subsurface currents, iceberg detection and tracking, etc.

96 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
Site selection, planning and monitoring: Earth observation can provide a large variety of prod-
ucts and information supporting the identification of the most suitable areas for the exploita-
tion of renewable energy sources. These products and information include for instance data on
relevant environmental parameters influencing the production of energy, data on the status of
the power plants, geological evaluation, topography mapping, etc. GNSS can enable geomatics
applications such as mine and construction surveying, mapping and GIS, photogrammetry, laser
scanning and remote sensing, as well as route planning and augmented reality visualization. The
GNSS devices that are used for those applications include high-accuracy GNSS receivers (geodet-
ic-grade smart antennas, all-in-one integrated mapping/GIS devices or infrastructure/CORS) and
embedded chipsets. On the other hand, a number of CORS networks operate receivers that are
powered by renewable energy sources (e.g., solar panels or wind turbines), so the utilization of
GNSS for renewable energy operations brings mutual benefits.
ENViRONMENTAL MONiTORiNG
Environmental auditing
Environmental auditing: Earth observation data is used in environmental auditing as an input to
assess the repercussions of human activity across four different environments:
• Atmosphere: Multiple Earth observation satellites and sensors are dedicated to monitoring
atmospheric conditions, including air quality and the presence of greenhouse gases (GHG)
emissions, enabling the provision of short- and long-term forecasting.
• Coasts: For coastal environment, relevant Earth observation data can be acquired relating to
wetland loss, land-use cover and change, wetland mapping, coastal geomorphology, water
optical properties, waterbody nutrients (chlorophyll-a), littoral and subtidal habitat.
• Land: Relevant parameters range from land-use cover and change, vegetation, biomass, and
soil monitoring, to the monitoring of human impact, such as waste, constructions, and other
infrastructure.
• Water and oceans: The relevant parameters for water and ocean environment, which can
be acquired through Earth observation include temperature, transparency/turbidity, water
depth, tides, currents, and to an extent, flora and fauna. The data also supports the moni-
toring of infrastructure and other traces of human activities, including waste.
Environmental resources management
Environmental resources management: The use of Earth observation satellites and data pro-
vides users the means to properly manage environmental resources across four environments:
• Atmosphere: Multiple Earth observation satellites and sensors are dedicated to monitoring
atmospheric conditions, including, for instance air quality and the presence of greenhouse
gases (GHG) emissions, allowing as well to provide short- and long-term forecasting.
• Coasts: Coastal monitoring from Earth observation satellites includes coastal wetland
loss, land-use cover and change, wetland mapping, coastal geomorphology, water optical
properties, waterbody nutrients (chlorophyll-a), littoral and subtidal habitat, erosion and
sedimentation mapping and long time series of ocean colour products including uncer-
tainties estimates or health issues such as algal bloom detection. In terms of compliance
monitoring, Earth observation data can be used for reporting (on water quality) under the
Water Framework Directive.
• Land: The various applications of Earth observation for resource management on land vary
from land-use cover and change, vegetation, biomass, and soil monitoring, to the monitor-
ing of human impact, such as waste, constructions, and other infrastructure.
• Water and oceans: Earth observation monitors parameters which assess the effects of
various human (and natural) activities on the water and ocean environments and to manage
resources. The measurements on temperature, transparency/turbidity, water depth, tides,
currents, as well as to an extent flora and fauna, and traces of human activities, including
waste.

ANNEX . DEFiNiTiON OF GNSS AND EARTH OBSERVATiON APPLiCATiONS | 97
impact studies and environmental, social and corporate governance
Impact studies and environmental, social and corporate governance (ESG): Earth observation
monitors parameters necessary for the elaboration of impact studies and for the implementation
and monitoring of ESG policies across four different environments:
• Atmosphere: Multiple Earth observation satellites and sensors are dedicated to monitoring
atmospheric conditions, including air quality and the presence of greenhouse gases (GHG)
emissions, enabling the provision of short- and long-term forecasting.
• Coasts: For coastal environment, relevant Earth observation data can be acquired, relating
to wetland loss, land-use cover and change, wetland mapping, coastal geomorphology,
water optical properties, waterbody nutrients (chlorophyll-a), littoral and subtidal habitat.
• Land: The various Earth observation applications for these activities on land include land-use
cover and change, vegetation, biomass, and soil monitoring, to the monitoring of human
impact, such as waste, constructions and other infrastructure.
• Water and oceans: For water and oceans relevant parameters include temperature, trans-
parency/turbidity, water depth, tides, currents, as well as to an extent flora and fauna, The
data also supports the monitoring of infrastructure and other traces of human activities,
including waste.
impact studies and environmental, social and corporate governance
Impact studies and environmental, social and corporate governance (ESG): Earth observation
monitors parameters necessary for the elaboration of impact studies and for the implementation
and monitoring of ESG policies across four different environments:
• Atmosphere: Multiple Earth observation satellites and sensors are dedicated to monitoring
atmospheric conditions, including air quality and the presence of greenhouse gases (GHG)
emissions, enabling the provision of short- and long-term forecasting.
• Coasts: For coastal environment, relevant Earth observation data can be acquired, relating
to wetland loss, land-use cover and change, wetland mapping, coastal geomorphology,
water optical properties, waterbody nutrients (chlorophyll-a), littoral and subtidal habitat.
• Land: The various Earth observation applications for these activities on land include land-use
cover and change, vegetation, biomass, and soil monitoring, to the monitoring of human
impact, such as waste, constructions and other infrastructure.
• Water and oceans: For water and oceans relevant parameters include temperature, trans-
parency/turbidity, water depth, tides, currents, as well as to an extent flora and fauna, The
data also supports the monitoring of infrastructure and other traces of human activities,
including waste.
FiSHERiES AND AQUACULTURE
Aquaculture
Aquaculture operations optimization: Throughout the operational phase of the aquaculture
plants, Earth observation can provide water quality monitoring notably on harmful algae blooms,
as well as assessment of fish farming environmental impacts and data for modelling of species
invasion. Combined in models, such data can provide periodical estimation to aquafarmers about
estimated growth and health of the stock. GNSS plays a role when the operation of offshore
farms is carried out by fully automated vessels which rely on accurate positioning and navigation,
or in the upcoming use of GNSS for the localization of networks of buoys
Aquaculture site selection: Considering relevant parameters, Earth observation data and
forecasting can help select the aquaculture location and type in both the nearshore and offshore
environment.

98 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
Fisheries
Catch optimization: Considering relevant parameters, Earth observation data and forecast-
ing can help select the aquaculture location and type in both the nearshore and offshore
environment.
Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) control: Satellite data has surveillance capabilities
for the IUU fishing activities and could contribute to the identification of perpetrators. The data
concerned is both Earth observation (optical and radar) and GNSS (providing identification of the
vessels, including through positioning systems such as AIS and VMS). With AIS and VMS being
mandatory depending on the vessel size (i.e., 15m for AIS, 12m for VMS), the GNSS receiver of
these applications is a different to the receiver used for general navigation.
Fishing aggregating devices: GNSS-enabled buoys that assist fishermen both in locating their
fishing nets and equipment as well as the identification and location of fish stock.
Fish stock detection: Earth observation data contributes to biogeochemical analyses and fore-
casts for global and regional seas, topography, bathymetry, ocean colour, sea-surface tempera-
ture and ocean currents, which are key inputs for numerical modelling of fish stock and detection
of fish shoals.
Fishing vessels navigation: Using GNSS-enabled navigation devices, fishing vessels can accu-
rately and safely navigate their fishing waters as well as navigate towards their equipment such as
fishing cages, buoys or fish lines.
FORESTRY
Environmental monitoring
Biomass monitoring: Earth observation and GNSS enable the monitoring of the biomass present
in a forest using various optical measurements, radar measurements and in situ sensors. This can
help in understanding the capacity for CO2 absorption of a given forest or potentials for biomass
energy production.
Deforestation/degradation monitoring: Earth observation and GNSS enable the monitoring of
the biomass present in a forest using various optical measurements, radar measurements and in
situ sensors. This can help in understanding the capacity for CO2 absorption of a given forest or
potentials for biomass energy production.
Natural resource monitoring
Forest inventory monitoring: Earth observation and GNSS enable the monitoring of the timber
inventories using various optical measurements, radar measurements and in situ sensors.
Forest vegetation health monitoring: The health of forest vegetation can be monitored and
managed using Earth observation. Optical and radar data can be used to measure forest vegeta-
tion intensity (through the generation of various indices such as NDVI) to infer the health of trees
and forest vegetation.
Illegal logging monitoring: Earth observation can help in the identification of illegal logging. By
using optical and radar data to monitor land-use changes and measure forest vegetation cover,
illegal destruction of forests can be detected and monitored.

ANNEX . DEFiNiTiON OF GNSS AND EARTH OBSERVATiON APPLiCATiONS | 99
iNFRASTRUCTURE
Environmental monitoring
Environmental impact assessment of infrastructure: Earth observation can support the analysis
of the impact of existing infrastructures (including during the construction phase) on the envi-
ronment and ecosystem in their surroundings. Relevant Earth observation-based products and
services include pollution monitoring (air, water, soil), vegetation and biodiversity monitoring, etc.
infrastructure planning
Permitting: Earth observation can support the evaluations to be carried out before a permit is
delivered for the construction of a new infrastructure. Thus, Earth observation can deliver prod-
ucts and services related to land cover/land-use mapping, forest mapping, geological evaluation,
exposure to disaster risk (e.g., floods), ground deformation, etc.
Site selection and planning: Earth observation can contribute to the selection of sites (e.g.,
tailing dams) or routes (e.g., roads/rail) through the provision of products and services such
as geological evaluation, topography mapping, historical data on land subsidence. Through
geomatics applications like construction surveying, mapping and GIS, photogrammetry, laser
scanning and remote sensing, GNSS can significantly speed up the accurate determination of site
borders, while also providing adequate methods for development of detailed specialized maps,
route planning or establishment of GIS database with accurate positions of all infrastructure site
features. In addition, to high-accuracy GNSS devices (smart antennas or integrated mapping/ GIS
devices), GNSS chipsets can feed high-accuracy positioning data into LiDAR and imaging devices
(drone or land-based), and augmented reality technologies for a-priori in situ infrastructure
visualization.
Vulnerability analysis: Earth observation can contribute to the vulnerability assessment for loca-
tions prone to natural hazards. Relevant Earth observation-based products and services include
historical data on floods, droughts, and fires as well as climate projections enabling the assess-
ment of the evolution of risks.
infrastructure construction and monitoring
Construction operations: Thanks to its capacity to detect surface changes, Earth observation
can support the monitoring in near-real-time of the progress achieved anywhere on the construc-
tion site. It can also help verifying the alignment between actual building and original plans. While
also providing typical surveying techniques on the site, GNSS is an ultimate supplier of position-
ing and orientation data for heavy machinery (graders, dozers, excavators, compactors), which
can be used for either semi-automatic (GNSS serves as a guide to the operator) or fully automatic
operations (GNSS data is directly fused into the machine hydraulic control). For the needs of BIM,
GNSS can feed the model with high accuracy positioning data of all relevant construction assets.
Monitoring of impact of human activities on infrastructures: Earth observation enables the
monitoring of the impact on buildings and infrastructures of land subsidence caused by a variety
of human activities (e.g., aquifer overexploitation in urban areas).
ODA support monitoring: Earth observation can be used to validate that Official Development
Assistance (ODA) support (i.e., investment in different development projects) is utilized as
planned. This is often directly informing the further release of funds from a donor country to a
receiving one.
Post-construction operations: Critical infrastructures such as dams, bridges, factories etc. can be
damaged in case of Earth’s surface deformation. Earth observation offers solutions for the mon-
itoring of infrastructure stability and for the provision of situation awareness as it can accurately
monitor land deformation and to detect minor changes (e.g., building subsidence). The stability
of critical infrastructure is monitored also via high-precision GNSS methods, e.g., by post-process-
ing of static relative GNSS observations at field control points (established directly into or in the
vicinity of the object) with station data from local or global CORS networks. In addition, GNSS
data may be utilized to feed various smart sensors, mounted into the infrastructure body for real-
time stability monitoring.

100 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
Pipeline monitoring: Earth observation can contribute to the monitoring of pipelines through
the provision of ground deformation information across pipeline networks as well as through
the provision of information related to vegetation encroachment or third-party interference. For
above-ground pipelines, GNSS provides methods for stability monitoring like post-construc-
tion operations, while for underground assets it may feed high-accuracy positioning data into
ground-penetration radars to map and detect leakages and other faults.
Timing and synchronization of telecommunications networks
Data centre: A data centre is a dedicated space within a building, or a group of buildings used to
house computer systems and associated components, such as telecommunications and storage
systems.
GNSS is used as a time source for network synchronization of computing resources.
Digital cellular network (DCN): Telecom operators require accurate and consistent time
and frequency at distant points of their networks to meet increasingly demanding broadband
requirements.
GNSS is used to provide consistent frequency and time alignment between all base stations
within the network.
Professional mobile radio (PMR): Telecom operators require accurate and consistent time
and frequency at distant points of their networks to meet increasingly demanding broadband
requirements.
GNSS is used for synchronization of time slots and handovers between base stations.
Public switched telephone network (PSTN): Telecom operators require accurate and consistent
time and frequency at distant points of their networks to meet increasingly demanding broad-
band requirements. Originally a network of fixed-line analogue telephone systems, the PSTN is
now entirely digital in its core network and in this report, it consists in fixed telephones networks.
GNSS is usually a backup to atomic clocks to provide time slot management.
Satellite communication (SATCOM): Telecom operators require accurate and consistent time
and frequency at distant points of their networks to meet increasingly demanding broadband
requirements.
GNSS is typically used in satellite control stations and telecommunications gateways, mostly for
frequency control.
Small cells: Telecom operators require accurate and consistent time and frequency at distant
points of their networks to meet increasingly demanding broadband requirements.
GNSS is used to provide frequency and phase alignment in small cells networks.
MARiTiME AND iNLAND WATERWAYS
Environmental monitoring
Marine pollution monitoring: SAR-based and optical satellite data can be used for detecting
and monitoring of oil spills and marine litter. Earth observation also provides forecasts of sea
currents and sea-surface heights (altimetry), sea-surface salinity, sea-surface temperature, ocean
colour and sea-ice data – useful for monitoring and forecasting the course of the pollution.
Moreover, remote sensing data can also contribute to identifying the polluters.
Ocean services
Metocean (meteorology over oceans, and offshore weather and sea state monitoring):
Earth observation can provide data for quality meteorology over oceans (offshore weather and
sea state monitoring) complemented with near-real-time data collection of variables such as wave
height and frequency, wind speed, direction, and ocean current velocity on global and regional
scales.

ANNEX . DEFiNiTiON OF GNSS AND EARTH OBSERVATiON APPLiCATiONS | 101
Vessel tracking
Dark vessel monitoring: GNSS-enabled long-range identification and tracking as well as AIS or
VMS provide the means to monitor and track suspicious vessels. When those vessels turn off or
disable their own AIS or VMS, Earth observation data provides enhanced situational awareness
that can be used by dedicated maritime authorities to monitor and track “dark vessels” through
Earth observation imagery and SAR data.
RAiL
Attractiveness enhancement
Passenger information systems: GNSS is used to provide enhanced passenger services such
as real time location and speed of trains along their route during a journey. Increasingly, GNSS
location of trains is also supporting platform and online passenger information services.
Public transport – tram and light rail: Currently, GNSS is used in smart mobility applications to
optimize the network capacity by managing tram locations or to provide real time information to
passengers such as the estimated arrival time of a tram at a designated station. GNSS has started
to be used for advanced applications, such as automatic speed limitation, ensuring that the tram
speed is lower than a customer-defined speed limit in a specific area. It is also used for mainte-
nance or on-board energy management, ensuring that the tram’s on-board battery has sufficient
energy level before passing a section without external power supply.
Train driving optimization
Rail fleet management: Train location provided by GNSS could be used to perform fleet analysis
to optimize the use of locomotives and railway cars and to properly size rail fleets.
ROAD AND AUTOMOTiVE
Fleet management systems
Bike-sharing: Bike-sharing and especially free-floating bike-sharing systems rely on GNSS to
locate the bike across the city by both end users and the bike-sharing service provider.
Public transport – buses: Public transit agencies use GNSS receivers in buses to track their loca-
tion in real-time to display their position on a map in the control centre and their expected arrival
times on digital displays at bus stops.
Road fleet management: Fleet management on-board units transmit GNSS positioning informa-
tion through telematics to support transport operators in monitoring the performance of logistics
activities. This application is used within cars that form a so-called fleet such as taxis, rental cars
and cars used for sharing schemes. Commercial vehicle fleet owners also adopt it. As subset,
dangerous goods tracking is done by transmitting GNSS-based positioning data on the vehicles
carrying them, together with other information about the status of the cargo.
Smart mobility
Navigation (IVS and PND): Navigation is the most widespread application, providing turn-by-
turn indications to drivers through portable navigation devices (PNDs) and in-vehicle systems (IVS)
built in cars.
Congestion control: Satellite road traffic monitoring services collect floating car location data
from vehicles through PNDs, IVS and mobile devices. The traffic information is then processed
and distributed to users and other interested parties. Remote sensing data can be used as an
additional layer of information for monitoring traffic flows.

102 | EU SPACE SUPPORTiNG A WORLD OF 8 BiLLiON PEOPLE
URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND CULTURAL
HERiTAGE
Environmental monitoring
Air quality monitoring in urban environments: Using satellite data and in situ measurements,
Earth observation can support detecting, collecting, and interpreting information on a multitude
of air pollutants, including their origins, movement, and expected health risks.
Urban greening: Earth observation and GNSS can be used to monitor vegetation cover, the
health of green space vegetation as well as precise definition, positioning and monitoring green
space infrastructure.
Urban heat islands: Earth observation can support mapping temperatures and temperature vari-
ations across urban areas, e.g., to alert health authorities of related risks for specific demographic
groups.
Smart cities operations
Smart streetlights: Smart streetlights incorporate precise GNSS positioning data, in addition to
other technologies such as cameras and photocells, to remotely control the output of individual
streetlights, detect faults, monitor energy performance. They also facilitate real time alerts for
city-wide problems including traffic flow, parking spaces, electrical outages, and accidents.
Smart waste management: GNSS can be used in smart waste management by precisely posi-
tioning waste containers, thereby helping in the monitoring and collection planning of waste.
Urban planning and monitoring
Cultural heritage monitoring: cultural heritage, including monuments, spaces, and cultural
infrastructure can be supported by means of Earth observation, both to assess (e.g., structural)
conditions as well as disruptions (e.g., illegal construction, violation of preservation orders).
Informal dwellings: Earth observation enables detection of illegal structures outside of planning
as well as violations of property lines.
Real estate: Earth observation enables detection of illegal structures outside of planning as well
as violations of property lines.
Surveying and mapping: Earth observation can support mapping of urban land-use and land
cover while enabling to classify built structures including building height and urban infrastruc-
ture such as roads. GNSS-based cadastral surveying and mapping help in precisely defining and
measuring specific location points of interest for cartographic and urban planning purposes (all
GNSS cadastral and mapping devices are being quantified under this application, regardless of
where they are used e.g., non-urban areas, energy and raw materials, infrastructures). Both Earth
observation and GNSS power GIS applications for surveying and mapping of urban areas.
Urban modelling, 3D modelling, digital twins: Earth observation data can serve as input to
digital surface models, enabling simulations, including shadow effects or street canyon effects.
The creation of so-called digital twins of cities would enable the visualization, monitoring and
forecasting of natural and human activity in support of sustainable development. GNSS can help
in precisely defining and measuring specific location points of interest for urban and 3D modelling
purposes.
Urban planning: Earth observation can measure urban footprints including sprawl, density, and
sealed surfaces. It can also measure change such as increase or decrease of urban deprivation.
This information can in turn be used to help inform and plan future urban developments.

THE EUROPEAN UNION
AGENCY FOR THE
SPACE PROGRAMME
(EUSPA) provides secure
European satellite navigation
services, supports the
commercialization of Galileo,
EGNOS and Copernicus
data, coordinates the
European Union
governmental satellite
communications programme
GOVSATCOM and manages
Space Surveillance and
Tracking (SST) front desk
operations. EUSPA fosters
innovation in the space
downstream sector,
contributes to the
European Green Deal and
digital transition, ensures
safety and security, and
strengthens autonomy
and resilience.
For more information,
visit euspa.europa.eu.

THE UNITED NATIONS OFFICE
FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS (UNOOSA)
IS RESPONSIBLE FOR ADVANCING INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
IN THE PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE AND HELPS ALL COUNTRIES
SECOND
USE SPACE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY TO ACHIEVE
SUSTAINABELDEI DTIEOVENLOPMENT.
SECOND
EDITION
BRINGING THE BENEFITS
OF SPACSEE T
C
O
O
HUMANKIND
N
D
ED
ITIO
N
WWW.UNOOSA.ORG