NUMBER 1
S U DA N B R I E F

Photo by Musa Adam Abdul-Jalil
AUTHOR Artisanal Gold Mining Camps
Musa Adam Abdul-Jalil
in the Butana (Eastern Sudan)
Professor of Social
Anthropology, Director,
as Migration Hubs
Peace Research Institute,
University of Khartoum
imusaadam@gmail.com Artisanal and small-scale gold mining sites have become large-
scale migration hubs for thousands of young men from Sudan
and its neighbouring countries. The April 15 war is likely to
increase artisanal gold mining since those who were displaced
by the war might seek gold mining as a source of income. This
could lead to growing pressure on the available services in
the camps and intensify competition over resources. Better
organization of the mining industry and improved migration
management will benefit both the Sudanese and foreign
governments, as well as the gold miners themselves.

22 SUDAN BRIEF NUMBER 1, 
Main points
• Multiple factors affecting human mobility converge in the artisanal gold mining camps. The
camps function as migration hubs for a large number of people who see their stay in the
mines as a temporary stop on the way to Europe, the Gulf States or North America.
• Workers get information and logistical support that enables them to plan their journey out
of Sudan while living and working in the camps, for example information about possible
destinations, routes and reliable traffickers. They also save money to pay for travel expenses.
• Good migration policies are multifaceted. Any successful approach needs to take into account
the factors that bring these men to the camps, the conditions they live under while they
are there, and the risks they run while travelling towards their ultimate destination.
Sudan’s gold rush
port in the Red Sea has also been a point of arrival for people from
Artisanal gold mining has been a crucial driver in the Sudanese Yemen who then find their way to the hinterlands.
economy ever since the secession of South Sudan in 2011. In The Butana plain, a vast area encompassing the five states
less than a decade, the phenomenon has spread very quickly to Gadarif, Kassala, Gazira, Khartoum & River Nile, has long been
encompass most of the country. It is now the most common considered a strategic location for migrants from the Horn of Africa,
activity among young men seeking to improve their income quickly. on route either to Khartoum or directly to Egypt and Libya on their
Rumours about young men stumbling upon gold deposits and way to Europe. Historically, the Butana represented a sanctuary
getting rich have spread rapidly, igniting young people’s hopes for for animal thieves and, later on, human smugglers and traffickers.
achieving their dreams. Today, many of the people choosing this route are migrants
Workers now live in more than 200 camps around the country. who take up temporary work in the gold mines. Migrants also
They are all male, young (between 18 and 35 years of age) and come from other areas in Sudan to work in the Butana gold mines
moderately educated. They represent a plethora of backgrounds: looking for a way to make money and to connect with smugglers
From IDPs from conflict zones to poor and unemployed men in and human traffickers who can get them out of Sudan and towards
search of a better life, and refugees from neighbouring countries. Europe, the Gulf countries or North America.
However, for many of the migrant workers, these categories overlap.
Life in the camps
Despite the large number of workers in the gold mining camps,
we know very little about the dynamics of this labour migration. The majority of the Sudanese workers in the mining camps in
The lack of information makes it hard to develop policies that Butana come from East Sudan (25 %), Gazira (19%), Darfur (17
address and mitigate the risks the workers run both while in the %), Blue Nile (13 %), White Nile (11 %), and Kordofan (10 %).
camps, and on their journeys towards and from the camps. To Foreign workers come mostly from Ethiopia, Eritrea, Chad, the
develop effective policies we need a better understanding of the Central African Republic and South Sudan. As non-Sudanese
driving factors and patterns of migration of the workforce in the workers were reluctant to answer questions about their country of
gold mining sector. origin for security reasons, these results are only indicative.
The recommendations in this brief are based on an in-depth The new sites for artisanal gold mining have quickly turned
study of four gold mining camps in the Butana region: Elkhiyari, into camps that attract thousands of young men seeking work as
Wed Bushara, Shawir, and El Fowell. We also did fieldwork in El diggers and processors or in service provision such as water, food,
Subag, the locality’s administrative headquarters. Fieldwork was hospitality and transport. The organization of the gold mining
conducted twice in January and . camps and the provision of services rest mainly on the mining
community itself. Camps are initiated by miners. Government
authorities only arrive later when mining in a specific location has
become lucrative and revenue collection becomes viable.
The United Nations Environment Programme defines artisanal The gold production itself is based on a model of fixed shares
goldmining as ‘gold mining conducted by individual miners or
small enterprises with limited capital investment and production’ between three main partners: the owner of the land/well gets
(UNEP 2014). Artisanal gold mining is labour intensive and 25% and the investor (who provides the working tools) gets 25%
uses rudimentary methods to extract and process gold.
while all the workers get the remaining 50%. However, there are
brokers who make this happen by bringing the partners together.
They receive payment from the investor. It is important to note
Migration hotspots in Eastern Sudan
that only persons who belong to the local tribes can own a well.
Eastern Sudan has a long history as a migration route for people The actual mining grounds which are locally called “wells” are
coming from Ethiopia, and more recently Eritrea. Sauakin as a scattered in a wide radius. The main camp is where the processing

ARTISANAL GOLD MINING CAMPS IN THE BUTANA (EASTERN SUDAN) AS MIGRATION HUBS 33
The mills in operation. Photo: Musa Adam Abdul-Jalil
Primary data was gathered mainly
through quasi-participant observation,
in-depth interviews and focused-group
discussions. We also distributed a
questionnaire among mining workers
using a snowball sampling method which
produced quantitative data. Secondary
data was obtained from administrative
and security offices on-site as well as
from relevant government departments
at state and locality headquarters.
Map showing the location of the main mining areas in Butana.
Source: Husain Sulaiman, Centre for Remote Sensing, University of Gadarif
takes place and is usually called “the mills market” which refers to Telephone communication and social media play an important
stone crushing and the final processing stages for gold production. role in motivating workers to come to the mining camps and later
The camps have also become vibrant marketplaces for the local to seek ways to travel outside Sudan. Shops selling telephone
population because of the plentiful selection of different types of accessories and credit are found all over the camps.
shops and stores: Groceries, restaurants, butcheries, clothes, barber The market operates as a meeting place where the local
salons, telephone, accessories and mobile credit shops, and suppliers population get the goods and groceries they need, and the gold
of digging tools and equipment. miners get additional information on travel routes and agents that
can help them out of the country.
The majority of workers list economic pressures as the most important While in the camps, the migrants mix with the local population
reason for coming to the gold mine (42%). However, a considerable in the markets and get access to information about travel routes in
number list fleeing from war (29%) as the main reason for leaving their
addition to establishing connections with smugglers. The Rashaida,
home areas. This is particularly the case for those who come from
Darfur. Regarding reasons for wanting to travel beyond the borders a pastoralist tribe that originates from the area between Sudan and
of Sudan, most of them gave success stories of previous migrants as
Eritrea, have come to play a particularly important role, both in
their main motivation (84%) and 13.3% declared that they have been
motivated by the desire to improve living conditions. The two categories popularizing the gold mining ‘culture’ through facilitating import
could be added together to constitute the economic factor as the of metal detectors and as an active part in the informal cross-
main driver of migration. The European Union is the most popular
destination for mining workers intending to leave Sudan (69.2%), with border trade including human smuggling and trafficking taking
Arab countries in the second place (23.1%) followed by Canada (7.7 %). place between Eritrea, Saudi-Arabia, Yemen and Sudan. Like
the Rashaida, the majority of smugglers come from the local area,

4 SUDAN BRIEF NUMBER 1, 
Policy recommendations
drawing upon their extensive knowledge and understanding of the
routes leading through the desert. 1. Artisanal gold mining is driven mainly by young men
The smugglers and trafficking operators have agents in the spontaneously responding to news of prospectus sites.
camps who actively look for possible clients. As such, the gold Government officials merely follow newly established sites to
mining camps are in practice effective migration hubs where the start revenue collection. The industry needs concerted efforts
marketplaces are not only markets for trading and buying goods, to organize it. Having clear policies especially regarding
but also play additional roles of harbouring migrants and providing employment, safety and training of the workforce is of crucial
them with logistical support to continue their long and arduous importance not only to the national government and mining
journey to their final destination. workers, but also to the countries that are on the receiving end
of the migrant flow.
Conclusion
As a recently invigorated economic and social phenomenon artisanal 2. Sudan lacks a comprehensive and coherent migration policy;
gold mining seems to represent an arena where multiple factors hence it is difficult to get accurate information on population
pertaining to human mobility converge. People in economic mobility. This makes it difficult to understand the exact drivers
need/poverty, IDPs and refugees move to gold mining centers for internal and external migration. In this connection, it is
seeking to alleviate their dire conditions. The gold mining camps important to recognize that criteria like poverty, IDP and
function as migration hubs for many who intend to migrate to refugee are not mutually exclusive. Registration of arrivals at
other countries. Europe, Arab Gulf countries, and Canada are the the camp sites is a starting point.
favoured destinations.
3. There is a complete lack of statistical information regarding
• Potential migrants get information and logistical support from the population present in the mining camps. New arrivals are
these camps that enable them to plan their journeys outside not registered and the same applies to those leaving the camp.
Sudan. Likewise, there is no systematic data registry from which the
characteristics of the population of the camp may be derived.
• In any one migration flow, several driver complexes may A data bank for gold mining workers is needed to understand
interconnect to shape the eventual direction and nature of the characteristics of those involved in the industry and their
movement. The challenge is to establish when and why some mobility cycle. Transport stations may be the best place to start
drivers are more important than others, which combinations from. Registration should be voluntary but could be linked to
are more potent than others, and which are more susceptible incentives like free access to health clinics.
to change through external intervention.
4. Foreign labour also needs to be organized through licensing
• To understand migration flows better, analysts could usefully and registration. Such measures can help secure their human
distinguish between predisposing, proximate, precipitating rights as well as enabling the government to control criminal
and mediating drivers. Combinations of such drivers shape and illegal activities.
the conditions, circumstances and environment within which
people choose to move or stay put, or have that decision thrust
upon them.
About this brief
This brief is an output from the Assisting Regional Universities in
Sudan (ARUS) and Sudan-Norway Academic cooperation (SNAC). Both
programmes are funded by the Norwegian Embassy in Khartoum.
The author would like to thank Ibrahim Ali Abakar, Yahya Haroun
Salih and Ad Abdallah Onour Hasan from the University of Gadarif
who contributed substantially in data collection and analysis.
CMI (Chr. Michelsen Institute) P.O. Box 6033, ISSN 2535-566X
Phone: +47 47 93 80 00 N-5892 Bergen, Norway
Phone from abroad: +47 55 70 Visiting address:
55 65 E-mail: cmi@cmi.no Jekteviksbakken 31, Bergen
Web: