INITIATIVES FOR UKRAINE
(Collected by the European University Institute through partners and networks,
including Scholars at Risk in Italy and in Europe)
Last Update: 17 
Further contacts for the
Country Description Link Status Notes
initiative
ACTIVE - MODIFIED
Extraordinary aid (ÖH)
closed to new applicants.
Tuition waivers active
The Austrian Student Union has gathered on a website all the essential
 until Feb 2026,
Austria information for Ukrainian students in Austria, in English, German,
info#en psychological support,
Ukrainian and Russian.
multilingual information.
Source: oeh.ac.at,
oead.at (Nov 2025)
ACTIVE
The Government of Paraná, through the Araucária Foundation and the
General Superintendence of Science, Technology and Higher Education
(SETI), announces the Program for Hosting Ukrainian Scientists. The Parana/Araucária:
goal of this initiative is on the welcome and integration of the researchers research grants for
at Paraná community, especially women, as well as on future joint Ukrainian female
collaborations for the reconstruction and strengthening of the Ukrainian rana-Government-announces- internacionalizacao@fun researchers (10,000
Brazil
economy through science and innovation in partnership with the State Program-Hosting-Ukrainian-Scientists- dacaoaraucaria.org.br BRL). New selection
Government. The researchers will receive a grant of R$10,000.00, in the support-Araucaria planned. Source:
category of Special Visiting Professor (PVE). In addition, each fappr.pr.gov.br (Feb
dependent under the age of 18 and/or ascendant over the age of 60 will 2025)
receive a supplement of R$1,000.00, with a maximum limit of three
supplements of R$1,000.00 for each selected researcher.
Bulgarian Embassy in ACTIVE
Kiev +380 44 235
Temporary protection
4389; +380 44 235 2202
extended until March
- Embassy.
2027. New support
Kiev@mfa.bg; Consulate
Ukrainian citizens who are seeking shelter in Bulgaria can sign up at the programme from May
General in Odessa +380
Bulgarian Embassy in Kiev and consulate in Odessa. aine 2025. Re-registration
48 7466 554; +380 48
deadline: 30 .

Source: refugeelight.bg
65 58; +380 48 746 63
()
75 - Consulate.
Odessa@mfa.bg
Bulgaria
ACTIVE
BG4UA page is run by a group of Bulgaria-based entrepreneurs, tech BG4UA: community-
community members, and friends of Ukraine. They are part of the based platform confirmed
Bulgarian evacuation, relocation, and accommodation efforts for active for evacuation and
Ukrainians who wish to leave Ukraine for Bulgaria, or who have found reception. Source:
themselves in Bulgaria and would like to stay. bg4ua.com

Bulgaria
ACTIVE Bulgarian government
portal confirmed active
Government issued official portal for Ukrainians seeking shelter in
 with temporary protection
Bulgaria
info. Source: gov.bg (Oct
2024)
The Student Refugee Program is the only one of its kind to combine ACTIVE
resettlement with opportunities for higher education. The program WUSC Student Refugee
supports over 150 refugee students per year through active partnerships Program: 150+
with over 100 Canadian university, college, and CEGEP campuses. We students/year, 100+
have empowered over 2,200 young refugees from 39 countries of origin campuses. Source:
to continue their education in safe and supportive environments in srp.wusc.ca
Canada since the program began.
Carleton University is currently working with Carleton's Scholars At Risk ACTIVE Carleton SAR: hosts
(SAR) initiative to host academics fleeing Ukraine. Since 2015, Carleton's Ukrainian academics,
faculty.affairs@carleton.c
SAR committee has worked with the university community to host, for one programme active since
Canada a
to two years, academics fleeing Afghanistan, Syria, Turkey, Yemen, and 2015. Source:
other locations. carleton.ca
 ACTIVE
nces-and-funding/awards-
The University of Toronto announces a $1-million matching fund for scholarships-bursaries-grants/in- University of Toronto: 1M
donations supporting displaced students from Ukraine along with course-awards/scholars-and-students- CAD fund for Ukrainian
emergency aid to current students from Ukraine who are affected by the at-risk-award- students. Source:
war. program/#:~:text=The%20Scholars% registrar.utoronto.ca
20at%20Risk%20Award,of%20status
%20in%20Canada)%2C%20or
ACTIVE
Charles University
•Multi-service portal
•Scholarship for students at risk
•Launch a special telephone line offering daily psychological counselling
services in several languages (Czech, Ukrainian, Russian and English) Charles University:
•Introduce a daily information phone service in several languages hosting 957 students +

(Czech, Ukrainian, Russian and English) 64 Ukrainian academics.
fbclid=IwAR0O6myYo3VivALcbwCh-
•Allocate a minimum of 150 beds at Charles University dormitories for the Financial, psychological
wLUCP1_h1UmUz-
accommodation of students or staff and their families from conflict- and housing support.
w7elGpGZ9h_PShFY1EouTxkQ
affected areas Source: cuni.cz (Jul
•Prepare a comprehensive system of support for persons associated 2025)
with Charles University from conflict-affected areas
•On the basis of further developments, prepare concrete financial
assistance, especially through the Charles University Endowment Fund,
Czech
or in cooperation with selected humanitarian organisations
Republic

Czech
Republic
The University of South Bohemia in České Budějovice offers ACTIVE
opportunities for studies at all levels of education, i.e. bachelor’s,
USB: ongoing hosting of
master’s, doctoral, including short-term study stays. Study stays
 students/researchers
(including Czech language course) and regular studies in accredited ukraine@jcu.cz
ine with scholarships.
study programmes will be supported by scholarships.
Source: jcu.cz (2025)
Deadlines depend on the faculty, some accept applications on a
continuous basis.
Masaryk University providing accommodation for Ukrainian citizens at ACTIVE
B&B HOTEL UNIVERSITY BRNO and dormitories, financial assistance
for Ukraine and Masaryk University: 4034
is looking for two postdocs interested in applying for a three-year pomoc@muni.cz dormitory beds 2025–26.
Postdoc Individual Fellowships funded by the Czech Science Foundation Source: skm.muni.cz
(GACR) under the guidance of its research group, which is focused on
empirical microeconomics and experimental economics.
Novo Nordisk Foundation ENDED
- Fellowships for Scholars at Risk from Ukrainian Universities
The Foundation has awarded an additional DKK 5 million for fellowships
that enable Ukrainian researchers from any scientific field to temporarily
serve as fellows at a research institution in Denmark. This fellowship 2023 programme (DKK

programme is led by Universities Denmark and administered by Scholars 10M). Not renewed in
s/novo-nordisk-foundation-supports-
Denmark at Risk Denmark. vtl@adm.ku.dk 2025. Source:
fellowship-programmes-for-ukrainian-
Scholars at Risk Denmark coordinates activities in Denmark to protect novonordiskfonden.dk
researchers/
and support refugee researchers and promote academic freedom. (Jan 2023)
Members of Scholars at Risk Denmark come from all universities in
Denmark, the Danish Institute for International Studies (DIIS), Danish
Institute for Human Rights and DSF – National Union of Students in
Denmark.
ACTIVE
University of Tartu: 2025
 scholarships
The University of Tartu has established a scholarship fund to collect and
ukrainian-students-continue-their- (€1000/semester).
Estonia channel donations to support the studies of Ukrainian students at the
studies-make-donation-ut-scholarship- Deadline 15 .
University of Tartu.
fund Source: sihtasutus.ut.ee
(Jan 2025)

MSCA4Ukraine Fellowships 2025 ACTIVE
16 : Call closing
MSCA4Ukraine is part of the wider EU response to Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine.
MSCA4Ukraine 2025:
 176 researchers. New
First launched in with an initial budget of €25 million
actions.ec.europa.eu/calls/msca4u 2026 call (€10M).
funded by the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions, it is the European
kraine-fellowships-2025 Source: ec.europa.eu
Commission’s dedicated scheme to support displaced researchers from
(Sep 2025)
Ukraine, enabling them to continue their work safely in Europe.
The initiative also aims at helping safeguard Ukraine's research and
innovation system and the freedom of scientific research at large.
As a pilot fellowship scheme, the SAFE project offers 60 fully-funded EXPIRED
fellowships (up to 24 months) for doctoral and postdoctoral researchers SAFE Project: call closed
of any non-EU nationality to work at a research institution in the EU. 20 Jan 2025 (60
fellowships). Not

The SAFE fellowships will be awarded following 2 tracks: renewed. Source:
– At-risk researchers currently outside the EU saferesearchers.eu (Feb
– At-risk researchers already within the EU 2025)
Applications can only be made by potential host institutions in the EU.
TO BE VERIFIED
Erasmus+ Manual verification
Useful resources for staff, students, youth, experts and others: updates 72-useful-resources-for-staff-students- required through official
on grants opportunities and state of education during war. youth-experts-and-others.html website (link in main file)
 TO BE VERIFIED Manual verification
Horizon for Ukraine
tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/o required through official
Opportunities in Horizon-funded research & innovation projects
pportunities/ua-opportunities website (link in main file)
 TO BE VERIFIED
s/d/1HqTKukfJGpmowQnSh4CoFn3T
6HXcNS1T1pK- Manual verification
Labs supporting Ukrainian Scientists Xx9CknQ/edit?fbclid=IwAR2RoNru0z required through official
OaK9i4cLnl4VWM0tz_gRpBjlzelllzqOi website (link in main file)
Ocnbow_bqOq4sMEU#gid=3206417

 TO BE VERIFIED
artschools.org/general/custom.asp?p
European network of Higher Arts Education (ELIA) - platform to share age=InsolidaritywithUkraineELIAmem Manual verification
and find links to relevant initiatives and resources for students and bersactionsupport&fbclid=IwAR2dZuj required through official
scholars in the Arts. aqB7Tjy7zHIe- website (link in main file)
eGV1jIeAcm8ZSKvMTKFHwY-
Xah5L0Mq0z_mjx4I
TO BE VERIFIED Manual verification
On the ESU (European Students' Union) site there's a compendium of 
required through official
resources to help Ukrainian students, arranged by country ukraine/
website (link in main file)
Europe

ACTIVE ERA4Ukraine/EURAXES
Euraxess – Page dedicated to Ukraine with information on job offers and S: portal confirmed
initiatives of support in each of the Euraxess member states. active. Ukrainian/English

And information and 600+
e
EURAXESS (virtual) mentoring program “Shape the future of a centres. Source:
Researcher coming to Europe” is welcoming Ukrainian scientists. euraxess.ec.europa.eu
(Nov 2025)
Euro-Mediterranean Foundation TO BE VERIFIED
Urgent grant requests are assessed on a rolling basis
Europe
Eligibility: requests for emergency funding are considered when
applicants can show that an intervention by the Foundation will help
Manual verification
counter threats against their lives and/or those of members of their family
 grants@emhrf.org required through official
and reinforce the visibility and pursuit of their activities at a strategic
website (link in main file)
timing; the request is such that it cannot be fully supported on an
emergency basis by another national, regional, or international
organization (all world)
Funding: the amount of funding requested may not exceed 5,000 EUR
List of help for BIPoC , LGBTQIA, Disabled/Chronically ill refugees in TO BE VERIFIED Manual verification

different countries required through official
ee/BlackPeopleInUkraine
Help for Black People / BIPoC in the Ukraine website (link in main file)
Manual verification
TO BE VERIFIED
Matching Ukrainian refugees with hosts required through official
website (link in main file)
EXPIRED
The Culture of Solidarity Fund is now open to individuals, collectives and
organisations from all sectors and civil society at large that propose short-
term or mid-term European cultural initiatives in the following three areas:
disinformation, misinformation, propaganda filter bubbles, fake news,
ongoing war ‘infodemic’ by supporting independent, alternative, and
trusted European (digital) media;
SAFE Project: call closed
providing and nourishing safe cultural spaces for individuals fleeing their
20 Jan 2025 (60
homes and looking for shelter in exile or in Ukraine;
 cos@culturalfoundation. fellowships). Not
counteracting forces of fragmentation through artistic and cultural
ulture-of-solidarity-fund/ eu renewed. Source:
expressions that provide hope to withstand the harsh realities of war and
saferesearchers.eu (Feb
to act for a peaceful future of Ukraine and Europe.
2025)
The Fund has grants available in three amounts:
Small: up to €5.000
Medium: €5.000 – 20.000
Large: €20.000 – 40.000
Grants are made available for a large variety of cultural needs required in
this situation. Especially inside Ukraine, but also all over Europe.

Europe
#ScienceForUkraine is a community group of volunteer students and ACTIVE
Science for Ukraine:
research scientists from academic institutions in Europe and around the
platform confirmed
world.
 active, continuous
Its mission is to collect and disseminate information about support 
eu/team.html updates. Source:
opportunities at the university, national, and international level for
scienceforukraine.eu
graduate students and researchers directly affiliated to a Ukrainian
(Nov 2025)
academic institution.
The European Research Council (ERC) has appealed to its grantees to TO BE VERIFIED
provide temporary employment to refugee researchers and support staff,
such as technician and lab managers, from Ukraine. The ERC has Marcin Mońko
contacted all its 5,600 current grantees and is collecting information on Press and
possible job opportunities. This data will be compiled and progressively ukraine-jobs-researchers-fleeing-war Communication adviser
Manual verification
published on the ERC website and other channels. The initiative follows T: +32 2 296 66 44
required through official
the ERC Scientific Council’s statement in support of Ukraine and its Madeleine Drielsma
website (link in main file)
research community. nal-opportunities/ERC-for-Ukraine- Press and
research-jobs Communication adviser
And T: + 32 2 296 66 44
ERC-funded jobs in research teams
TO BE VERIFIED Manual verification
EU Commission support to help Member States meet the needs of 
required through official
refugees scorner/detail/en/ip_22_1946
website (link in main file)
ACTIVE
Finland: temporary
protection extended to
Instructions on arriving in Finland from Ukraine +. Academic
support confirmed.
Source: university (2025)
ACTIVE
Finland: temporary
protection extended to

Mental health support on chat in English +. Academic
students/chat/
support confirmed.
Source: university (2025)
ACTIVE
University of Vaasa Finland: temporary
We grant study rights for separate studies to university students who protection extended to
have fled Ukraine and whose studies have been interrupted due to the ukraine/study-opportunities-students- admissions@uwasa.fi +. Academic
war. This entitlement allows students to take individual courses and is ukrainian-universities support confirmed.
valid for up to two years. The studies are free of charge for students. Source: university (2025)
Finland
Rector Jukka Kola, Chair ACTIVE
Finland: temporary
SAR Finland of Unifi, tel. +358 29 450
 protection extended to
Finnish universities, together with Scholars at Risk (SAR) Finland, are 5050
universities-expresses-support-for- +. Academic
investigating the possibilities for hosting Ukrainian students and Executive Director Tanja
ukraine/ support confirmed.
researchers to the Finnish universities. Risikko, tel. +358 40 195
Source: university (2025)

Finland
ACTIVE
Finland: temporary
protection extended to
University of Helsinki - help for student refugees; place to continue 
ukraine@helsinki.fi +. Academic
studying ukraine
support confirmed.
Source: university (2025)
University of Eastern Finland ACTIVE
Finland: temporary
UEF opens admissions to non-degree studies to people who have
 protection extended to
arrived in Finland from Ukraine. This study right is for people who have
opportunities-for-people-fleeing-the- studysupport@ue.fi +. Academic
applied for or been granted temporary protection and who have a right to
war-in-ukraine support confirmed.
pursue a degree in a Ukrainian university. Studies completed under the
Source: university (2025)
separate study right are free of charge.
ACTIVE
France: academic
Programme for hosting researchers from risk areas. Held by the Ministry support confirmed.
of HE & Collège de France france.fr/fr/programme-pause Source:
campusfrance.org (2025)
ACTIVE
France: academic
The association of ukrainian students in France organizes the reception support confirmed.

and accommodation of Ukrainian students who arrive in France Source:
campusfrance.org (2025)
France
Foundation Maison des sciences de l'homme: ACTIVE
•The Atlas program offers short-term fellowships of two or three months
in France for international postdoc researchers
France: academic
•The DEA program enables foreign scientific professionals from all atlas@msh-paris.fr
support confirmed.
continents to be invited for a period of four to six weeks to support their suports-scientific-community-impacted-candidatures.dea@msh-
Source:
work in the SHS in France. war-ukraine paris.fr
campusfrance.org (2025)
•Maison Suger wants to facilitate the conditions of scientific residency in
Paris for every researchers affected by the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Submitted applications will be given priority.
Dr. Yoan Vilain, LL.M.
ACTIVE
Humboldt University: Director of the
“Refugees Welcome @ HU“ programme and Humboldt-Universität's International Department
membership with “Scholars at Risk“: Ukrainian academics and students Head of section 2

will receive intensive visa support as well as social and academic support The President's Information not available
portal/nachrichten-en/february-
in crisis situations. The HU will make every effort to bring academics and Representative for / incomplete
2022/nr-22224
students to the HU within the framework of sponsorship programmes so International and
that they can complete their training and advance their research projects European Affairs
in Berlin. yoan.vilain@hu-berlin.de
Germany

Diaspora 2030 ACTIVE
Are you are currently living in Germany and have a migration history from
DAAD Ukraine
one of the following countries: Albania, Cameroon, Colombia, Ecuador,
 programme confirmed
Ethiopia, Georgia, Ghana, India, Kosovo, Nepal, Serbia, Tunisia, Ukraine diaspora2030@giz.de
proposals-diaspora-experts/ active. Source: daad.de
or Vietnam? Would you like to pass on your knowledge and skills through
(2025)
a short-term development-oriented assignment in your country of origin?
Then apply as a diaspora expert!
As part of the HessenFonds, the Hessian Ministry of Science and ACTIVE
Research, Arts and Culture provides scholarships for exceptionally

talented and high achieving university students and researchers with
ren/internationales/studium-
refugee status at state universities in Hessen. The funding shall enable
incoming/hessenfonds-fuer- No description provided
them to continue their studies or their scientific career at a state
fluechtlinge/hessenfonds-for-
university in Hessen.
refugees
The next deadline for nominations of the candidates by the universities is
the 15th of .
German Academic Exchange Service ACTIVE
Funding of highly qualified Ukrainian graduates, doctoral candidates and DAAD Ukraine
postdoctoral researchers for short research stays in Germany in order to pendium/datenbank/en/21148- programme confirmed
strengthen cooperation between Ukrainian and German universities and scholarship- active. Source: daad.de
to give young Ukrainian scientists access to research infrastructures in database/?detail=57650857 (2025)
Germany.
ACTIVE

The University of Bonn offers more than 4 positions to researchers and-teaching/doctoral-students-and-
radu@verwaltung.uni-
threatened by the war in Ukraine. Funding available! Contact Robert postdocs/after-your-doctoral- No description provided
bonn.de
Radu. studies/support/argelander-starter-kit-
grant-for-postdocs-starter-kit-a
 ACTIVE
The Universität Potsdam Together with its international partners, offers welcome-center@uni-
potsdam.de/en/welcomecenter/prepa No description provided
support for academics at risk. potsdam.de
ration/researchers-at-risk
The Gerda Henkel Stiftung is glad to announce that the application for ACTIVE
general research grants are now open for international postdoc DAAD Ukraine

researchers. The Gerda Henkel Foundation is one of the largest private scientific.exchanges@snf programme confirmed
16jI/funding/science-
research founders in Germany and has a reputation for supporting high- .ch active. Source: daad.de
communication/scientific-exchanges
quality, innovative research in the fields of history, archaeology, and (2025)
Islamic studies.
The Leibniz-Institut für Länderkunde (Leibniz Institute for Regional ACTIVE
Geography, IfL) - The IfL is committed as a host institution for
researchers who have fled Ukraine.
In addition, the IfL offers support to researchers from Russia and Belarus 
who are at risk due to the Ukraine war and the situation in their countries. 1/news/ifl-in-brief/details/support-for- info@leibniz-ifl.de No description provided
The prerequisite is that their previous academic work fits in with the IfL's ukrainian-researchers
main research areas (migration and mobility, urban and spatial
development, border research, history of geography, geovisualisation,
etc.).
Germany

The Leibniz Institute for European History (IEG) awards scholarships for ACTIVE
doctoral students and postdocs from Germany and abroad. Research
DAAD Ukraine
projects from the early modern period to 1989/90 that deal with the
 programme confirmed
religious, political, social and cultural history of Europe are funded. fellowship@ieg-mainz.de
mainz.de/stipendien/foerderung active. Source: daad.de
Comparative, transfer-historical and transnational projects as well as
(2025)
intellectual, ecclesiastical and theological-historical questions are
particularly welcome.
 ACTIVE
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Center for Religious Studies - Special ceres@rub.de
ogramm-fur-ukrainische-
scholarship program for scholars inflicted by the war on the PhD, DAAD Ukraine
wissenschaftlerinnen/
Postdoc, and professorial level. Scholarships are up to six months. programme confirmed
and
And rtg- active. Source: daad.de

Research Opportunities for Ukrainian Researchers in Philosophy to come situatedcognition@rub.d (2025)
cognition.com/2022/03/14/ukraine-
either to Bochum or to Osnabrück (Germany) e
fellowships/
 Tetyana Tonkoshkur ACTIVE
The University of Tübingen has set up an emergency fund with research
tuebingen.de/international/universita E-Mail.:
grants to support endangered Ukrainian researchers. The scholarships No description provided
et/solidaritaet-mit-der- international.research@u
are awarded for a period of up to 12 months.
ukraine/#c1528199 ni-tuebingen.de
ACTIVE
Scholarships
•Kristin Günther, Jin
Jlussi and Rawand
Othman from Department
5: International Affairs
will help you apply for a
one-to-twelve-month

scholarship.
hamburg.de/en/internationales/mitarb
Universität Hamburg - Funding program for Ukrainian researchers at External-funding
eitende/mitarbeitende- No description provided
acute risk. applications
wissenschaft/gefaehrdete-
•After the scholarship is
forschende/funding/hpsar.html
granted, Dr. Elisabeth
Germany Bunselmeyer from
Department 4: Research
Management and
Funding will help you
prepare the external-
funding application.
ACTIVE

Baden-Württemberg Fund for Persecuted Scholars No description provided
february-2022?e=d51a244ee8#BWF
ACTIVE DAAD Ukraine
Students and staff from Ukrainian Universities can join Saarland 
programme confirmed
University and continue their study or work. The University offers a wide saarland.de/global/welcome- ukraine@uni-saarland.de
active. Source: daad.de
range of study programmes as well as German language classes. center/ukraine.html
(2025)

Germany
Academy in Exile offers scholars who are threatened in their home ACTIVE
countries because of their academic or civic engagement for human academyinexile@uni-
 No description provided
rights, peace and democracy the opportunity to resume their research due.de
abroad.
ACTIVE German-Ukrainian
University Network
(DUHN): 29 projects,
Shelter Placement Platform for Germany (Elianor Network) €24M (2025–2029), 47
Ukrainian universities.
Source: daad.de ()
Help in Berlin ACTIVE No description provided
Mission Lifeline - rescue ship which has so far mainly rescued refugees ACTIVE
No description provided
from the mediterranean sea is raising money to evacuate Ukrainians lifeline.de/ukrainekonvoi/
DGO - they have a scholarship programme for belarusian students and ACTIVE
info@dgo-online.org No description provided
are currently working on scholarships for Ukrainians. org/international/english/
ACTIVE DAAD Ukraine
GFPS - they have an extensive information padlet where german and
 programme confirmed
english information is mixed. Initiatives which help with translation,
com/svenjaros/vl0105hx3igusfic active. Source: daad.de
scholarship initiatives, shelter in Germany, etc.
(2025)
Prof. Dr. Bernd Scholz- ACTIVE
University of Bremen: Reiter
The university is in contact with Bremen Student Services Organization President
(Studierendenwerk Bremen) regarding the establishment of counseling bremen.de/en/university/university- University of Bremen
services for its Ukrainian students and the possible intake of refugee communication-and-marketing/all- Phone: +49 421 218- No description provided
students and scholars in the Student Services Organization’s news/details/university-of-bremen- 60011
apartments. The apartments for visiting scientists of the University of reduces-ties-to-russia-to-a-minimum Email: rektoruni-
Bremen will also be made available. bremen.de
ACTIVE
Freie Universität Berlin:
Freie Universität Berlin has decided to establish a short-term “Ukraine Management and

Emergency Fund” to provide support during this transitional and turbulent Administration:
berlin.de/en/universitaet/ukraine/inde
period, for example for Ukrainian students who won’t be returning home The President of Freie
x.html
at this time, but whose official stay at Freie Universität is coming to an Universität Berlin
end. This support is also available for others (not just students). Kaiserswerther Str. 16-18 No description provided
Further measures are under consideration depending on how the 14195 Berlin
situation develops. For example, Freie Universität, its partner institutions, Germany
and foundations are making preparations to expand support Email: praesident@fu-
opportunities already in place through the “Scholars at Risk” program to berlin.de
include support for exiled researchers from Ukraine.

Germany
The DAFI (Albert Einstein German Academic Refugee Initiative) ACTIVE
scholarship programme offers qualified refugee and returnee students
the possibility to earn an undergraduate degree in their country of DAAD Ukraine
asylum or home country. Through the dedicated support of the programme confirmed
hqeduc@unhcr.org
government of Germany, the support of Denmark and the Czech scholarships.html active. Source: daad.de
Republic, UNHCR and other private donors, the programme has (2025)
supported over 18,500 young refugees to undertake tertiary studies
since 1992.
Overview of Labs and Departments which support Ukrainian scholars ACTIVE

In this spreadsheet, you can find an extensive list of laboratories and
s/d/1jGFCqP2kj1ZAN6xy6EoRN1boz
departments which are willing to support Ukrainians scholars. Under No description provided
aggk9VEsbzYaIkkYcQ/htmlview
“Contact for Whatsapp”, there is a phone number which can be
contacted.
Deutsche Bundesstiftung Umwelt (DBU, Osnabrück) – Topics related to ACTIVE
Environmental Protection or Nature Conservation (fellowship)
Master‘s graduates and doctoral students who live in Ukraine or who
have fled the country are eligible to apply. Ukrainian citizenship is a
central requirement. The studies must have been completed with a good
or very good degree (Master‘s, Magister, Diplom) and should not have
Contact person
taken place more than five years ago. The fellowship is not intended for
Dr. Nicole Freyer-Wille
persons who wish to pursue a doctoral thesis (duration 24 to 36 months) DAAD Ukraine
Phone: +49 541 9633
or studies at a German university. The DBU welcomes applications from programme confirmed
 460
all disciplines, provided they wish to work on a topic related to active. Source: daad.de
Mobile: +49 1511
environmental protection or nature conservation. (2025)

The amount of the fellowship is € 1.250 per month. The fellowship is tax-
Email: n.freyer@dbu.de
and social security-free. In addition, the DBU covers the costs of health,
accident and liability insurance as well as travel costs to Germany. The
DBU also supports German courses in Germany and invites to seminars,
workshops and events.
Requirements: Good knowledge of English and/or German. Applications
are possible until further notice.
Further information on ACTIVE Hungary: Danube+
The Budapest University of Technology and Economics (BME) helps the 
BME’s aid package can Cooperation (Jun 2025).
students affected by the Ukrainian crisis with dormitory accommodation BME_helps_transborder_students_a
Hungary be requested at International academic
and scholarship. The institution offers help for people fleeing from nd_Ukrainian_partner_universities?la
internationalrelations@b partnerships. Source:
Ukraine as well. nguage=en
me.hu erasmusplus.org.ua
Visible Ukraine – Visible Ukraine is an interdisciplinary web journal TO BE VERIFIED
focusing on humanities and social sciences, established and managed
Manual verification
by participants of the Invisible University for Ukraine. Our objective is to
 required through official
amplify diverse Ukrainian voices, introduce new interdisciplinary subjects,
website (link in main file)
and foster intellectual exchanges to make Ukraine visible in local,
regional, and global discussions.
International
TO BE VERIFIED Manual verification
Contacts of embassies in neighbouring countries and contacts in 
required through official
Germany 19zo8AbuysWrBVN6uD0UYOVt358Z
website (link in main file)

International
TO BE VERIFIED Manual verification

UNCHR - UN Scholarship Opportunities for Refugees required through official
s/
website (link in main file)
ACTIVE Ireland: academic
Removal of visa requirements for Ukrainian citizens seeking asylum in
support confirmed.
Ireland
Source: gov.ie (2025)
Science Foundation Ireland. In an effort to help tackle the humanitarian ACTIVE
and economic loss, SFI is launching a new supplemental grant scheme
to encourage and enable holders of existing SFI grants, and their
associated Host Institutions, to provide opportunities for displaced
Ireland
researchers from Ukraine to join and collaborate on existing SFI-funded Ireland: academic
 displacedresearchers@sf
grants in order to integrate swiftly into the Irish research system, to support confirmed.
calls/displaced-researchers/ i.ie
enable them to maintain continuity in their research career and to bring Source: gov.ie (2025)
added benefit to the SFI grant from their expertise.
Applications are open to principal investigators of existing SFI-funded
grants to provide relevant research positions to displaced researchers
from Ukraine at any stage of their research career.
Bocconi University: ACTIVE
•Supporting members of its community and their families involved in this
conflict
Italy: university
•Working, in coordination with Italian institutions, in particular the Ministry
 bocconi@unibocconi.leg scholarships confirmed
of University and Research, on concrete actions to support students and
/notizia.php?idArt=23948 almail.it 2025–26. Source:
academics in conflict-affected territories.
mur.gov.it (2025)
Bocconi invites members of its community to support the fundraiser for
Ukraine organised jointly by the Red Cross, Unhcr and Unicef
(
ACTIVE Italy: university
University of Padova Opportunities for Scholars at Risk | unipd.rescuefund@unipd scholarships confirmed
Opened the call Unipd Scholars at risk 2024. Università di Padova (unipd.it) .it 2025–26. Source:
mur.gov.it (2025)
Help’ website run by UNHCR, the UN Refugee Agency. Here, refugees, ACTIVE Italy: university
asylum-seekers and stateless people can find information to help them scholarships confirmed

know more about their rights, obligations and the services available to 2025–26. Source:
them. mur.gov.it (2025)
ACTIVE
JumaMap is the multilingual portal especially for refugees. In this section
you will find the most up to date news, legislation, existing financial
subsidies, education and training opportunities for those individuals who
Italy: university
are currently arriving in Italy due to the war in the Ukraine.
 scholarships confirmed
On the map inside this page, you will find listed all regional and local
emergency/ 2025–26. Source:
programs, which are currently active, that provide free reception services,
mur.gov.it (2025)
psychological support, legal assistance, distribuition of first necessity
goods, a list of centers against domestic violence and of Italian language
courses.
Italy

ACTIVE Italy: university

Collegio Carlo Alberto scholarships confirmed
n/master-in-economics/scholarship-for-ignacio@carloalberto.org
Scholarship for postgrad studies in Economics 2025–26. Source:
a-ukrainian-student/
mur.gov.it (2025)
ACTIVE Italy: university
Universitá di Parma - Several open opportunities, see web site for the flavia.evandri@unipr.it scholarships confirmed

text of the calls. Scholars from Ukraine welcome to apply. refugees@unipr.it 2025–26. Source:
mur.gov.it (2025)
diamond@sissa.it ACTIVE
phd@sissa.it
mobility@sissa.it
In collaboration with the Friuli Venezia Giulia Regional Authority, the
research@sissa.it
Universities of Trieste, Udine and SISSA are preparing to welcome
lucia.piani@uniud.it Italy: university
Italy Ukrainian students and researchers and support them through
giorgio.alberti@uniud.it scholarships confirmed
scholarships. In particular, regional universities make available up to 18
delegato.internazionale 2025–26. Source:
semesters for doctoral students or master degrees for thesis preparation.
@units.it mur.gov.it (2025)
Additional mobility grants for visiting faculty are available at SISSA.
delegato.ricercassh@unit
s.it
relazioni.internazionali@
amm.units.it
ACTIVE
Italian Ministry of Higher Education - The initial support measures in favor
of students, PhD students, researchers, professors, of Ukrainian and any
other nationality, who, because of ongoing political and military crises,
have been granted with international protection, have been amended:
the initially foreseen fund of 500 thousand euro has been increased to 1
million euro, the relative methods of use will be defined by a Decree of
the Minister of University and Research.
As such, all organizations belonging to the higher education and
research system (Universities, Research bodies, Academies, AFAM -Art,
Music and Dance- Institutions and Scientific institutes, such as the
national Academy of Sciences or the national Academy of the Lincei) Italy: university
can contact this e-mail address, notifying solidarity initiatives for helpforacademics@mur.g scholarships confirmed
professors, researchers, students and PhD students affected by the emergency ov.it. 2025–26. Source:
ongoing international crisis, willing to welcome those who would like to mur.gov.it (2025)
continue their studies, research and academic activities in our country.
The solidarity initiatives, will thus be highlighted and may, among others,
include:
- Visiting Professor and Research Fellowship positions;
- scholarships;
- other forms of hospitality offered individually by academic institutions,
with the involvement of local authorities and third sector parties.
The above-mentioned organizations, if needed, may contact the MUR
assistance to solve specific problems related, above all, to the inclusion
of scholars in the Italian system of higher education and research.

Italy
University Milano Bicocca ACTIVE Italy: university
Center for European Studies, University of Milano-Bicocca: scholarships confirmed
cefes@unimib.it
Visiting opportunities for war refugee Ukrainian researchers Within the support/ 2025–26. Source:
ScienceForUkraine and UkrainianGlobalUniversity support initiatives mur.gov.it (2025)
The Alma Mater Studiorum-University of Bologna ACTIVE Italy: university
Unibo offers a range of opportunities for Ukrainian PhD students, post- we-are/mission-and-values/right-to- scholarships confirmed
helpukraine@eui.eu
docs, researchers and professors, refugees in Ukraine or holders of a peace/the-university-of-bologna-for- 2025–26. Source:
permanent residence permit in Ukraine. peace mur.gov.it (2025)
ACTIVE
Bibliotheca Hertziana – Max Planck Institute for Art History has created Latvia: temporary

the #ScienceForUkraine Art History Fellowships, a dedicated call for protection extended to
ne rihaforukraine@gmail.co
applications by researchers in the field of art history who are at risk in +. Academic
 m.
Ukraine, Russia, and Belarus, independently from their nationality. support confirmed.
es/research-developer?c=2376430
Please share this information within your networks. Source: university (2025)
ACTIVE
Latvia: temporary

Ukraine to Latvia - The centralised site for refugees from Ukraine. Website of The Ministry protection extended to
fbclid=IwAR3bPizdo7fFXY0AqNIHiEN
Latvia Includes additional support contacts, useful links, etc. Everything from of Interior of Latvia: +. Academic
QJ 9vbcSnAlya9NoB9DD-
getting housing to legal assistance for working permits and visas. support confirmed.
ywWYWWylniCpr9Cc
Source: university (2025)
ACTIVE
Latvia: temporary
University of Latvia - Open office type of work places for researchers (up
protection extended to
to 25 persons), provided with stationary computers and office supplies.
 ilze.kaposta@lu.lv +. Academic
Faculty itself can not provide with accommodation, but we coud help to
support confirmed.
arrange it within University of Latvia.
Source: university (2025)
ACTIVE
Lithuania: temporary
protection extended to
Blue Yellow - An NGO that has been active since 2014 supporting
 info@blue-yellow.lt +. Academic
freedom fighters and civils in Ukraine.
support confirmed.
Source: university (2025)
Lithuania

Marius Jakulis Jason Foundation - MJJ foundation establishes the funds ACTIVE
to support the Ph.D. students, Postdoc Marius Jakulis Jason Foundation -
MJJ foundation establishes the funds to support the Ph.D. students,
Postdoc researchers and scientists from Ukraine who are looking for safe
relocation opportunities in Lithuania until it is safe to return and
strengthen their country. Lithuania: temporary
Duration of the stay in the Lithuanian universities and research centers – protection extended to

Lithuania up to 8 months with possibility of extension, if necessary. info@mjjfondas.lt +. Academic
ukraines-science/
Who can apply: support confirmed.
Postdoc researchers from Ukraine affected by the war Source: university (2025)
Researchers with ongoing collaborations with Lithuanian universities and
institutes
Hosting Lithuanian universities, research centers or individual
laboratories that are ready to temporarily host a scientist from Ukraine
(those institutions can submit an online application to MJJ)
ACTIVE
Lithuania: temporary
protection extended to
Vytautas Magnus University support to Ukrainians +. Academic
support confirmed.
Source: university (2025)
Vilnius University offers doctoral students, postdocs and established ACTIVE
scientists working in the fields of Economics and Management the
Netherlands:
opportunity to continue their work in a research group at Vilnius rima.rimsaite@lmta.lt
 scholarships and support
University for a period of up to 3 months. asta.vaitkeviciene@cr.vu.
duchy-of-lithuania-scholarship#lt confirmed 2025–26.
It also offers Ukrainian students to continue their studies in Lithuania and lt
Source: uaf.nl (2025)
apply for the Grand Duchy of Lithuania Scholarship to ensure the
continuity of academic life.
ACTIVE
Netherlands:

scholarships and support
The national railway company NS let's Ukrainian refugees travel for free. inwoners-van-oekraine-jouw-paspoort-
confirmed 2025–26.
is- je-treinkaartje-naar-nederland/
Source: uaf.nl (2025)
The Leiden University Centre for the Arts in Society offers five visiting ACTIVE
researcher places to refugee PhD students and scholars from Ukraine
who are currently located in the Netherlands. The visiting researchers’
places are intended to last up to 6 months (180 days) and are available
with immediate effect. They provide applicants with a bridging opportunity Netherlands:
to continue existing research that was interrupted due to the war, to work im- scholarships and support
out an application for an externally funded research or job opportunity or manities/centre-for-the-arts-in-society lucas@hum.leidenuniv.nl confirmed 2025–26.
to pursue a related CV-building project. We offer to integrate applicants Source: uaf.nl (2025)
in LUCAS’ research community by matching them with a mentor who can
help coordinate their next steps. We also offer working space in our
office facilities, computing facilities and access to the university library so
that applicants can continue their research.
The
Netherlands

The
Maastricht University -Reduced (EU) admission fees for all rewriting ACTIVE
Netherlands
Ukrainian students, as well as 1st-year students with displaced persons
Netherlands:
status. Offer emergency fund to all students in acute unforeseen
 study@maastrichtuniversi scholarships and support
financial need. Relaxed the burden of proof somewhat for students
r-ukraine ty.nl confirmed 2025–26.
suffering from the ongoing situation. Has scholarship for students from
Source: uaf.nl (2025)
Ukraine who think they will still have trouble paying for their studies even
after the tuition fee reduction.
ACTIVE
Netherlands:
Radboud University - Reduced (EU) admission fees for Ukrainian
 scholarships and support
students for the current academic year. Financial help is available via an admissions@ru.nl
and-agenda/war-in-ukraine confirmed 2025–26.
Emergency Fund. An appointment is needed to apply
Source: uaf.nl (2025)
ACTIVE
The University of Amsterdam has decided that affected students with Netherlands:
acute financial problems can apply for an emergency loan. This scholarships and support
hardship-support@uva.nl
emergency loan is aimed at all students from Ukraine, Russia and ukraine.html?cb#Finances confirmed 2025–26.
Belarus who experience financial hardship due to the war in Ukraine. Source: uaf.nl (2025)
Vrije Universiteit, IVM -VU Amsterdam has created a fund for the support ACTIVE
of PhD students who are affected by the war in Ukraine. The support
fund offers hospitality for 1 year at one of VU Amsterdam its faculties. Netherlands:
Hospitality includes work space and access to facilities. scholarships and support
o.khyzhniak@vu.nl
Applications are invited from PhD students who (1) are affected by the about/ukraine confirmed 2025–26.
war in Ukraine, (2) have an invitation from a faculty at VU Amsterdam to Source: uaf.nl (2025)
join one of their research teams. Hospitality grants are awarded on a first
come, first served basis.
The Incluusion programme offers refugee students the chance to further ACTIVE
develop themselves by attending bachelor courses at Utrecht University Norway: temporary
for free. In addition, status holders gain work experience in the protection extended to

Norway Netherlands and improve their Dutch through the Incluusion incluusion@uu.nl +. Academic
sion
Traineeships. Incluusion was founded in 2016 and welcomed more than support confirmed.
1,000 asylum seekers and status holders from over 40 countries since Source: university (2025)
that time.
ACTIVE Poland (NAWA):
 programme confirmed
Info about asylum for any nationality
apply/protection-asylum/ active. Source:
nawa.gov.pl (2025)
Poland

ACTIVE
Polish National Agency for Academic Exchange (NAWA) - The Bekker
NAWA Programme
The aim of the Programme is to support the international mobility of PhD
students, scientists and academic teachers in pursuit of scientific
excellence by enabling them to conduct their research in renowned
foreign institutions around the world.
The Programme is open to PhD students and scientists representing all
fields and disciplines of science as well as artistic disciplines. There are
also no restrictions regarding countries where the Host Institutions are Poland (NAWA) –
located. Solidarity with Ukraine:
Research fellowships (3 to 24 months) shall allow scientists to stay in agnieszka.chmiel@nawa. Bachelor/Master/PhD
recognized research centres and to implement the Projects together with bekker-programme gov.pl scholarships confirmed
eminent foreign scientists and scientific teams as well as establish long- 2025–26. Source:
term relationship with foreign scientific teams. For young scientists, the nawa.gov.pl (Nov 2025)
Bekker Programme will be also an opportunity for postdoctoral
fellowships while for PhD students it can be the part of their education.
The Programme provides funding to cover scholarship holder's living
expenses related to the stay in the foreign Host Center and the mobility
allowance as well. The amount of the funding may be increased if the
grantee's spouse and his underage children participate in the trip. It also
applies to assistant of a scholarship holder with a severe or moderate
disability.
An email ACTIVE
ukraina@ug.edu.pl has
been launched to which Poland (NAWA):

University of Gdańsk - fundraising for scholarships and possible place for send requests for help, programme confirmed
aiser-help-students-and-academics-
scholars at risk.ant. academic initiatives and active. Source:
ukraine
reports on the need to nawa.gov.pl (2025)
support students and
scientists from Ukraine
Poland ACTIVE Poland (NAWA):
Łukasiewicz Research Network - Open for scientists and engineers but
 ukraina@lukasiewicz.gov programme confirmed
also for workers with experience in the field of production and the
offers-for-ukrainians-in-poland/ .pl active. Source:
support division.
nawa.gov.pl (2025)
ACTIVE Poland (NAWA):
programme confirmed
24-hour hotline for Ukrainian citizens (with the Card of Pole). 0048 22 523 88 80
active. Source:
nawa.gov.pl (2025)
ACTIVE Poland (NAWA):
programme confirmed
24-hour hotline for Ukrainian citizens. 0048 47 721 75 75
active. Source:
nawa.gov.pl (2025)

Poland
ACTIVE Poland (NAWA):

programme confirmed
Facebook group for announcing / receiving transports on UA / PL border. com/groups/665520791308207/?
active. Source:
ref=share
nawa.gov.pl (2025)
ACTIVE Poland (NAWA):
programme confirmed
Free textbook for learning Polish 
active. Source:
nawa.gov.pl (2025)
ACTIVE Poland (NAWA):

Facebook group with Ukrainian citizens seeking legal aid and Polish programme confirmed
com/groups/prawniczkiiprawnicyukrain
lawyers willing to provide it pro bono active. Source:
co m/
nawa.gov.pl (2025)
ACTIVE Poland (NAWA):
Dedicated website for Ukrainian citizens
programme confirmed
Information for students and researchers coming from Ukraine (in 
active. Source:
Ukrainian and Polish).
nawa.gov.pl (2025)
Polish student union PSRP has prepared a special site, where you can ACTIVE Poland (NAWA):
find all necessary information regarding government announcements for programme confirmed
international@psrp.org.pl
Ukrainian students; Polish, nation-wide help initiatives; helpful links, active. Source:
and many more ukraine/ nawa.gov.pl (2025)
ACTIVE Poland (NAWA):

Polish Centre for International Aid launched a fundraising initiatives to programme confirmed
 info@pcpm.org.pl
help Ukraine. active. Source:
rusza-z-pomoca-ukrainie.html
nawa.gov.pl (2025)
ACTIVE Romania: Ukrainian
student university
access, Erasmus+
University of Lodz Scholarships for Ukrainian Researchers and other 
funding and +20%
initiatives of-lodz-for-ukraine
capacity. Source:
studyinromania.gov.ro
(2025)
Romania
ACTIVE Romania: Ukrainian
student university
access, Erasmus+
General help-info webpage in Romania funding and +20%
capacity. Source:
studyinromania.gov.ro
(2025)
ACTIVE
Sweden: temporary
protection extended to

Sweden a FB group for the people that are looking for help +. Academic
com/groups/unitipentruucraina
support confirmed.
Source: university (2025)

ACTIVE Switzerland: academic
support confirmed for
Ukrainian
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences announces scholarships for
researchers/students.
Ukrainian scientists to perform research in Sweden.
Source:
swissuniversities.ch
(2025)
ZHAW Zurich University of Applied Sciences - The ZHAW is admitting ACTIVE
Switzerland: academic
students from Ukrainian universities who have fled to Switzerland (i.e.
support confirmed for
students who are already in Switzerland) and have been granted
Ukrainian
protection status S by the competent authorities, allowing them to join visitingstudents@zhaw.c
researchers/students.
ongoing semester on a temporary basis as visiting students. Those us/news/ukraine/ h
Source:
Switzerland accepted will not be required to pay any tuition fees. This offer applies to
swissuniversities.ch
Bachelor’s and Master’s degree programmes taught in German and
(2025)
English languages.
Basel University - The Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences of the ACTIVE
University of Basel is raising a «Faculty Fund for Ukrainian Researchers
Switzerland: academic
at Risk» to provide qualified individuals who have fled Ukraine (Status S)
support confirmed for
with the opportunity to continue their academic activities and research Contact (in Ukrainian,
Ukrainian
projects at the Faculty on an interim basis. fbclid=IwAR3VwGiQwn_P6jSQLjVIMH Russian, English or
researchers/students.
Depending on the needs of the applicants and the possibilities of the GZVULtaZOBwH0pF4ajcSMEL5WiQ7 German):ukraine-
Source:
Faculty Fund, the support can be in the form of scholarships, temporary ZJmQ4V6KE philhist@unibas.ch
swissuniversities.ch
positions, teaching positions, a workplace at the respective
(2025)
seminar/department, infrastructure and IT support, scientific supervision
or other.
TO BE VERIFIED
Zurich University of the Arts - Refugee researchers from Ukraine can be
admitted to ZHdK. They will be eligible to work in projects funded by the Manual verification
zugang.gefluechtete@zh
Swiss National Science Foundation. Moreover, ZHdK offers places to required through official
dk.ch
students from Ukraine on its degree programmes in art education, website (link in main file)
design, film, fine arts, music, dance, theatre and transdisciplinary studies.
Ukraine Global Faculty - a not-for-profit impact initiative, coordinated by TO BE VERIFIED Manual verification
K.FUND non-profit charity and supported by the Ukraine’s Ministry of required through official
Ukraine Science and Education. website (link in main file)
Lviv Center of Urban History List of Help for Scholars at Risk: TO BE VERIFIED
Manual verification
List of initiatives for institutional assistance to researchers and scientists, ademics-at-risk/?fbclid=IwAR21oW-
info@lvicenter.org required through official
as well as their relatives who are in danger and forced to leave Ukraine FkBYV9a-05hFEEQAFG_3jwSK-k-
website (link in main file)
due to the war. pelotZd_aNvim7as4yFiZMEzI
DAAD Ukraine - Ukrainian students and researchers can find on this TO BE VERIFIED
Manual verification
website the first orientation in Germany and, especially, in the German
 required through official
system of higher education and research. It also offers an overview of
website (link in main file)
various offers of academic assistance.

ACTIVE
Ukrainian Global University - The initiative was launched in partnership
with the Office of President of Ukraine by the consortium of leading
Ukrainian educational institutions and organizations: Kyiv School of
Economics, Ukraine Global Scholars, Ukrainian Catholic University,
Ukrainian Emerging Leaders Program at Stanford University, Professional
USA: academic support
Government Association of Ukraine, SET University, Kyiv Academic uglobal.university@gmail.
 confirmed (2025).
University. The initiative is also endorsed by the Ministry of Education com
Source: state.gov
and Science of Ukraine and the Embassy of Ukraine in the US.
Ukrainian Global University is a vast network of educational institutions,
that join efforts to rebuild Ukraine by supporting Ukrainian high school
and university students, scholars, tutors by providing them with
scholarships, fellowships and postgraduate programs.
ACTIVE USA: academic support
Harvard University provides a list of opportunities and resources for 
confirmed (2025).
scholars at risk. edu/resources-scholars-and-students
Source: state.gov
ACTIVE USA: academic support
New York Public Library 
confirmed (2025).
List of fellowships available at the New York Public Library nypl/fellowships-institutes
Source: state.gov
 ACTIVE
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign is working with two external USA: academic support
engagement/igi-series-global-
networks for displaced scholars, Scholars at Risk (NYU) and the IIE rstauff@illinois.edu confirmed (2025).
responsibilities/illinois-scholars-risk-
Scholars Rescue Fund. Source: state.gov
program
H-Ukraine promotes scholarly and intellectual discussion of Ukrainian ACTIVE
USA: academic support
studies and history. This network strives to make available recent
 help@mail.h-net.org. confirmed (2025).
scholarship, teaching resources, and other material related to the
Source: state.gov
academic study of Ukraine.
Dr. Mary Neuburger, ACTIVE
Chair of UT's Department
USA: academic support
The University of Texas at Austin collects resources for Ukrainian of Slavic and Eurasian
confirmed (2025).
scholars raine-conflict-resources.html Studies
Source: state.gov
burgerm@austin.utexas.
edu
 ACTIVE
USA threat/
ISPP International Society of Political Psychology: It is possible to USA: academic support

request funds for immediate emergency support for personal living needs info@ispp.org confirmed (2025).
content/uploads/2020/03/ISPP-EC-
(capped at 1000 USD). Source: state.gov
Stmt-on-
Ukraine_Feb2022_Signed.pdf

USA
ACTIVE
Keith David Watenpaugh
- Director of Article 26
Backpack™
Professor and Director of
Human Rights Studies
College of Letters and
Science USA: academic support
Safe storage of personal documents and educational credentials (530) 752-0470 confirmed (2025).
kwatenpaugh@ucdavis.e Source: state.gov
du
Nikki Grey Rutamu
Deputy Director of Article
26 Backpack™
ngreyrutamu@ucdavis.e
du
Institute of International Education Scholar Rescue Fund: ACTIVE
USA: academic support
IIE-SRF is prepared to work closely with its global network of partners to 
srf@iie.org confirmed (2025).
provide practical support to threatened and displaced scholars from srf-statement-on-ukraine/
Source: state.gov
Ukraine.
ACTIVE USA: academic support

Scholars at Risk Network focus on Ukraine scholarsatrisk@nyu.edu confirmed (2025).
solidarity-with-ukraine/
Source: state.gov
Special Student Relief (SSR): ACTIVE
Special Student Relief (SSR) is the suspension of certain regulatory sevp@ice.dhs.gov or for
requirements by the secretary of the U.S. Department of Homeland SEVIS technical USA: academic support

Security (DHS) for an F-1 student from parts of the world that are questions, email confirmed (2025).
ents/special-student-relief
experiencing emergent circumstances. Regulatory requirements that may SEVISHelpDesk@ice.dh Source: state.gov
be suspended or altered for an F-1 student include: duration of status, s.gov
full course of study and off-campus employment eligibility.
UK: university
Assocation for Slavic, East European, and Eurasian Studies (ASEEES)- Lynda Park ACTIVE
scholarships confirmed
RESOURCES TO HELP DISPLACED SCHOLARS FROM UKRAINE p-displaced-scholars-ukraine lypark@pitt.edu
active. Source:
ACTIVE UK: university
University of Bristol 
student- scholarships confirmed
The Student Funding Office can provide a range of support to students, march/ukraine-advice-march-
services@bristol.ac.uk active. Source:
including Emergency support payments; hardship funding. 2022.html
britishcouncil.org (2025)
Reach out to UCL Global ACTIVE
Engagement
[ciaran.moynihan@ucl.ac
United UK: university
 .uk; and
Kingdom UCL - London's Global University offers support for students in various scholarships confirmed
support-staff-and-students-affected- j.middleton@ucl.ac.uk]
forms. active. Source:
war-ukraine for any concerns about
britishcouncil.org (2025)
UCL staff in the area, to
provide additional
information.

United
Kingdom
ACTIVE UK: university
Student Action for Refugees (STAR) UK – database of initiatives for scholarships confirmed
info@star-network.org.uk
students at risk university/scholarships/ active. Source:
britishcouncil.org (2025)