SPECIAL
SECTION Chapter 8: Special Section The Caribbean

THE CARIBBEANDEFENCE
AND SECURITY
Creation of Defence and Security Forces
1750-1800 1801-1850 1851-1900 1901-1950 1951 onwards
1792 Trinidad and TTTobago 1832 Jamaica Constabulary 1853 Royal Grenada Police 1940 Dominica Police Force. 1960 Royal Saint Kitts and
Police Force Service. Force. Force. Nevis Police Force.
1834 Royal Saint Lucia Police 1896 Royal Saint Kitts and 1962 Jamaica Defence Force.
Force. Nevis Defence Force (1). 1962 Trinidad and TTTobago
Defence Force.
1835 Royal Barbados Police
Force. 1965 Guyyana Defence Force.
1839 Guyyana Police Force. 1967 Royal Antigua and
Barbuda Police Force.
11884400 RRooyyyaall BBaahhaammaass PPoolliiccee
1973 Belize Police Department.
FFoorrccee..
1975 National Army of
Suriname(2).
West Indies Regiment
1978 Belize Defence Force.
Createdin 1795,theWest InndiaRegimentwas aninnfantryuunitofthe BBritish Army recruiteedd and
generally stationed inthe Brittish coloniesofthe Caribbbean.Thhee Regimentddifferedfromsimilar fforcces 1979 Royal Saint Vincent and
recruitedinotherpartsofthee British Empire inthat itt formeddd anintegralpartofthe regular BBritiish The Grenadines Police
Army. Ascountries became inndependent, they started ccreatingg theirown deefenceforces, whichhhweere Force.
no longer part of the West Indddies Regiment. 1979 Barbados Defence Force.
1980 Royal Bahamas Defence
(1)Initiallyyy, a defenceforce was createdasa result ofa strike that security forces wereunable tocontrol. The regularforcce was Force.
ccrreeaatteedd iinn 11996677..
1981 Royal Antigua and
(2)In1975,theRepublicofSuriname,becameindependentfrom theNetherlandsandestablished itsown nationalarmed
forcesSurinaamseKrijgsmachi.In1980,theychangedtheir nameto NationaalLegeror NationalArmyyy,afterthe military Police Army Barbuda Defence Force.
government took over.
Regional Organizations
In the areas of defence and security, the countries of the Caribbean share a common agenda and take part in regional forums. Though they
originally tended towards integration (mainly economic), with time they have created new spaces of cooperation.
1990 2000
The non-Spanish speaking Caribbean is an area of vast heterogeneity that from the foundation of
common concerns has established cooperative spaces. The countries have constructed their political
systems and structures on the foundation of their processes of decolonization and maintain strong
links with countries such as Great Britain, United States, and Canada, both due to historical and
linguistic reasons. Strong links with China have also been developed. In terms of their relations with
other countries from the continent, such as the Latin Americans, shared concerns are highlighted in
mechanisms such as the Organization of American States, or the Conference of Defence Ministers of
the Americas and Conference of Ministers of Public Security, as well as in the growing relations with
Brazil, Colombia or Venezuela.
-oce
ro/dna
lacitiloP
ytiruces
dna
ecnefeD
noitarepooC
snoitazinagro
cimon
smsinahcem
seicnega
CARICOM. Caribbean Community
Economic integration and
cooperation among its members.

OECS. Organization of
Eastern Caribbean States
Sustainable development
through their strategic insertion
in the world economy.

ACCP. Association of
Caribbean Commissioners of
Police
Promote and facilitate
cooperation in the development
and implementation of
police strategies, systems and
procedures.

ACS. Association of Caribbean
States
Regional cooperation.

RSS. Regional Security System
Collective security system.

CDEMA. Caribbean Disaster
Emergency Management
Agency
Emergency management.

IMPACS. Implementation
Agency for Crime and
Security
Crime and security management
within the CARICOM framework.

SAM. Security Assistance
Mechanism
Territorial integrity, defence against
threats to security.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

secrroofff
yytttiiirruucceess
rrrooo/////dddna
ecnefed
foo
ssnnooiiissssiiiMMM
adubraB
dna augitnA
taht
dedivorp
,yyycnegreme ro raw fo esac nI
noitarepooC
adubraB
dna
e a c u r g o i F tn e A c n la e
y fe o
D R
asa
s i e r v a r w es
r l o la y h c s n e e c g ro re F m e e c il f o o P e e ta h t t s , r d e e p ra o l r c p e d a
fo
r e o s s / a d r c e n t n a sa i y s e c i c d n n e l a a g t r r s u e is t m s a A n e
d c n it a se
y m tir o u d c e n s i
yr y o tn t , i e g rr c i eeeee e n tttt rrr ee ee ddd ff vv ee nnn oo DD aaa ss
yti
s r e u c c r e o S f
ecn
se e c f r e o D f
.etatS
eht
fo ecnefed eht ni ecrof yratilim
redro
cilbup
adubraB
dna
augitnA
layoR ecroF eciloP
siveN dna sttiK tniaS
fo
noitaredeF
ecroF ecnefeD siveN dna
sttiK
tniaS
layoR
aicuL
tniaS
ecroF eciloP siveN dna
sttiK
tniaS
layoR
aicuL
tniaS layoR
samahaB
ehT
fo
htlaewnommoC
ecroF eciloP
ecroF
ecnefeD
samahaB
layoR
ecroF
eciloP
samahaB
layoR
sodabraB
ecroF
ecnefeD
sodabraB
ecroF
eciloP
sodabraB
layoR
acinimoD
fo
htlaewnommoC
aciamaJ
ecroF
eciloP
acinimoD
dna
tnecniV
tniaS
ecroF
ecnefeD aciamaJ
senidanerG
eht
dna tnecniV
tniaS layoR
ecroF yralubatsnoC
aciamaJ
ecroF
eciloP
senidanerG
ehT
ezileB
adanerG
ecroF
ecnefeD
ezileB
ecroF
eciloP
adanerG
layoR
tnemtrapeD
eciloP
ezileB
ogaboT
dna dadinirT fo cilbupeR
ehT
ecroF
ecnefeD
ogaboTTT dna dadinirTTT
noitalsigeL
lanoitaN
ecroF
eciloP
ogaboTTT dna dadinir
.7002
,tcA
)tnemdnemA(
ecnefeD
- .8991 ,tcA )tnemdnemA(
eciloP
-
adubraB
dna augitnA
.9791
,112
retpahC
,tcA ecnefeD
- .5691 ,502
retpahC
,tcA
eciloP
-
samahaB
.8991
,761
retpahC
,tcA
eciloP
- .3102 ,951
retpahC ,tcA )tnemdnema(
ecnefeD
-
sodabraB
.8791
,531
retpahC
,tcA ecnefeD
- .1591 ,831
retpahC
,tcA
eciloP
-
ezileB
anayuG
fo cilbupeR ehT
.0491 ,10:41
retpahC
,tcA
eciloP
-
acinimoD
ecroF
ecnefeD anayuG
.0991
adanerG
fo swaL
desiveR ,442 retpahC
,tcA
eciloP
ehT
-
adanerG
ecroF
eciloP anayuG
.6691
,10:51
retpahC
,tcA ecnefeD
- .7591 ,10:61
retpahC
,tcA
eciloP
-
anayuG
.2691
,tcA
ecnefeD ehT
- .5391 ,tcA ecroF
yralubatsnoC
ehT
-
aciamaJ
.ctA ecnefeD - .3002
,tcA
eciloP
ehT
-
siveN
dna
sttiK tniaS
emaniruS
fo cilbupeR
ehT
.4002 ,10:41
retpahC
,tcA
eciloP
-
aicuL tniaS
.tcA
eciloP
- senidanerG
eht
dna
tnecniV tniaS
,6991
,tcA
ymrA
lanoitaN
-
emaniruS
emaniruS
fo proC
eciloP
.6002
,10:51
retpahC
,tcA
ecivreS eciloP
- .2691 ,10:41 retpahC
,tcA
ecnefeD
-
ogaboT
dna dadinirT
Source:Defence (Amendment) Act, 2007 (Antigua and Barbuda). Defence Act, Chapter 211 (Bahamas). Defence Act, Chapter 159 (Barbados). Defence Act, Chapter 135
(Belize). Police Act, Chapter 14:01 (Dominica). Defence Act, Chapter 15:01 (Guyana). Ministry of National Security and The Defence Act (Jamaica). Defence Act (Saint Kitts
and Nevis). Police (Amendment) Act (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines). Website of the Ministry of Defence (Suriname). Defence Act, Chapter 14:01 (Trinidad and Tobago).
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 8: Special Section The Caribbean

Defence and Defence Force’s Mission
Security Forces Country Defe a n n c d e , T s e o rr v i e to re ry ignty Co O op rd e e ra r t a io n n d t S o e c in u t r e it r y nal A o s f s i e n s m t a a t e n u r c r g a e e l i n d n c i s t y h a a s e t n e e d r v / e o n r t
Antigua and Barbuda x x x
Bahamas x x x
Defence Defence/ Barbados x x x
Forces Police Forces
Belize x x x
In the event of war or other emergggencyyy,,, if ppproclaimed byyy the autorities, the Police Force
Dominica shall be a military force which may be employed for State defence
Antigua
Grenada In the event of war or other emergggencyyy,,, if ppproclaimed byyy the autorities, the Police Force
and Barbuda shall be a military force which may be employed for State defence
Guyana x x x
Jamaica x x x
Bahamas
Saint Kitts and Nevis x x x
Saint Lucia In the event of war or other emergggencyyy,,, if ppproclaimed byyy the autorities, the Police Force
shall be a military force which may be employed for State defence
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines In the event of war or other emergggencyyy,,, if ppproclaimed byyy the autorities, the Police Force
shall be a military force which may be employed for State defence
Barbados Trinidad and Tobago x x x
Sources: Defence (Amendment) Act, 2007 (Antigua and Barbuda). Defence Act, Chapter 211 (Bahamas). Defence Act,
Chapter 159 (Barbados). Defence Act, Chapter 135 (Belize). Police Act, Chapter 14:01 (Dominica). Defence Act, Chapter
15:01 (Guyana). Ministry of National Security and The Defence Act (Jamaica). Defence Act (Saint Kitts and Nevis). Defence
Act, Chapter 14:01 (Trinidad and Tobago).
Belize
GG: Governor General / PTE:President / PM: Prime Minister / DB: Defence
Legal functions related to defence: Board / CF:Chief of the Force / SC:Security Council / CP: Commissioner of
Police / CM: Military Command.
Commission in Command,
Country Commanded Directed by Controlled Through another country administration and Responsible for Troop exit Defence Board
Dominica formally by authorized by discipline Operations authorized by Members
A an n d ti g B u a a rbuda GG PM PM DB DB CF GG PM, d C e F s , i o g t n h a e t r e s d t . o be
PM, Minister of National
Bahamas GG PM Minister of National SC SC CF GG Security, others to be
Grenada Security designated.
Barbados GG PM -- -- DB CF GG --
Ministry of Defence and
Belize GG PM Ministry of Defence and Minister DB CF GG Immigration, CF, other
Immigration
ministers to be designated.
Guyana
Minister for National
Dominica PTE PM Security, Labor and -- CP CP -- --
Immigration
Grenada GG PM -- -- CP CP -- --
Jamaica
Guyana PTE PM -- PM DB CF P P a M rlia w m i e th n t P A T f E fa , i P rs M , C , M F, t in h i r s e t e e r o o th f e H r o s m to e
be designated.
Saint Kitts Jamaica GG PM Minist S e e r c o u f r N ity ational DB DB CF GG Sec M ur i i n ty is , t C e F r , o o f t h N e a r t i m on in a is l ter
to be designated.
and Nevis
Saint Kitts GG PM Minister of National -- DB CF -- --
and Nevis Security*
Minister for Home
Saint Lucia Saint Lucia GG PM Affairs and National -- CP CP -- --
Security
S th a e in G t r V e i n n a ce d n in t e a s nd GG PM Ministe S r e o cu f r N it ational -- CP CP -- --
Saint Vincent and PTE, President of the
the Grenadines National Assembly,
Vice-president, two
representatives of
Suriname PTE PTE of M D in e i f s e t n e c r e PTE CM CF PTE r t e h p e r e A s r e m n e ta d t i F v o e r c o e f s t , h a e
Ministry of Justice, a
member of the Council of
Suriname
Ministers, a representative
of the Police.
Minister of National
Trinidad T a r n in d i d To a b d ago PTE PM Minist S e e r c o u f r N ity ational -- DB CF PTE Secu t r o it y b , e C d F, e t s w ig o n a m te in d i . sters
and Tobago Source: Compilation based on the defence and police force laws of each country. In the case of Dominica, Police Act, Chapter
14:01, 1940, reference is made only to the responsibility for the Police Force.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

Strategic Relations and International Assistance
Members of organizations and regional systems:
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Dominica
Grenada
Guyana
Jamaica
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Source: Compila-
tion based on the
Suriname
Conference closing
TTTrinidad and TTTobago statements.
(1) Observer members.
The bond between ttthhhhhhee CCCaarriibbbbbbean and
Latin American countriieeess iiiss sshhhhooown Bahhaaamas
through their participatttttiiiooonnnn iinn dddiiiffffferent
regional and hemispheric iiinnnsssttaanncceeesss and
cooperation treaties and agreemmeennntts,
such as:
CCuubbbbaa
DDDooommmiinnican Republic
•Memorandum of Mexico
understanding to combat international Belize JJaaammmaaaiiiccaa
drug trafficking (Cuba - Bahamas, 1996).
• Cooperation agreement against Guateemmmala
drug-trafficking (Cuba - Barbados, 1993). Barbadoos
• Agreement on prevention, control, and Trinidad anndd
repression of consumption of stupefacient and TTTobago
psychotropic substances (VVVenezuela - Barbados, 1987).
Venezuela
Other examples of agreements on narcotics
and drug-trafficking:
•• Jamaica-Dominican Republic
•• TTTrinidad andTobago-VVVenezuela. Suriname
•• Belize-Mexico.
y
•• Belize-Guatemala.
Brazil
•• Suriname-Brazil.
•• Suriname-VVVenezuela.
Source: Compilation based on information provided by the public information services of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Ministries of Defence from the dif-
ferent countries.
Joint Exercises
Cooperation among states is also manifested through the following joint exercises:
Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Argentina, Belize, Brazil, Bahamas, Belize, Brazil, Chile, Anguila, Antigua and Barbuda, Caribbean, Mexico, Brazil, Guyana, Puerto
Dominica, Dominican Repub- Canada, Chile, Colombia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, British United States and Rico, Antigua and
lic, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Virgin Islands Costa Rica, Dominica, Canada Barbuda, Suriname.
Jamaica, Nicaragua, Saint Kitts Ecuador, El Salvador, France, Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Guatemala, Holland, Nicaragua, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana,
T V o i b n S a c u g e r n o in t , U a U a m n n n i d i t e t e , e t d h d T r e S i K n t G i a i n d t r g a e e d d s n o a a m d n i d n a e n s d , Per M u in , e U c x o i n c n i o t j e u , d P n a c S n t t io a a t m n e s a w , a it P n h a d r C a U F g r A u u C a g y . u , ay, Uruguay, T U rin n i i d te a d d S a t n a d te T s o . bago, and N t N h e H i e c v a o is G r n , a r d S g e u a n u i r a n a a d , t s P , i L n a J u e a n c s m i a , a m S a , u i S c a r a a , i i n , S n a M a t m i V n o e t i n n , K t c T s i e t r e t i n r n s r t i a a d a t n a , n d d d
and Tobago, Turks and Caicos Islands
and United States
Tradewinds Panamax Allied Command Forces Humanitarian Allied Caribe Wave 11 CARIBEX
Forces Forces (FAHUM) and Lantex 11
Maritime interdiction Ensure the defence of the Competency in military Response to natural disasters Simulation of Training
Panama Canal capabilities. in the region Tsunami Alert
Anglophone Caribbean Other countries and dependencies in the region Central America, Mexico, Haiti, Dominican Republic South America
United Kingdom European countries with dependencies United States Canada
Source: Compilation based on information provided by the US Southern Command, the White Paper on National Defence, 2012 and the website of the Regional
Security System and the Government of Trinidad and Tobago.
fo ecnerefnoC sretsiniM
esnefeD
saciremA
ehT
fo
)AMDC(
fo ecnerefnoC seimrA
naciremA
naciremA-rrretnI secnerefnoC
lavaN fo metsyS
noitarepooC eht
gnomA
riA
naciremA
)AAFOCIS(
s secroF
naciremA
htuoS
licnuoC
ecnefeD RUSANU
ecnaillA
nairaviloB
fo selpoeP
eht
rof
aciremA
ruO
)ABLA(
naciremA-rrretnI orpiceR
fo ytaerT
ecnatsissA
lac
)RAIT(
In the CDMA process, the Caribbean States
show special interest
for non-traditional security aspects
(natural disasters,
arms trafffficking and
(1) drug-trafficking,
(1) (1) among others).
Their closing
statements and
speeches include the
(1) (1) small island states of
(1) (1) the Caribbean.
(1)
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 8: Special Section The Caribbean

Presence through Embassies
Which Caribbean countries have Embassies in Latin American countries? Which Caribbean countries do Latin American countries send ambassadors to?
Argentina: Trinidad and Tobago Argentina: Guyana / Jamaica / Trinidad and Tobago
Brazil: Dominica / Guyana / Jamaica / Trinidad and Tobago Brazil: Antigua and Barbuda / Bahamas / Barbados / Belize / Dominica
/ Grenada / Guyana / Jamaica / Saint Kitts and Nevis / Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines / Saint Lucia / Trinidad and Tobago
Chile: Trinidad and Tobago
Chile: Jamaica / Trinidad and Tobago
Colombia: Jamaica / Trinidad and Tobago
Colombia:Jamaica / Trinidad and Tobago
Cuba:Antigua and Barbuda / Bahamas / Barbados / Belize / Dominica /
Grenada / Guyana / Jamaica / Saint Kitts and Nevis / Saint Lucía / Cuba: Antigua and Barbuda / Bahamas / Barbados / Belize / Dominica /
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines / Suriname / Trinidad and Tobago Grenada / Guyana / Jamaica / Saint Kitts and Nevis / Saint Lucia /
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines / Suriname / Trinidad and Tobago
Dominican Republic:Belize / Jamaica
Dominican Republic:Jamaica / Saint Lucia
El Salvador: Belize / Trinidad and Tobago
El Salvador: Belize / Trinidad and Tobago
Guatemala:Belize
Guatemala:Belize / Trinidad and Tobago
Honduras:Belize
Honduras:Belize
Mexico:Belize / Jamaica / Trinidad and Tobago
Mexico: Belize / Guyana / Jamaica / Saint Lucia
Venezuela:Grenada / Guyana / Jamaica / Trinidad and Tobago
Nicaragua:Belize / Jamaica
• All of the Caribbean countries considered in this Special Section have an Embassy in Cuba.
• Out of the Latin American countries considered in this publication, Cuba is the country with most Paraguay:Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
embassies in the Caribbean, followed by Brazil and Venezuela.
Source: Website of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs of Antigua and Barbuda, Argen- Venezuela: Antigua and Barbuda / Barbados / Belize / Dominica
tina, Chile, Barbados, Belize, Cuba, Guyana, Jamaica, Saint Vincent and the Gren- / Guyana / Jamaica / Saint Kitts and Nevis
adines, Trinidad and Tobago and Suriname; of the Government of Bahamas, Grenada / Saint Vincent and the Grenadines / Trinidad and Tobago
and Saint Lucia.
Participation in regional organizations
Anglophone Caribbean and Suriname Other dependencies and countries in the region Latin America
Antigua and Barbuda Anguilla Colombia
Bahamas French Antilles Costa Rica
Barbados Dutch Antilless Cuba
Belize Aruba (1) Dominican Republic
Dominica Bermuda El Salvador
Grenada Curacao Guatemala
Guyana Cayman Islands Haiti
Jamaica Turks and Caicos Islands (1) Honduras
Saint Kitts and Nevis Virgin Islands Mexico
Saint Lucia British Virgin Islands Nicaragua
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Montserrat Panama
Suriname Saint Martin Venezuela
Trinidad and Tobago (1) Aruba, Curacao, the Netherlands Antilles and theTTTurksandCaicos Islands, along withFrance on behalf
ofFrench Guyana, Guadeloupe andMartinique,areassociatemembersof theACS. As such, they have the
right to participate and vote on issues directly affecting them and within their constitutional competence.
CARICOM ACS OECS ACCP
Anguilla, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Mexico, Puerto Rico and VVVenezuela have observer status in
IMPACS RSS SAM CDEMA CARICOM.
1. Take the profi t out of crime, target criminal assets and protect the 7. Strengthen the effectiveness of criminal investigation through modern
Following fi nancial system. technologies and scientifi c techniques.
consultations 2. Crime Prevention - Addressing the causes of crime and insecurity and 8. Strengthen CARICOM’s resilience to cybercrime.
made by IMPACS, increase public awareness of the key risks. 9. Pursue functional cooperative security engagements to tackle and
in 2013 the manage shared risks and threats.
Heads of State of 3. Establishing appropriate legal instruments while ratifying existing
CARICOM members agreements. 10. Strengthen the justice sector.
adopted a new 4. Increase trans-border intelligence and information sharing. 11. Modernize and enhance correctional services and institutions management.
Regional Security 12. Strengthen mechanisms against human traffi cking.
Strategy, which 5. Enhance law enforcement and security capabilities and strengthen re-
plants the followingg gional security systems. 13. Improving resilience to natural and man-made disasters.
security pillars: 6. Enhance maritime and airspace awareness, strengthen CARICOM bor- 14. Promote resilient critical infrastructure management and safety at ma-
ders including contiguous land borders. jor events
Source: Compilation based on information provided by the aforementioned institutions and their websites.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

Implementation Agency for Crime and Security (IMPACS)
Seat IMPACS:
It is the operational center of CARICOM’s crime and security management structure and main organization respon- Port of Spain,
sible for the implementation of the agenda against crime and security. Among its functions, it daily reports to the Trinidad and Tobago.
Council of Ministers responsible for these matters. It is focused on projects related to security affairs management
anndd iinnvveessstigation.
XXII Conference of the Heads Establishment of a Regional Task Force to examine the main causes of crime and make
of Government of CARICOM recommendations to cope with interrelated problems, including traffi cking of drugs and
(Nassau, Bahamas). fi re arms, and terrorism.
CARIPASS Program Regional Integrated Ballistic Regional Border
Implementation of a regional Information Network (RIBIN) Security Training
electronic identifi cation system. Support to CARICOM members with (CARICAD)
In 2007, the initiative to create a no forensic technology, in order to Training and education on border
regional travel card was conceived. Its track the movement of weapons to security for offi cers from the
MMMaaaiiinnn installation began in 2010. organized crime activity. Caribbean region.
pprroojjeeccttss
Regional Forensic Science Human Resource Counter Traffi cking Strategy
Capacity Building Development Strategy
It is devoted to articulate a framework
Dialogues and cooperation mechanisms A working group was established policy to increase regional coordination
among the directors of forensic to promote the development of a and information and intelligence
science laboratorios from the different human resource development strategy sharing among the CARICOM
countries. among the Member States. The key Member States and their
components are law enforcement, international partners
intelligence, customs and immigration,
and forensics.
Advanced Passenger Joint Interdiction Training
Information System
(APIS)
It is an automatic system imple-
mented in 2007 for maritime and
aviation operators that permits the
strengthening of border security in
The Minister
the region through the provision
of Foreign
of information to law enforcement Affairs of
personnel from CARICOM Mem- the Bahamas
ber States regarding passengers signs different
and carriers prior to their depar- agreements
ture and/or arrival. The exchange related to
of information such as the pass- IMPACS at the
18th Meeting
port numbers of passengers and
of the Council
carrier information, including crew,
for Foreign and
is carried out through an electronic Community
system between the airline operat- Relations
ing system and that of the country (COFCOR),
of destination. Such information in St. Lucia.
must comply with a specifi c for- Photo:
mat. Efforts are currently being IMPACS.
made to expand the program to
include information regarding the
cargo carried by planes and ships.
Photo: IMPACS..
Joint Regional
Communications Centre Regional Intelligence
- Mechanisms for border Fusion Centre
security.
- Advanced information system - Shares information.
for passengers and cargo.
- Joint analysis.
- Regional listings.
Source: Compilation based on public information from IMPACS.

Establishment of the Agency’s formal organization.
XXVI Conference of the Heads
By means of an inter-governmental agreement, the IMPACS was created in .
of Government of CARICOM
The IMPACS worked in a limited way until , when it started to operate as
(Gros Islet, Saint Lucia).
it is known today.
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 8: Special Section The Caribbean

Regional Security System (RSS)
The Regional Security System (RSS) was created in 1996. It is a collective security system whereby members agreed that any armed attack against
any of them, whether by a third State or other sources, represents an armed attack against all of them. Security forces are comprised of military
and police personnel.
Mission: To ensure the stability and well-being of its Member States Permanent headquarters: Bridgetown, Barbados.
through mutual cooperation, in order to maximize regional security in
Troops:contributed by each Member State (combination of po-
preserving the social and economic development of people.
lice and military personnel).
Functions: Promote cooperation in the prevention and interdiction of
traffi cking of illegal narcotic drugs, national emergencies, search and res- SAM Secretariat established by CARICOM.
cue, immigration control, fi sheries protection, customs and excise control,
Coordinates disaster response on behalf of CDEMA, through
maritime policing duties, natural and other disasters, pollution control,
CDRU (Caribbean Disaster Relief Unit).
combating threats to national security, prevention of smuggling, and pro-
tection of off-shore installations and exclusive economic zones.
The Regional Security System has a cooperation agreement with
INTERPOL, including consultations and information exchanges.
BBaacckkggoouunndd::
1982: Memorandum of understanding among 4 members of 1983: Saint Kitts 1985: Grenada
the OECS (Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, St. Lucia and St. and Nevis endorsed the 1996: Regional
Vincent and the Grenadines) and Barbados to provide mutual endorsed the memorandum. Security System
assistance when required. memorandum.
Strategic Plan 2010-2020. Objectives: RSS TTTraining Institute
1. Expand the role of the RSS. It is a virtualcenter that trainsqualified instruc-
2. Strengthen the integrity of security institutions. tors, develops standardized training materials
and promotes leadership skillsamong participat-
3. Increase the contribution of the RSS to regional and international security.
ing security forces.
4. Improve border security.
Between and , Canada
5. Reduce crime and identify and dismantle organized criminal networks.
contributed US$1,200,000 in support to this
6. Improve response and levels of activity in the face of natural and man-made project for the professionalization of personnel.
disasters.
7. Develop and implement a public relations strategy for the RSS.
Member States 2009 - Saint Lucia: 2010 – Earthquake, Haiti: 1995 – Hurricanes Luis
should take the Firefighters from the RSS Operación Restore and Marilyn, Antigua,
necessary measures were deployed. Comfort. St Kitts and Nevis.
to facilitate the
passage across their
territories of service 2004 – Hurricane Ivan, 1998 – Hurricane Georges:
personnel, Grenada. St Kitts and Nevis.
equipment, annddd
materials to bbbeee uuussseeeddd
in assistttaaannnccceee... Turks and Caicos 1989 – Hurricane Hugo,
Antigua, St Kitts
and Nevis.
SSSeeenior commanders Cuba Dominican Rep.
of contributinggCCCC aayymmaann Islands
countries maintain Puerto Vírgin Islands
command of their Rico
personnel during AAAAAAnntigua
operations. HHaiitii BBBBBaarbuda
Jamaica
Saint Kitts and Nevis GGuadalupe
Supporting the population during 2015 – Tropical Storm Montserrat DDDDDDooooomminica
the tropical storm Erika.
Erika and Hurricane MMMMartinique
Danny: support to Saint Lucia
CDEMA. Saint Vincent Barbados
Antilles
Grenada
Tobago
2014 – Tropical Storm Trinidad
Bertha: support to
CDEMA.
Photo: GIS Dominica, published on October 2, 2015.
Source:Compilation based on the Treaty Establishing the Regional Security System (1996/03/05), information provided by the Permanent Secretary of the RSS
(Central Enlace Offi ce, Barbados) and its website.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

Security Assistance Mechanism
2006 (*)
Treaty to establish a security assistance mechanism, creating a link be-
tween different actors (the RSS and non-member States, the English-
speaking Caribbean and Suriname).
Objectives:
Anglophone
Caribbean - Disaster response.
(Antigua and Regional - Regional resource mobilization and deployment for national and re-
Barbuda, Bahamas, gional crisis management and fi ght against crime.
Barbados, Belize, Suriname Security
Dominica, Grenada, System (RSS) - Combat and elimination of threats to national and regional security.
Guyana, Jamaica,
Saint Lucia, Saint - Preservation of the territorial integrity of participating States.
Kitts and Nevis, A Joint Coordination and Strategic Planning Committee, comprised
Saint Vicent and
of the Regional Security System (RSS) Coordinator and the Security
the Grenadines and
Trinidad and Tobago). Chiefs of the Member States, has been established for its imple-
mentation. Where defence forces exist, both their commander and
the commander of the police force are members of the Committee.
* Signing by the various countries occurred gradually since then and continued through 2007.
Source:Compilation based on the Treaty Establishing the Regional Security System (1996/03/05), information provided by the Permanent Secretary of the RSS
(Central Liason Offi ce, Barbados) and its website.
Association of Caribbean Commissioners of Police (ACCP)
The creation of the Association reaches back to the Conference of Regional Police Commissioners in 1972, in the Port of Spain, Trinidad and
Tobago, where it was agreed to meet annually in order to discuss questions of interest to the police forces of the region. In 1987 in Castries, Saint
Lucia, the Association was offi cially established.
Itsmission is to be the regional organization for the promotion and facilitation of: Values
• Cooperation in the development and implementation of police strate- ✓ Commitment to a quality service.
gies, systems and procedures. ✓ Collaboration and cooperation.
• The development of technical and professional skills aamong ✓ Ethiccaal and professional standards.
police offi cers. ✓ Links with the community.
✓ RRespect for human rights.
• Proactive measures to prevent crime and improve relaaa- ✓✓ Gender perspective.
tions between the police and the community.
Secretariat
Executive Committee
Based in Barbados
Composed of 5 since 1999. Responsible
members from for planning and
different countries. coordinating ACCP
activities.
ACCP and Motorola
Scholarship Program
Since 2007, this program has provided assistance ttttoo tthhee
children of police offi cers so that they are able to fi nish their
university studies in engineering, human resources, criminol- 31st Annual General Meeting, Suriname, 2016-09-01
ogy and forensic science. Those selected are able to continue The Meeting brought together 24 countries and its slogan wasBorder security, a key
their education in Caribbean, British, American and Cana- element for citizen and regional security.
dian institutions.
80% of the 2015 scholarships were granted to female
offi cers.
Project Triage There are approxi-
mately 40,000 po-
lice offi cers serving in the ACCP countries. One of the most
relevant projects is the Project Triage, as a high number of
deaths in the line of duty is provoked by the lack of emergency
materials for primary, immediate atention in the case of being
attacked. The Project provides trauma kits to police offi cers
and is supported by donations only.
2016 meeting in Suriname.
Photo:Royal Bahamas Police Force.
Source: ACCP, Royal Bahamas Police Force and Suriname Police Force.
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 8: Special Section The Caribbean

Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA)
Created in 1991 by decision of the Heads of Government of CARICOM Member State, CDEMA is an inter-governmental body. Initially created as
CDERA (Caribbean Disaster Emergency Response Agency), in it adopted the concept of emergency management, thus expand-
ing their scope of action.
Seat CDEMA: 25 years supporting emergency
Barbados management in the Caribbean.
National Organizations
• National Offi ce of Disaster Services (NODS)
Antigua and Barbuda
• Ministry of Health and Social Transformation
• National Emergency Management Agency.
Bahamas
• Prime Minister’s Offi ce.
• Emergency Management Department
Barbados
• Ministry of Home Affairs.
• National Emergency Management Organization (NEMO).
Belize • Ministry of Transport, Communications and National Emergency
Management.
• Disaster Management Offi ce.
Dominica
• Ministry of National Security, Labour and Immigration.
• National Disaster Management Association Agency (NADMA).
Grenada
• Prime Minister’s Offi ce.
• Civil Defence Commission.
Guyana
• President’s Offi ce
• ffi ce of Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Management
Jamaica (ODPEM). Secretariat
• Prime Minister’s Offi ce. Headquarters: Barbados.
• National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA). -Acts as a coordination body.
Saint Kitts and Nevis • Ministry of Foreign Affairs, National Security, Labour, Immigration
and Social Security.
• National Emergency Management Organisation.
Saint Lucia • Prime Minister’s Offi ce. Board of Directors
Saint Vincent and • National Emergency Management Organisation. -Brings together coordinators from each
the Grenadines • Ministry of National Security, Maritime and Aerial Development. national organization.
Suriname • National Coordination Center for Disaster Relief. -Provides recommendations.
• Offi ce of Disaster Preparedness and Management.
Trinidad and Tobago
• Ministry of National Security.
Council
Note:CDEMA Members include Anguilla (Department of Disaster Management), Turks and
Caicos Islands (Department of Disaster Management and Emergencies), British Virgin Islands Highest political body.
(Department of Disaster Management), Haiti (Directorate of Civil Protection) and Montserrat
Made up of the Heads of Government
(Disaster Management Coordination Agency).
of participating states.
Training to the CARICOM Disaster Reviews the Agency’s work.
Relief Unit (CDRU)
In the framework of the regional mechanism, CDEMA trains several units. 32
TheRegional Response Mecha-
participants completed the training for the CDRU in 2016, including pólice
offi cers, members of the military and fi re services. nism (RRM) is an agreement for National
coordinating disaster response Disaster
between Member States and re- Plans
gional and international agencies. Regional
It ensures a rapid response and ef- Coordination
fective management of resources. Plan
Response
(agreements, acts, memoran- Specialized
d
st
u
a
m
nd
s
ar
o
d
f
i ze
u
d
n d
w
e
o
r
r
s
k
ta
p
n
l
d
a
i
n
n
s
g
)
and RRM Plans
ECDG*
Operations Regional
Deposits
CDRU Operations
CARICOM’s disaster response unit runs disaster response and
humanitarian operations in the name of CDEMA. Formed by
the police and military forces that make up the RSS, it acts at
the request of CDEMA and is prepared to provide assistance
in maintaining law and order, in the management and distri- * Eastern
PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooootttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA bution of vital goods, and to deploy immediately. Caribbean
Donor Group.
Source:Compilation based on the information provided by the Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA) and its website.
Execution
Advise
Political
Functions:
- Mobilizing and coordinating humanitarian relief.
- Mitigating or eliminating, as much as possible, the
consequences of disasters impacting an affected par-
ticipating State.
- Providing immediate and coordinated response by
means of humanitarian assistance to an emergency in
any participating State.
- Securing, coordinating and channelling comprehen-
sive and reliable information on disasters affecting any
participating State to the pertinent governmental and
non-governmental organizations.
- Promoting the adoption of loss-reduction policies and
practices at national and regional levels.
- Coordinating the establishment, promotion and
maintenance of adequate response capabilities.
Structure

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

Antigua and Barbuda
Offi cial name: Antigua and Barbuda
Minister of Legal Affairs, Public Safety and Labour:Steadroy Benjamin Population: 93,000 inhabitants
Parliamentary Monarchy since 1981 Territorial Extension: 440 km2
Member of the Commonwealth. GDP (US$): 1,332,000,000
Responsible for the coun- National Legislation
Minister of Legal Affairs, try’s defence and other
Public Safety and Labour tasks established by the • Police (Amendment) Act, 1998.
Defence Committee.
• Defence (Amendment) Act, 2007.
Royal Antigua and Barrbuda
Defence Force
TThhe Force actively
collaborates with
the Offi ce of
Personnel: 250
National Drug
Control and Money
Regular Forces Laundering Policy,
especially through
its Intelligence
Unit and the Coast
1st Batallion Coast Guard Guard. One of
the biggest joint
operations carried
Service out in 2014 was
and Support the capture of a
Unit sailboat carrying
marijuana (with an
approximate value
Reserve Forces of 10 million Euros).
The Antigua & Barbuda National Cadet Corps is an organization of young
people who volunteered to be cadets during their high school studies. It
receives private support as well as from the Government and is under the
command of a senior offi cer of the Defence Forces. Its main objective is to
train young people in the military fi eld, but also to promote certain attitudes
such as discipline, loyalty, leadership and citizenship.
Royal Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force anniversary. Photo: ABDF.
Total cadets number approximately 180 young men and women.
Sources:Public information services, ABDF and National Cadet Corps;Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe 2015, CEPAL; IMF, World Economic Outlook
Database, .
Bahamas
National Legislation
Offi cial name: Commonwealth of The Bahamas • Police Force Act, Chapter 205, 1965.
Minister of National Security: Bernard J. Nottage Poppulation: 393,000 inhabitants
• Defence Act, Chapter 211, 1979.
Parliamentary Monarchy since 1973. Territorial Extension: 13,880 km2
Member of the Commonwealth. GDP (US$): 8,917,000,000
Ministry of National Security Its mission is to defend the sov-
ereignty of the Commonwealth
Royal Bahamas of The Bahamas, provide assist-
Defence Force ance to law and order enforce-
ment and carry out humanitar-
ian tasks together with their
local and international partners.
Personnel: 1,378
Regular Forces Sandy Bottom
Project
This large investment
project, with a total
Squadron Air Wing
cost of US$ 232
Department
million, will drive
the Force capability
to 1,900 personnel 43 marines graduated in 2016. Photo: Royal Bahamas Defence Force.
in three years
Recruits
and will enhance 54 23
the operational men and women
Reserve Forces capabilities. It includes entered the Bahamas Defence Force WOMEN
the acquisition of as candidates in women 2016. 30%
patrol crafts, the
Naval offi cers taking theJunior
development of port MEN
Naval Offi cers course in the infrastracture and 70%
Britanian Royal Navy College of
the establishment of
Great Britain for 9 months.
military bases.
Sources:Royal Bahamas Defence Force website; House of Assembly, 2013-14 Mid-Year Budget Review; Commonwealth of the Bahamas, An Agenda for a Modern
Bahamas, Draft Estimates of Revenue & Expenditure 2016-2017; Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe 2015, CEPAL; FMI, World Economic Outlook
Database, .
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 8: Special Section The Caribbean

Barbados
Offi cial name: Barbados
National Legislation
Prime Minister: Freundel Stuart Population:285,000 inhabitants
Parliamentary Monarchy since 1966 Territorial Extension: 430 km2 • Defence (amendment) Act, Chapter 159, 2013.
Member of the Commonwealth. GDP (US$): 4,498,000.000 • Police Act, Chapter 167, 1998
Prime Minister’s Offi ce
Independence
Barbados Defence Force Parade
Personnel: 626
Regular Forces
Its mission is defend the
country from external
invasions or attacks, pa-
1st Batallion Coast Guard Air Wing trol the coastal zone to
prevent contraband and
other illegal activities
and assist other agencies
in the case of natural or
manmade disasters.por
el hombre.
Reserve Forces
The Barbados Defence Force administers
the National Sports Development
Proggram. In 2016 the national budgget
allocated approximately US$ 680,000 to
this program.
Photo: Barbados Government Information Service – GIS – C. Pitt.
Sources:Barbados Government Information Service-GIS; Barbados Defence Force; The Barbados Parliament, Barbados Estimates 2016-2017;Anuario Estadístico de
América Latina y el Caribe 2015, CEPAL; IMF, World Economic Outlook Database, .
Belize
Offi cial name: Belize
National Legislation
Minister of Defence: John Saldivar Population: 367,000 inhabitants
Parliamentary Monarchy since 1981 Territorial Extension: 22,970 km2 • Police Act, Chapter 138, 1951.
Member of the Commonwealth. GDP (US$):1,807,000,000 • Defence Act, Chapter 135, 1978.
It is responsible for the
Minister of Defence
defence of Belize, for
bringing support to the
Belize Defence Force civilian authorities in
maintaining order, and
Personnel: 1,537 other functions de-
fi ned by the Governor
General.
Regular Forces
1st and 2nd Air Wing National
Batallion Special Boat Coast Guard (1)
Unit
Service and
Support
Batallion Acquisitions
In 2016 and for
Volunteer the fi rst time in
Batallion history Belize will
acquire 200 patrol PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhooooooooooooooooooooooooooooootttttttttttttttttttttttttooooooooooooooooo::::::::::: BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeellllllllliiiiiiiiiiiiizzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeffffffffffffffffffffeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeennnnnnnnnnnnnnnncccccccccccccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee FFFFFFFFFFFFFFoooooooooooooooooooooooooooorrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrccccccccccccccccccccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee....
boats, at a cost of
Reserve Forces US$ 10.2 million. Handing over of two helicopters from Taiwan, .
(1) Independent from the Defence Forces.
Belize – Mexico Institutional changes - Ministry of Defence
Joint foot, land vehicle and maritime patrols are carried out along the Rio Hondo (boundary In 2016 the former Ministry of National Security has been divided
between these countries) and quarterly meetings are held between the authorities of the Belize into a Ministry of Defence and a Ministry of Police.
Defence Force and the Army of Mexico in order to coordinate these border control activities.
Sources: Public information services of the Government of Belize; Belize Defence Force; Defence Act, Chapter 135; Budget Debate 2016-2017;Anuario Estadístico
de América Latina y el Caribe 2015, CEPAL; IMF, World Economic Outlook Database, .

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

Dominica
National Legislation
• Police Act, Chapter 14:01, 1940.
Offi cial name: Commonwealth of Dominica
Minister of Justice, Immigration and National Security: Rayburn Blackmoore Population: 73,000 inhabitants
Parliamentary Monarchy since 1978 Territorial Extension: 750 km2
Member of the Commonwealth. GDP (US$): 521,000,000
Minister of Justice, Immigration National Emergency Planning
and National Security Organisation - NEPO
The Ministry runs the Offi ce of Disaster
Dominica Police Force Management, which takes part of the
National Emergency Planning Organi-
sation. The Dominica Police Force is
Personnel: 444 also part of this system.
Regular Forces
Departments Marine La Plaine, new police station PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhoooooooooooooooooooooooooooootttttttttttttttttttttttttooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo::::::::::::::::::: GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGIIIIIIIIIIIIISSSSSSSS DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooommmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmiiiiiiiiiiinnnnnnnnniiiiiiiiccccccccccccccccaaaaaaaaaaa...
Unit
Members of the Police Force
conducting transit operations
Reserve Forces
Police Service Commission
Created under the Dominica Constitu-
New members of the Police Force
tion Order, it has the power to appoint
39 additional members will be in- and remove offi cials in the Police Force
corporated into the Police Force by below the rank of Deputy Chief of Po-
. lice, and to exercise disciplinary control.
Disaster relief and assistance
In 2015 the Government of Dominica spent between 5 and 6 million US$ dollars to
assist victims of Tropical Storm Erika. The Police Force actively collaborated during
the operations. Photo: GGGGGGGooooooooovvvvvvveeeeeeerrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeennnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnttttttttttttttttt IIIIIIIIIIInnnnnnnnfffffffffoooooooooooooooooooooorrrrrrrrmmmmmmaattttiiiioooonn SSeeeeerrrviiccceee -- GGIISSS DDDDDDoommmmiiiinnnniiiiiccccccccaaaaaa.
Sources:Dominica Government Information Service-GIS; Commonwealth of Dominica Police Force website; Public and Police Service Commissions;Anuario Estadís-
tico de América Latina y el Caribe2015, CEPAL; IMF, World Economic Outlook Database, .
Grenada
Offi cial name: Grenada National Legislation
Prime Minister: Keith Mitchell* Population:107,000 inhabitants • The Police Act, Chapter 244, Revised
Parliamentary Monarchy since 1974. Territorial Extension: 340 km2 Laws of Grenada 1990.
Member of the Commonwealth. GDP (US$): 1,000,000,000
*Acting as Minister for National Security, Public Administration, Disaster Management, Home Affairs, Information & Implementation.
Drugs seized by
Ministry of National
Police Force (in kg.)
Security1
2,000
Royal Grenada Police Force
1,500
1,000
Personnel: 836

Regular Forces

PPPPhhhhoootttoooo::: RRRRooooyyyyaaalll GGGGGGrrrreeeeenadda PPollicee FFFFFFooorrccee.
Departments Coast
Guard 2013 2014 2015 Police anniversary, parade during a sports celebration.
In 2014, the Police Force received responsibilities in case of disaster. In addition to designing, updating and evaluating
the continuity of operations and response plans and procedures, their specifi c responsibilities are:
Police Force Coast Guard
Reserve Forces • Search and rescue.
• Protection of public property and the prevention of vandalism and
looting. • Law enforcement and maritime security.
• Traffi c control towards and away from hospitals and emergency areas. • Control of pollution, such as substances
1 Ministry of National Security, Public • Crowd control. spilled into the sea from ships or from the
Administration, Disaster Management, • Evacuation procedures. land.
Home Affairs, Information &
• Security of basic services and vulnerable points. • National security along the coast.
Implementation.
• Coordination of the telecommunications system. • Assist in evacuations when requested
Sources: Government Information Service; Royal Grenada Police Force; Grenada Drug Epidemiology Network (GRENDEN), Annual Report 2015; Anuario Estadístico
de América Latina y el Caribe 2015, CEPAL; IMF, World Economic Outlook Database, .
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 8: Special Section The Caribbean

Guyana
Offi cial name: The Republic of Guyana
President: David A. Granger Population: 771,000 inhabitants National Legislation
Semi-presidential republic since 1966. Territorial Extension: 214,970 km2 • Police Act, Chapter 16:01, 1957.
Member of the Commonwealth. GDP (US$): 3,335,000,000 • Defence Act, Chapter 15:01, 1966.
• Status of Visiting Police Force Act, 2008.
Its mission is to defend the territorial integrity of
Offi ce of the President
Guyana, assist the civilian power in law and order
Guyana Defence Force enforcement when required and to support the
country’s economic development.
Personnel: 3,800
Guyana’s People’s Militia
Regular Forces
In 2016 the militia, which was previously
subsumed into the reserve infantry battalion,
1st and 2nd Coast Air Corps has been re-established. It will be deployed
Infantry Guard throughout the territory and will comprise
Batallion around 1,500 members.
(Reserve)
Education
Service and
Support Guyana Defence Force’s Schools have
Batallion trained many offi cers and soldiers from
other Caribbean Commonwealth countries.
Engineers Since 1981, Guyana has provided training to
Battalion future offi cers at Colonel Ulric Pilgrim Offi cer
Cadet School, who are also trained at the
Artillery Royal Military Academy (Sandhurst, United PPPPPPPPPPPPhhhhhhhhhhooooooooooooootttttttttttttooooooooooooo::::::::: GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGuuuuuuuuuuuuuuyyyyyyyyyyaaaaaaannnnnnnnaaaaaaaaa DDDDDDDDDDeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeffffffffffffffeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeennnnnnnnnnnnnnccccccccccceeeeeeeeeee FFFFFFFFFFooooooooooorrrrrrrrrccccccccccceeeeeeeee.....
Company Kingdom), the Royal Naval Academy (Dart-
mouth, United Kingdom) and in Brazil. Independence Day celebrations.
Special
Forces Guyana-Brazil Military Intelligence Exchange Guyana is a member
Squadron of UNASUR’s South
The XX meeting was held in 2016, under the theme “Continued
American Defence
Reserve Forces friendship and partnership towards enhanced border security”. Council.
Sources:Defence Act Chapter 15:01; Guyana Information Agency – GINA; Guyana Defence Force website; Address by H. E. Brigadier David Granger President of the
Cooperative Republic of Guyana at The Annual Guyana Defence Force Offi cers’ Conference, March 3 2016; Organizational Analysis of the Guyana Defence Force;
Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe2015, CEPAL; IMF, World Economic Outlook Database, .
Jamaica
Offi cial name: Jamaica
National Legislation
Minister of National Security: Robert Montague Population:2,803,000 inhabitants
• The Constabulary Force Act, 1935.
Parliamentary Monarchy since 1962 Territorial Extension: 10,990 km2
Member of the Commonwealth. GDP (US$): 14,057,000,000 • The Defence Act, 1962.
Jamaica - Canada
Canada takes a particular inter- The 1st and 2nd Battalions The Combat The mission of the
Ministry of National Security est in Jamaica because more than are tasked with conducting Support Batallion Service and Support
300,000 Jamaicans live in their infantry operations. They provides training in Battalion is to provide
Jamaica Defence Force country. For this reason, coop- assist the police in order to assure and timely combat service
eration with the Jamaican Defence maintaining law and order facilitate the the support to the JDF. It is
Personnel: 3,199 Forces is of strategic importance in and in conducting joint operational responsible for the
the fra mework of the Canadian internal security operations. preparation of the JDF. administration and
Regular Forces project “Capacity Development in logistics of the JDF
the Caribbean”. The institution- (health, transport,
finance,
alization of training programs at
1st and Coast Air wing the Centers of Excellence built in FFaallmmoouutthh co m m a m in u t n e i n c a a n tio ce n , , e v t e c h .) i . cle
2nd Batallion Guard c c o o o n p so e l r id at a io te n t w he it h c Mo Ja uo m nnt a tre i y c g a oa a Bs i a m ya s r t e o - DDiiscovery Bay
Ocho Rios
3rd Batallion gional leader and strengthen the
(Reserve) Caribbean re NN g ee i ggg o rr n iill al security system.
Service and Its mission is to provide PPPoort Antonio
R B E S e n a u g g t p a i i m p n ll o e i e o r e n t n r t t d n t c h h o i a s e e u t s e n u m S t a r i t d l y t a i h t ’ e s t a r e e r i a n y a n t a t c e d s n a r / d e p o s / a a r o t g c s e r i . a t li y i m t n h t s i o e - t T se h J p D r e r v m o F i o C c v i t p e i o s o d e s s a e r i a t s o a o c m t t n h i G h o a ie i e n r s u v i l a t p a t e i l o m r t i d t h e s ' e s BBBlllaaaccckkk RRRiiivvveeerrr Mand MM e aa vi yy l l PP e eenn Sp TTTT a oooo n wwww is nnn h n KKKKKKiinnggssttoonn
objectives. MMoorraannt Bay
Combat AAlllliiggaattoorr PPoonndd PPPooorrrrrttttttttt EEEEEEEssssssqqqqqquuuuuiiiiivvvvvvveeeeelll Rocy Point
support
Batallion
The 3rd Battalion's
mission is to provide
Reserve Forces i c n m o h a m u t u i n o m e t n d r a y i n b a a t u d e n il e d d s v e i e n t r o l v g o i c p p t e h r m o r t o m e o n u o t t g h t . h e e m TT t hh o ili e m t o a a EE c b r i h n s y je s i g e e c io v t ii n n i e v n g e e i t n e i s h s e r e o t e RR o f o r i e t p n p h g e g r e o ii r m a s v J u t D id e i p o F e n . p n tt o a ''s l r t c TT o hh ii n nn ee t ff s i aa n u rroo nn u p lll tt o ee p r u y o o s r m ff t d tt i t r l hh o i u t e a g t r h AA y e e ii r o r a p p WW d o e i l c r i i c a a n e t t g i i o o a i n n n s s d t o , o , p p h e s r e u o r a a p v d t i p d i o o e n r t s .
Sources: Jamaica Defence Force; Press Clippings;Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribee2015, CEPAL; IMF, World Economic Outlook Database, .

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

Saint Kitts and Nevis
Offi cial name: Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis
National Legislation
Prime Minister: Timothy Harris Population: 56,000 inhabitants
• The Police Act, 2003
Parliamentary Monarchy since 1983 Territorial Extension: 260 km2
Member of the Commonwealth. GDP (US$): 945,000,000 • Defence Act,10, 1997
Minister of Foreigggn Affairs,
National Security, Labour,
Immigration and Social Security
Royal Saint Kitts and
Nevis Defence Force
Personnel: 480
Regular Forces
Company Coast
Guard
Service and
Support
Platform
PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhoooooooooooooooooooooooootttttttttttttttttttttttoooooooooooooo:::::::::::: SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNIIIIIIIIIISSSSSSSSSSSSSSS.....
Incorporation of new recruits.
Basic Course Defence Council
The Training Basic Course for members of the military lasts A National Crimes Commission and the Saint Kitts
for fi ve months, comprising issues like patrolling, map and Nevis Defence Council have been approved by
reading and land navigation, fi eld craft and tactics, physical the Cabinet of Ministers and will be activated dur-
Reserve Forces training, internal security, drills, and use of fi rearms. ing 2016.
Sources:Government of St. Kitts and Nevis Information Service - SKNIS; 2016 Budget Address; Estimates for the Year 2016, Vols. I and II, Government Expenditure
and Revenue Plan;Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe 2015, CEPAL; IMF, World Economic Outlook Database, .
Saint Lucia
National Legislation
• Police Act, Chapter 14:01, 2001.
Offi cial name: Saint Lucia
Minister of Home Affairs, Justice and National Security:Hermangild Francis Population: 186,000 inhabitants
Parliamentary Monarchy since 1979 Territorial Extension: 620 km2
Member of the Commonwealth. GDP (US$): 1,425,000,000
Ministry of Justice, Internal
Affairs and Security
The Police is deployedd iinn
Royal Saint Lucia
two division across thheee
Police Force territory of SSaaiinntt LLuuuccciiiaaaa::
North and SSoouutthhh
Personnel: 1,270
Castries
Regular Forces
Anse La Raye
Departments Marine
Police Dennery
PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooottttttttttttttttttttttttttoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo::::::::::::::::: RRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRooooooooooooooooooooooooyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaallllllllllllllllllllll SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnntttttttttttttttttttttttttttt LLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuccccccccccccccccccccccciiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooolllllllllllllllllllllllllllliiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiicccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFoooooooooooooooooooooooooooorrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee.............
Female agents parading during a celebration.
Soufriere
Strategic objectives of the Royal Saint Lucia Police Force
Micoud • Establish a community-based policing program in cooperation
with all communities.
• Implement a crime prevention strategy to improve arrest rates
Choiseul and reduce crime.
• Increase professional standards of investigations into complaints
and internal reviews.
Vieux Fort
• Strengthen internal support services.
Reserve Forces
• Establish an effective strategy against traffi cking.
Sources:Royal Saint Lucia Police Force, public information pages; Police Act, Chapter 14:01;Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribee2015, CEPAL; IMF, World Economic
Outlook Database, .
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 8: Special Section The Caribbean

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Offi cial name: Saint Vincent and the Grenadines National Legislation
Prime Minister: Ralph Gonsalves* Population: 110,000 inhabitants • Police Act 280.
Parliamentary Monarchy since 1962 Territorial Extension: 390 km2
Member of the Commonwealth. GDP (US$):784,000,000
* Acting as Minister of National Security, Air and Sea Port Development.
Ministry of National Security and Force distribution
Aerial and Maritime Development
1,000

Royal Saint Vincent and

the Grenadines Police Force

Personnel: 1,026

Regular Forces

91 99

Rapid
Coast
Response
Unit Guard Police G C u o a a r s d t Se F r i v re ice Polic P e h s o t t a o t : i o R n o y a a t l S G t. e V o in r c g e e n t t o a w nd n . the Grenadines Police Force.
Special
Fire
Services Service National Economic and Social Development Plan (2013-2025)
Unit
The Coast Guard
• Improve and sustain initiatives to reduce crime.
conducts training • Collaborate, fi rst with members of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, and with CARICOM
with Barbados, members.
Antigua and • Solidify initiatives to improve border security
Barbuda, United • Improve mechanisms for exchange of information and intelligence between forces at the national,
States and the regional and global levels.
United Kingdom • Amend legislation pertaining to national security, including essential services.
Reserve Forces • Collaborate with the international community on issues of transnational and international security.
Sources: Ministry of National Security and Royal St.Vincent and the Grenadines Police Force public information; Budget Address 2016; National Economic and Social
Development Plan (2013-2025);Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe 2015, CEPAL; IMF, World Economic Outlook Database, .
Suriname
Offi cial name: Republiek van Suriname
Minister of Defence: Ronni Benschop Population: 548,000 inhabitants National Legislation
Territorial Extension: 163,820 km2
• National Army Act, 1996.
Republic with a presidential system since 1975. GDP (US$): 4,336,000,000
Ministry of Defence The mission or the National Army is to:
• Defend the territorial integrity of Suriname.
National Army of Suriname • Assist the civil power in maintaining law and order.
• Contribute to the country’s economic development.
Personnel: 2,000
Regular Forces
The Republic of Suriname became in-
dependent in 1975. At that time, the
defence of the new republic was trans-
1s I t n a fa n n d t r 2 y nd S N e a rv v i a ce l Air Corps ferred from the Royal Netherlands Army
Battalion to the newly-formed armed forces: the
Surinaamse Krijgsmacht. The military
Special government that seized power in 1980
Forces after the coup changed their name to
Company
Nationaal Leger, or National Army, as
they are known today.
Internal security is mainly a responsibility
of the police forces. However, the armed
forces can be involved in domestic issues
when required. Moreover, they contrib-
ute to the development of tasks in other
countries. PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooottttttttttttttttttttttttttttttooooooooooooooooooooooooo:::::::::::::: MMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnniiiiiiiiiiiiiisssssssssssssssssssssssssstttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrryyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy ooooooooooooooooooooooooooooofffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeffffffffffffffffffffffffffffeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeennnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnncccccccccccccccccccccccccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee...
Reserve Forces Ceremony held after a military exercise, 2016.
Sources: Public information from the Government of Suriname and the Ministry of Defence; National Army Law;Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe
2015, CEPAL; IMF, World Economic Outlook Database, .

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

Trinidad and Tobago
Offi cial name: The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
Minister of National Security: Edmund Dillon
Parliamentary Republic since 1962.
Member of the Commonwealth
National Legislation
Ministry of National Security • Defence Act, Chapter 14:01, 1962.
Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force • Police Service Act, Chapter 15:01, 2006.
Personnel: 5,044
Regular Forces
3rd Engineer-
ing Battalion
Reserve Forces (189)
Composition of the Defence Force
Air Guard: 8% Reserves: 4% Regiment: 59%
Coast Guard: 29%
Charlotteville
Tobago
Roxborough
Plymouth Moriah
Scarborough
Canaan Tobago Airport
Caribbean Sea Toco Galera Point
Venezuela
Maracas
Dragons Maraval Saint
Mouths Port-of-Spain Sa J n oseph Tunapuna Arima
Juan Arouca
Caroni Guaico
P (P ia o r r c t o -o A f- i S rp p o ai r n t ) Sangre
Grande
Chaguanas
Gulf of Paria Tabaquite
Guatuaro Point
San Fernando Rio Claro Pierreville
Brighton La Brea Pr
T
in
o
c
w
e
n
s Tableland Ortoire
Debe Trinidad
Point Fortin Siparia Penal Basse Guayaguayare
Terre Galeota Point
Fullarton Moruga
San Francique
Serpents
Mouth
Atlántic Ocean
Venezuela
389.2
Population: 1.365.000 inhabitants
Territorial Extension:5,130 km2
GDP (US$):23,816,000,000
Its mission is to defend
Trinidad and Tobago from
external and internal threats,
assure national interests and
provide support to a state anndd
non-state agencies that seekkkk
national development.
Functions
1st and 2nd • Cooperate with and assist the civil authorities in maintaining law
Battalion and order.
Coast • Assist civil authorities in times of crisis or disaster.
Air Guard
Guard • Perform ceremonial functions on behalf of the State. (398)
(1.474) • Provide search and rescue services in accordance with national
requirements and other international agreements.
Service and • Assist in the prevention of traffi cking in narcotics and other illicit goods.
Support
Battalion • Monitor the safety of maritime traffi c in national waters.
• Assist in the development of the national community.
The Military-Led Academic Training (MiLAT)
It is a two year residential programme for young men who have not
completed their secondary school education, organized by the De-
fence Force on behalf of the Government. It recruits 120 persons
annually and provides life skills training and classes under the supervi-
sion of military instructors and civilian teachers. Instruction is received
in areas such as mathematics, English language, physical education,
computer studies, biology, music, accounting, social studies, basic
business, foot drill, fi rst aid, land navigation, survival training. They also participate in community service, environmental maintenance, culinary
skills, gardening, etc.
Source: Ministry of National Security of Trinidad and Tobago; Defence Act, Chapter 15:01; Trini-
dad and Tobago Citizen Security Programme; IMF, World Economic Outlook Database; Anuario
Emancipation Day Parade, 2016
Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe, 2015, CEPAL.
TTTTAAAAALLLLLLiiiiiMMMMMMMM
:::::::oooooooooooootttttttttttooooooooooohhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPP
The Minister of National
Security inspects the
Regiment’s parade, 2016
ytiruceS
llanoitaN
ffo
yrtsiniM
:otohP
The Trinidad and Tobago Coast Guard is theRegional
Maritime Rescue Coordinating Centre, with responsibility
for 62,000 square nautical miles.
eeeeeeeellllllllaaaaaaaa
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 8: Special Section The Caribbean

Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force
Men REGIMENT Women
87 Officers 8
2,543 Enlisted NCOs 319
The framework for the incorporation 20 Cadet 6
of women into the TTDF is established
on the principle of equal opportunity.
Women have the option to join any Men COAST GUARD Women
Branch/military occupational 80 Officers 17
specialization in the TTDF, and also
have equal access to education, 1,176 Enlisted NCOs 184
training and promotional
19 Cadet 3
opportunities, including Command and
Staff appointments. Additionally, base
pay and pension entitlements are Men AIR GUARD Women
similar for male and female members. 39 Officers 16
Men Women 2263 Enlisted NCOs 79
1 Cadets 0
Men RESERVES Women
4 Officers 4
129 Enlisted NCOs 52
Officers Enlisted NCOs Cadets
Education and training Number of persons recruited
The TTDF conducts its own professional education and training courses, along
with providing opportunities for selected individuals at local and overseas Men Women
establishments. The Force also trains and educates its junior and mid-level
Officers locally and –in a similar way- it complements these efforts with participa-
tions at local universities and local or foreign tertiary/technical and vocational
institutions.
3,000
Men Women
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000

Officer Cadets Enlistees
Scholarships offered by other countries include: the US Army War College; the Caribbean Junior Command and Staff College, Jamaica; the George C. Marshall Europe-
an Center for Security Studies; the Naval War College; the National Defence University; the William J. Perry Center for Hemispheric Defence Studies; the US Command
and General Staff College and the Air Force NCO Academy; the Canadian Forces College and the Canadian Forces Leadership and Recruit School; the Chinese National
Defence University; the Nanjing Army Command College; the Dalian Naval Academy and the Academy of Special Operations, China; and the HMS Collingwood, U.K.
Source: Ministry of National Security.
stedaC
seetsilnE
Women 14% Men 86%
16.00% 13.36% 18.37%
84.00% 86.64% 81.63%

Number of persons who applied, 2015

One out
of 3 people

who apply
for cadet is
a woman. 100

Officer Cadets Oter Ranks
Quantity of persons who applied and were recruited, 2015
Persons recruited 12
In 2015, the number of officer school candidates
Persons who applied 1,553 exceeded the recruitment requirements by 12,841%,
while the number of enlisted/NCO school candidates
was 760% higher than expected for recruitment.
Persons recruited 407
3,504
Persons who applied

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

Organisational structure of the Ministry of National Security
Minister of National Security National Security Council
Minister in the Ministry of
National Security
Permanent Secretary Parliamentary
(Accounting Offi cer) Permanent Secretary Secretary
Deputy Permanent Secretary
To T b r S a i ( n T e g i T r o d v P a i P S c d o e ) l & ic e S S A t e ( r g S r a e v S t n i e A c c g e ) y i s c Tob T a ri g ( n F T o o i T d r D D a c e F e d ) f e & n ce T T o r S b i ( e n T a r i T g v d F o i a c S d e F ) s i & re Im D m iv ig is r i a o t n ion P M re a p O D n a f i a fi r s e g a c d s e e t n m e O e r e s f n s t & F To o T b r r c a i e n g i D o d i a v C d i a s d & io e n t Tob Tr a ( S i T g n e T o i r d P v P a R ic r d S e i ) s & o ns F S C o c e r ie e n n n tr c s e e ic Adm G i e n n is e t r r a a l tion
(ODPM)
Activities performed by the Force in 2015 and 2016
Community support Support to public security
The TTDF has a special focus in youth development and The TTDF conducts operations in support of 8,200
s m p a o n rt a s g . e A s p o a t r h t e f r r m om aj o t r h e yo M ut i h li t d a e ry v - e L l e o d p m A e c n ad t e p m ro i g c ra Tr m ai m ni e n : g t , h i e t l e a r w at io en n f a o l r d ce u m tie e s n . t M as e m pa b r e t r s o f o i f t s t h ro e u T t T in R e p o a p r- - 8,000
Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC). ticipate in foot, mobile and static patrols in 7,800
high crime areas as part of the Inter Agency
This programme recruits and trains 2,400 young persons Task Force (IATF), which comprises members 7,600
annually. Training includes a life skills programme, a variety of the Defence and the Police Forces. 7,400
of employment skills training, and literacy training.
The Force also participates in inter-agency 7,200
The Force is also engaged in developing the national com- mobile patrols in coastal areas in support 7,000
munity through sports. Its fl agship programme is thePhysi- of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service’s
cal Training Instructors Course, in partnership with the border security efforts. Provides support for 6,800
University of the West Indies, St. Augustine campus (Trini- planned police operations, namely, cordon 6,600
dad and Tobago). The course provides TTDF/foreign military and search, raids, and vehicle check points. 6,400 personnel and civilians with diploma level certifi cation. This
course is also actively involved in assisting national sport- - In 2015: 6,793 patrols with the Police Service 6,200
ing bodies to prepare athletes for regional and international and participated in 89 planned operations. 6,000
sporting competitions. The Department also supports sport- - As at June 30, 2016 patrols conducted 2015 1st semester 2016
ing activities in schools, communities and assists private and stood at7,995 and 91 planned operations During the fi rst half of 2016, the police force conducted
public enterprises as part of its outreach programme. were undertaken. 18% more patrols than in 2015 as a whole.
The Coast Guard was also involved in search and rescue, humanitarian assistance and other maritime security missions such as counter narcotics and counter terrorism operations.
Offi ce of Disaster Management and Preparedness
Created in 2005, is a division
within the Ministry of National Executive Director
Security whose mission is to
build capacity for disaster risk
management and adaptation Vice Executive Director
to climate change in conjunc-
tion with other agencies, and
to coordinate responses and
reconstruction operations in or- Mitigation, Preparation and Public Information Administration and Project
Planning and Response Unit and Community Finance Unit Management Unit
der to protect persons, the envi- Investigations Unit Education
ronment and the economy, and
Extension Unit
ensure a nation resilient from
disasters.
Assistance in emergencies and crises
The Air Guard (TTAG) conducts fi refi ghting operations through
The Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force (TTDF) routinely participates in fl ood relief opera- the use of itsbambibuckets (a system involving the use of water
tions with the 1st Engineer Battalion of the Trinidad and Tobago Regiment (TTR) being the buckets suspended from helicopters) in support of the Trinidad
lead for Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief operations. and Tobago Fire Service’s fi refi ghting efforts
During 2015 and 2016:
- 12,960 personnel hours were spent on the conduction of damage assessments. - 41 and 13 bambi bucket operations were conducted in 2015
- 51,840 on standby duties. and 2016 respectively.
- The TTDF also provided assistance for the Energy Sector Security Initiative (ESSI), which is
- It also supported the humanitarian assistance and disaster
a private-public partnership between security forces in Trinidad and Tobago and the United
relief operations conducted in Dominica in the aftermath of
States, with the objective of providing protection for critical energy infrastructure from for-
Tropical Storm Erika.
eign or local threats.
Source: Ministry of National Security.
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD