The work of military forces in
COVID-19
the context of
crisis
Nº1 | 
Photo: Argentine Army
Photo: SEDENA, Mexico Photo: Uruguayan Army
Photo: Argentine Army Photo: Uruguayan Army

The work of military forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis
• As a result of the rampant spread of COVID-19, the security areas of the different coun-
tries across the region have been called upon to assist in subsidiary tasks to support pan-
demic-related efforts. A great deal of those activities are devoted to providing assistance to
the health-care system and taking resources to sectors in need.
Against the backdrop of an unprecedented situation, on the whole the States have passed
rules of exception, quarantines and social distancing –in some cases mandatory. As we fol-
low the development of this crisis day by day, it is important to have organized information
on such thematic areas to contribute to present and future thoughts about the role played
by defense and security forces in time of crisis.
How are the military forces contributing?
Referred to as secondary or subsidiary missions; while national defense is the main mission
of the armed forces under constitutional mandate and/or legal statutes, subsidiary missions
are those whereby the state makes use of installed capacities in an armed force to place
them at the service of the community. Assistance in case of disasters and actions in sup-
port of public order have been part of the armed forces’ ongoing activities across the re-
gion. In this particular crisis, all of the countries through their defense establishments have
maximized the contribution the armed forces can make in case of an emergency. A great
source of information in this instance is found in social media networks from the various
armed forces. A study of official Twitter accounts during the period from March 10 to April
10 reveals –through their lens—what the armed forces are contributing in each country, as
shown below:
Activities published by the Armed Forces of Latin American countries
in relation to COVID 19, by area (in %)*
7%
Others
Public order / Borders
30%
43%
Assistance to
health-care system
20%
Food and / or drinking
water distribution
*Based on tweets posted in official sites. Costa Rica and Panama: Public Force and Aeronaval Service respectively. Period considered: March 10th-April 10th.

The work of military forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis
Activities published, by country and by area (in %)*
Period considered: Assistance to Food and / or drinking Public order / borders Others
March 10th-April 10th. health-care system water distribution
Argentina 49% 39% 2% 10%
Bolivia 59% 2% 34% 5%
Brazil 61% 10% 3% 26%
Chile 55% 10% 32% 3%
Colombia 28% 45% 23% 4%
Costa Rica 30% 6% 64% 0%
Dominican Republic 57% 8% 33% 2%
Ecuador 53% 18% 27% 2%
El Salvador 14% 16% 70% 0%
Guatemala 22% 28% 50% 0%
Honduras 46% 37% 17% 0%
Mexico** 76% 0% 0% 24%
Panama 19% 19% 58% 4%
Paraguay 48% 24% 24% 4%
Peru 48% 6% 33% 13%
Uruguay 32% 13% 32% 23%
Venezuela 32% 16% 44% 8%
**In the case of Mexico the DN-III Plan includes distribution of food and security and surveillance of affected areas.
Assistance to health-care system: disinfection of locations with high circulation of people; prevention campaigns; deploying
and setting up of medical tents, temporary hospitals and quarantine centers; transport and distribution of medicines, biomedical
equipment and medical supply; production of personal protection equipment; among others.
Food and drinking water distribution: delivery of rations, food boxes and purified water to communities in need.
Public order/Borders: maritime, air and land patrols; border controls.
Other: repatriation of nationals; disinfection of military facilities; coordination meetings; among others.
Source: Official Twitter accounts of the armies, navies and air forces of: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica (Public Force), Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Panama (Aeronaval Service), Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela. Period considered: March 10th-April 10th.
Regarding the work effectively performed by the armed forces within the context of the crisis,
a few of the more relevant examples have been compiled in the map below.

The work of military forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis
The work of defence forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis *
References: A he s a s l i t s h ta -c n a c r e e t s o y p st u e b m lic . F w o a o te d r a d n i d st r / ib o u r t d io ri n n . king Public order / Borders. Others.
Dominican Republic
Guatemala
- 575 troops assigned to support health
- Support to the transport of COVID-19 test kits. institutions.
- Support to the construction of the Temporary Hospital in Quetzaltenango. - Distribution of medicines.
- Food distribution. - Food rations distribution.
- Border protection. Honduras - Implementation of patrols jointly with the
- Patrolling to enforce compliance with measures adopted. Police.
- Making face masks for military personnel. - Transportation and distribution of - Manufacturing of surgical gowns and
ventilators, suction tubes, biomedical protective face masks.
Mexico equipment and medical supplies.
- Opening of a temporary isolation center
- Implementation of DN-III-E Plan. in the Olympic Village and of hospitals Venezuela
- Repatriation of Mexican nationals and foreigners. and shelters as isolation centers.
- Armed forces hospitals made available for use in - Transportation of patients. - Food distribution.
the emergency. - Distribution of food supplies and food - Border protection.
- Contracting of health-care professionals and rations. - Patrolling to ensure compliance with
qualified workforce to support the National Health - Drinking water distribution. measures adopted.
System. - Disinfection of markets and - Production of surgical masks and
supermarkets. protective face masks.
- Border controls. - Disinfection of locations with high
- Implementation of control actions and circulation of people.
El Salvador patrolling.
Colombia
- Adapting spaces to
make them fit for
quarantine centers. - Set up of field hospitals, tactical tents and
adaptation of sites for hospital care.
- Food and drinking
water distribution to - Transportation of medicines and medical
people in quarantine equipment.
centers. - Food distribution.
- Border protection and - Patrolling to enforce compliance with lockdown
detection of blind spots and curfew.
in the country. - Checkpoints, protection to shopping malls,
- Implementation of dissemination of prevention information.
health controls and - Making face masks.
vehicle checks. Costa Rica - Border protection.
-
s
D
u
is
rr
in
o
f
u
e
n
c
d
ti
i
o
n
n
g
o
q
f
u
a
a
r
r
e
a
a
n
s
t ine (Public Force) Brazil
centers. - Food and clothes distribution.
- Border protection. - Setting up emergency tents,
- Patrolling. hand-washing stations and emergency
hospitals.
- Repatriation of nationals.
Panama (Aeronaval Service) - Transporting medical material, vaccines,
respirators and ventilators.
- Distribution of food supplies and bags. - Food, liquid soap and alcohol-based hand
- Drinking water distribution. sanitizer distribution.
- Disinfection of facilities. - Drinking water distribution.
- Implementation of prevention protocols for vessels. - Border protection.
- Implementation of land and air naval patrolling. - Support to influenza vaccination
campaigns.
- Blood donation campaign.
- Disinfection of locations with high
Ecuador circulation of people.
- Production of alcohol-based hand sanitizer
- Repatriation of nationals. Peru and cloroquine.
- Transportation of essential goods, - Production of personal protection
medical supplies and food kits. - Set up of a mobile hospital at the equipment: cloth face masks, disposable
- Set up of emergency tents and international airport for the care of people hats and gowns.
emergency hospitals. entering the country.
- Distribution of food kits and - Transfer of medical supplies, personal
rations. protection equipment and COVID-19 test Paraguay
- Drinking water distribution. samples.
- w Bo it r h d e th r e p P ro o t l e ic c e ti o a n n d in C c u o s o to rd m in s a . tion - P pr r o o t d e u c c ti t o io n n e o q f u f i a p c m e e m nt a . sks and personal - - T P r r a e n p s a p ra o t r i t o u n n o it f s v m en a u d e e s a t v o a m ila a b k l e e t f h o e r m th e fi t p f o o p r u p la a t t i i o e n n . t
- c P o a m tro p l l l i i a n n g c a e n w d i t c h h m ec e k a s s t u o r e e s n sure - D cl i e s a tr n i i b n u g t i i o te n m o s f . food kits and personal - i D s i o s l i a n t f i e o c n t . ion of venues.
implemented. - Drinking water distribution. - Distribution of food kits to families in educational
- Production of alcohol-based hand sanitizer. institutions.
- Border protection. - Production of personal protection kits.
- Patrolling and checks to ensure compliance - Border controls.
with measures implemented. - Patrolling.
- Repatriation of nationals.
Bolivia Uruguay
- Building disinfection chambers. - Set up of tents in hospital venues and military resources and personnel
- Transportation and distribution of medicines, bio-security equipment and COVID-19 test samples. made available to the health system.
- Food distribution. - Support of military drivers to enable doctors to visit households.
- Patrolling in cities and setting up fixed checkpoints. - Food distribution.
- Border protection through patrolling with the Police. - Patrolling for urging people to stay at home.
- Production of surgical masks and protective face masks. - Repatriation of nationals and foreigners.
- Repatriation of French tourists. - Border controls.
- Production of alcohol-based hand sanitizer. - Making face masks.
Chile
- Opening and set up of modular hospitals, temporary hospitals, emergency tents and field modules. Argentina
- Transportation and distribution of various medical supplies, medicines and mechanical ventilators.
- Transportation of kits for COVID-19 tests. - Production of alcohol-based hand sanitizers.
- Transportation and distribution of beds and cots for medical centers. - Production of face masks, sheets for surgical centers and disposable gowns.
- Distribution of rations and food boxes. - Repatriation of nationals.
- Patrolling, airport control, health control and health barriers. - Distribution of food, rations and bags of supplies.
- Border controls. - Water purification and distribution to communities in need.
- Support to vaccination centers. - Deploying and setting up a medical hospital.
- Disinfection of areas with high circulation. - Transfer and distribution of medical devices and supplies.
- Production of face masks. - Support and participation in influenza vaccine campaigns.
*Source: Information updated as of April 10, 2020. Compilation based on daily social media posts (Twitter) of the armed forces from the different countries in the period from March 10 to April 10, 2020.

The work of military forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis
Which measures have countries adopted?
The activities of all state sectors and the community are governed by different rules of excep-
tion implemented by the countries. Some of these measures are common to almost all coun-
tries, such as the mandatory social distancing order. The following graph shows how the dec-
laration of health emergency precedes the different actions. It is precisely in the declaration
of state of emergency that the cohort of cases is divided, although there is a slight tendency
to place the COVID-19 crisis in the framework of this type of legal mechanism.
Measures adopted by countries with regard to COVID-19
State of emergency / of siege /
Health emergency Mandatory social distancing
of exception
FEBRUARY
3 Brazil
5 Chile
10 Honduras
MARCH
5 Guatemala
11 Peru / Ecuador
12 Colombia / Argentina
13 Panama / Venezuela Uruguay
14 El Salvador
15 Peru Peru
16 Costa Rica / Ecuador Paraguay
17 Colombia Ecuador / Venezuela
18 Bolivia
19 Dominican Republic / Chile Haiti Chile / Haiti /
Dominican Republic
20 Brazil Argentina / Honduras
21 El Salvador
22 Bolivia / Guatemala
25 Panama / Colombia
29 Paraguay
30 Mexico Mexico
APRIL
3 Costa Rica
Source: Decrees 260, 297 and 325 (Argentina); Supreme Decrees 4196, 4199 and 4200 (Bolivia); Portaria 188 and Act 13.979 and its modifications (Brazil); Government of Chile web-
site; Decrees 417, 457 and 531 (Colombia); Executive Decrees 42227 y 42285 (Costa Rica); Decrees 134 and 135 (Dominican Republic); Decision 00126 and Decree 1017 (Ecuador);
Decrees 593 and 594 and Executive Decree 12 (El Salvador); Government Decrees 5, 6 and 9 (Guatemala); PHO (Haiti); Executive Decree 005 (Honduras); DOF March 30 (Mexico);
Executive Decrees 489, 490, 499 and 507, Cabinet Resolution 11, and Statement 27 (Panama); Decree 3456 (Paraguay); Supreme Decrees 044 and 008 (Peru); Decree 93 (Uruguay);
Decree 4160 (Venezuela). Year: 2020 unless otherwise indicated.

The work of military forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis
The state of exception as a statutory figure in the different countries emerges from consti-
tutional texts. For Latin American countries, the different versions of state of exception, its
causes and mechanics are as follows:
Standing regulations on States of Exception
Country Name Cause Participation of the Legislative Power
Declared by the Congress and by the President if the latter were not
Internal commotion in session (with a subsequent report).
Argentina State of siege
Foreign attack Requires the approval of the Senate.
Danger for State security
External threat
Bolivia State of exception It requires the approval of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly.
Internal unrest
Natural disaster
Grave or imminent institutional instability
State of defense Natural calamities of great proportions
Grave commotion of national impact
Brazil Situations which prove the inefficiency of the Requires the approval of the Congress.
state of defense
State of siege Declaration of the state of war
Response to an armed foreign attack
State of assembly External war
Requiere acuerdo del Congreso.
Internal war
State of siege
Grave internal commotion
The President shall inform the Congress of the measures adopted.
Chile State of catastrophe Public calamity Requires the approval of the Congress in case they are extended
for more than a year.
Grave disturbance of the public order The President shall inform the Congress of the measures adopted.
State of emergency Grave damage to national security Requires the approval of the Congress in case they are extended for
more than fifteen days.
Requires the approval of the Senate except when it is necessary to
State of external war External war
repel aggression.
The declaration of a third consecutive period requires the approval
State of internal commotion Grave disturbance of the public order
Colombia of the Senate.
Situations which disturb or seriously threat to The Congress shall examine the causes and measures which deter-
State of emergency imminently disturb the economic, social and eco- mined it and those adopted, and shall expressly rule on the conve-
logical order or which constitute public calamity nience and timeliness of such measures.
Requires the vote of no less than two thirds of the total members of
the Assembly. During recesses of the Assembly, the President must
Costa Rica Suspension of fundamental In case of evident public need decree the suspension of rights and guarantees. The decree suspen-
rights and guarantees
ding guarantees is equivalent, ipso facto, to a call to session for the
Assembly, which must meet within forty-eight hours.
Imminent natural disasters or catastrophes
Cuba State of emergency Circumstances affecting internal order, national The National Assembly of People’s Power must be informed.
security or stability
Cases in which national sovereignty or Congress shall have the power to declare it and the Executive Branch
State of national defense territorial integrity are under grave or imminent shall have the power to request its declaration.
danger due to armed foreign attacks
Dominican State of internal commotion Grave disturbance of public order causing an
immediate threat to institutional stability
Republic
Events disturbing or seriously threatening to
Requires Congress approval.
disturb the country’s economic, social and
State of emergency
environmental order or which constitute a
public catastrophe.
Case of aggression
International or internal armed conflict
Ecuador State of exception Grave internal disturbance The National Assembly, which has the authority to revoke the decree
at any time, must be informed.
Public disaster
Natural disaster

The work of military forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis
Standing regulations on States of Exception
Country Name Cause Participation of the Legislative Power
War
Invasion of the territory
Rebellion It is decreed by the Legislative or the Executive Power.
El Salvador Exception regime Sedition In case of the suspension of certain guarantees, the approval of the
Catastrophe Legislative Power is required.
Epidemics or general calamity
Grave disturbances of the public order
State of prevention Invasion of the territory
State of alarm Grave disturbance of the peace
Guatemala State of public calamity The Congress can ratify, modify or dismiss it.
State of siege Activities against the security of the State
State of war Public calamity
Civil war The Assembly must convene with immediate effect to make an announ-
Haiti State of siege
Foreign invasion1 cement regarding the measure. It must be renewed every 15 days.
Invasion of the national territory
The Congress can ratify, modify or dismiss the decree sent by the
Honduras State of siege Grave disturbance of the peace
President within thirty days.
Epidemics or any general calamity
Suspension, in all the country Invasion
or in a specific place, of the Grave disturbance of the public peace
Mexico guarantees which could Any other issue which could put the society in Requires the approval of the Congress.
constitute an obstacle to cope grave danger
with the situation in a quick and
Conflict
easy manner
When required by:
National security
Nicaragua State of emergency The Assembly can approve, modify or dismiss it.
Economic conditions
National catastrophes
Foreign war The Legislative Body must hear the declaration of a state of urgency
Panama State of urgency Internal disturbance that threatens the peace if it lasts more than ten days and confirm or reverse the decisions
and public order. related to the state of urgency.
Armed conflict
It can be declared by the Executive Power or the Congress.
State of exception Grave internal commotion which puts the
Paraguay Constitution or the bodies established in it in If it is declared by the Executive Power it requires the approval of
imminent danger the Congress.
State of defense External aggression Requires the approval of the Congress.
Disturbance of the peace or internal order
Decreed by the President with the consent of the Council of Minis-
State of emergency Catastrophe or grave circumstances which ters. The Congress must be informed about it.
affect the life of the Nation
Peru Invasion
Decreed by the President with the consent of the Council of Minis-
External war
ters. The Congress must be informed about it.
Civil war
State of siege Imminent danger of the above mentioned The extension beyond forty five days requires the consent of the
situations Congress.
Foreign attack
Uruguay Quick security measure Requires a resolution from the General Assembly.
Internal commotion
Catastrophes and public calamities which
State of alarm seriously endanger the security of the Nation,
or its citizens
Extraordinary economic circumstances which
Venezuela State of economic emergency seriously affect the economic situation of the The extension requires the approval of the National Assembly.
Nation
Internal or external conflict which seriously
State of internal or external endangers the security of the Nation, its
commotion citizens or institutions
1 Act 2008-004 of September 10, 2008 incorporated the state of urgency in the case of natural disasters.
Source: RESDAL. A Comparative Atlas on Defence in Latin America and the Caribbean, Compilation based on the Constitution of each country.

The work of military forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis
A post-Coronavirus
world
Carina Perelli
The coronavirus spreads and quarantines are nationally imposed, shed-
ding a light on problems in pre-existing systems and safety-nets. All
around the world, we see how those who have essential jobs risk getting the
virus without hazard pay, at the same time that telecommuting has become
the saving grace for the lucky non-essential workers who can do it, and those who can’t work
remotely worry about finances and whether they will have job to come back to. In the majority of
countries, hospitals are filled to capacity and don’t have enough equipment or staff needed to
treat all the patients they do have.1 Unemployment websites crash and their phone lines jam as
non-essential businesses shutdown.2 Meanwhile, right-wing governments are speaking of UBI
schemes,3 not as an unrealistic pipedream that could only exist in a utopia,4 but as a possible
temporary solution to get people through quarantine. Regardless of how long the quarantine
process will last in different countries, all of the global problems that the virus has indirectly shed
light on will not fall back into the darkness and remain unseen. The virus has proven that all of
these problems are not endemic to any one country in particular, but rather that these are global
problems. It is in these chaotic times, that we should not be only asking ourselves, as a global
society, about the imminent present, but also examine how this will shape the future.
The armed forces are currently submitting to the medical professionals’ expertise. The real
soldiers in the “war” against COVID-19 are medical professionals and sanitation employees.
1 
2 
3 
4 

The work of military forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis
Carina Perelli | A post-Coronavirus world
At this point, the commanders of this “war” are doctors and nurses. How will this shape the
armed forces and their role in society? On the other hand, what about elections? Some coun-
tries, states, and boroughs will have to postpone their elections.5 What will this imply in terms
of how they will be organized? If some choose to make their constituents vote remotely, how
will it be done and how long would it take to set up a proper digital electoral system? How will
all of this impact each area where an election has been suspended?
In light of this pandemic, emergency procedures have emerged from different governments,
some of them even colliding with human rights and constitutional laws. Society is turning
a blind eye to these procedures due to the supposedly temporary nature of them, but they
should not be forgotten or left as it is when the storm passes. Such powers and policies,
however temporary, could very easily become precedents. When the time comes that we
are able to flatten the COVID-19 curve, we must be vigilant about whether these sorts of
procedures truly are temporary or not. What regulations will be kept? Which ones will need
to be abolished once the epidemic has finished as they are too dangerous to keep outside
of a state of emergency? These are things that need to be monitored.
Xenophobia and discrimination are on the rise6 as many people around the world are facing
economic and financial problems due to the quarantine. Those who have tested as positive
for coronavirus will probably face discrimination, treated like lepers, with some not even
allowed back into their own apartments if the landlords suspect that they have tested pos-
itive.7 The flames of class warfare are receiving more fuel, as individuals who lost employ-
ment fear eviction,8 as theft and burglaries and riots might rise, and as domestic and child
abuse rises during quarantine.9 The chasm between the haves and the have-nots widens
and the bridges continue to fall. The construction of the Other as the enemy is happening
in front of us as we speak.
We know that the coronavirus won’t just go away and disappear into the ether, even after
the dangerous phase has passed. Epidemiologists have been warning of a virus outbreak
for years and say that another outbreak will happen again.10 It’s a matter of when, not if.
The time has come that we ask ourselves, as a global society: What have the different gov-
ernments learned from this and how can they prepare on a global scale for the next one?
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 

The work of military forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis
Carina Perelli | A post-Coronavirus world
How do we fix the health-systems in our respective countries and what parts need to be
retooled? How can we fix the safety-net?
Just like how same-sex marriage was an indirect and unexpected development of the AIDS
epidemic, the coronavirus will also have an indirect impact on policy and culture decades
down the line. All of these problems have the potential to affect public security and the health
sector on a global scale. We must prioritize putting these changes into perspective and try to
see what effects and impacts, however indirect, COVID-19 will have on a global scale.
How do we prepare for the domino-effect of these issues? Do we need to change policies
and norms? Is reform needed? If yes, what sort of reforms are going to be needed? What
do we need to prepare for? We must come up with solutions for these problems and their
future unintended consequences before we are caught flat-footed by them. We must face
the future and not just let it happen to us.

The work of military forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis
African defense
and security
forces facing
the COVID-19
pandemic
Niagalé Bagayoko*
Reproduced from Global Brief, April 7 20201
In response to the rapid spread of Covid-19, many African States have
adopted measures restricting the movement of people, limiting free-
dom of movement and the right of assembly and prohibiting large-scale
gatherings. As in other countries around the world where similar mea-
sures have been adopted, defense and security forces play a leading
role in the implementation of these measures. For example, Côte d’Ivoire and Senegal
have declared a state of emergency, which makes it possible to govern by decree or
simple administrative measures, while Togo has declared a “state of health emergency”
in accordance with constitutional provisions: the Togolese authorities have also simulta-
neously decided to set up a special anti-pandemic unit, composed of 5,000 defense and
security forces personnel, to be deployed throughout the country to enforce the measures
adopted. Curfews have also been decreed in many capitals, such as Dakar, Nouakchott
and Ouagadougou, where the security forces are responsible for enforcing the ban on
movement at nightfall.
Henceforth, enforcing the various coercive and emergency measures in accordance with
human rights and the rule of law, as well as the principle of proportionality in the use of
force, is a major challenge for the African defense and security apparatus. Since the entry
into force of the various provisions, accusations against the security forces have indeed
multiplied, relayed by the press and amplified by social networks, supported by videos,
* African Security Sector Network - ASSN
1 Available at Original in French. Own translation.

The work of military forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis
Niagalé Bagayoko | African defense and security forces facing the COVID-19 pandemic
for example in Abidjan, Dakar and Ouagadougou. In Chad, DRC and Kenya, journalists
have also been targeted by the security forces for their coverage of the restrictions - as
reported by the ACLED project,2 while in Niger, Amnesty International has denounced the
arrest or summons by the police of journalists, for their treatment of the epidemic. Some
of the images - including scenes of humiliation, degrading treatment or physical violence
- demonstrate once again, if proof were needed, the imperative need to consider respect
for human rights and human dignity as an integral part of the professional skills of the de-
fense and security forces. The numerous press articles devoted, both by the international
and national media, to the role of the defense and security forces in the implementation of
measures related to the fight against the virus and the interventions of civil society orga-
nizations, particularly in certain civic spaces that tend to be restricted, demonstrate that
these different actors intend to play their rightful role in terms of public control of security
systems in the context of an unprecedented crisis. The internal inspection mechanisms
within the defense and security forces themselves are also called upon to play an essen-
tial role in this respect. In South Africa, for example, the Independent Police Investigative
Directorate (IPID) is already conducting several investigations to determine the exact con-
ditions of deaths suspected of being linked to the excessive use of force by the police units
responsible for enforcing the “lock-down” decreed by the authorities.
In addition, in many countries in situations of open conflict, crisis or post-crisis situations,
the defense and security forces have in recent years been the subject of allegations, often
proven, of abuse or abuses against populations or certain communities, particularly in
Mali, Burkina Faso, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central African Repub-
lic. In Guinea-Conakry, the defense and security forces, deployed in recent months to re-
press demonstrations opposing the constitutional reform that would allow President Alpha
Condé to run for a third term, are now responsible for enforcing the state of emergency de-
clared to deal with Covid-19. The serious acts of violence that may have been committed
by some units of the armed forces of the above-mentioned countries should prompt utmost
vigilance in considering the prerogatives now granted to the military, gendarmes, police or
border services deployed in the context of the current health crisis.
Finally, it is essential to delimit as clearly and strictly as possible the respective responsibil-
ities of the different categories of forces deployed, with the mobilization of military person-
2 Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project, 

The work of military forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis
Niagalé Bagayoko | African defense and security forces facing the COVID-19 pandemic
nel as a third category force in the context of explicitly formulated requisitions to prevent
any undue and abusive involvement of these defense forces in missions to maintain public
order. The possible use of intelligence services to gather a certain amount of disease-re-
lated information within communities will also need to be closely monitored.
However, the contribution of African defense and security forces to the collective fight
against the current pandemic should also be considered from a constructive perspective.
From this point of view, it is first of all important to look at the previous experiences that
the continent’s armed forces have accumulated in their involvement in the fight against
HIV/AIDS (particularly in southern Africa) and the Ebola virus (particularly in West Africa
and the Mano River region as well as in the DRC, often with the assistance of bilateral and
multilateral partners), both to contain the spread of these diseases within their ranks and
to contribute to the national effort to contain them.
Similarly, the measures now being taken by some military units to limit the spread of the
disease among their own personnel deserve particular attention. For example, in Nigeria,
the military has activated an internal process to prevent the outbreak within the barracks,
in conjunction with other security services including the Nigeria Police, the Nigeria Secu-
rity and Civil Defense Corps and the Fire Services. The protection of personnel of the de-
fense and security forces against the spread of the virus and the eventual care of infected
personnel and their families by their respective institutions, is indeed a crucial issue now,
as demonstrated by the shortcomings and difficulties encountered by the systems put in
place within some Western armies.
Furthermore, the health crisis linked to the spread of Covid-19 also calls for a rethink of the
role of certain services of the defense and security forces, in particular that of the armed
forces’ health services as well as the engineering services. In Morocco, for example, it
was decided in mid- that the Royal Armed Forces (FAR) would provide health
structures equipped to compensate for the deficit in the health system if necessary. More
generally, the experience of certain African armies, such as those of Ghana or Senegal,
in the construction of field hospitals, acquired in the framework of cooperation programs
or through their experience of crisis management in the UN or bilateral framework, could
prove useful in the short term, in the event of overloading of civilian health services. In the
longer term, military health services can play an important role in the provision of health

The work of military forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis
Niagalé Bagayoko | African defense and security forces facing the COVID-19 pandemic
care as well as in future vaccination campaigns, should a vaccine be developed. Some
training centers, such as the Ecole du Service de Santé des Armées de Lomé (ESSAL),
could also in the longer-term work on the lessons learned from the management by African
armies of the Covid-19 health crisis.
It is also interesting to note that prison systems, often neglected by public security poli-
cies, have received immediate attention from the very beginning of the crisis. In Togo, for
example, 1,048 persons detained in several prisons in the country have been released.
The same in Niger, where the release of a number of prisoners (including the former Presi-
dent of the National Assembly, Hama Amadou) occurred, and in Senegal, where the former
President of Chad, Hissène Habré, along with other detainees, was granted provisional
release to protect him from the effects of the virus on his health.
More broadly, the manner in which African defense and security forces will discharge the
responsibilities assigned to them in the management of this health crisis could help devel-
op relations of trust with populations and communities, whose cooperation and receptive-
ness will be essential to ensure the effectiveness of the measures adopted.
For this reason, it is particularly important that the need to work towards increased dem-
ocratic governance of security systems should not be overlooked. It is already likely that
many cooperation programs will be redirected towards support for African health systems,
a late and reactive response to calls for such support long before the emergence of the
Covid-19 virus. However, it will be important not to lose sight of the fact that the long-term
efforts to work towards security systems reform (SSR) must be continued. All too often,
changes in donor priorities have been one of the factors explaining the poor progress
made in SSR: in recent years, the processes undertaken have often been diverted from
their initial objectives - in particular as regards democratic governance, respect for the rule
of law and promotion of human rights - by new priorities which have ended up monopoliz-
ing the reform agenda (e.g. the fight against terrorism, prevention of violent extremism, the
fight against illegal migration). It will of course be necessary to take into account the con-
sequences and lessons learned from the management of the coronavirus pandemic by the
African defense and security apparatus. Nevertheless, the structural effort that is essential
to strengthen the operationality but also the democratic governance of the African defense
and security apparatus, whose crucial role in the future of the continent, beyond the mere

The work of military forces in the context of COVID-19 crisis
Niagalé Bagayoko | African defense and security forces facing the COVID-19 pandemic
response to security crises, is once again demonstrated by this pandemic, should not be
abandoned or neglected.
Finally, the crisis linked to the Covid-19 pandemic, more than ever before, calls for consid-
eration of the “human security” approach, conceptualized by the UNDP (United Nations
Development Programme) as early as 1994, which calls for security to be considered not
only from a military angle but also in its social, political, food, environmental, community
and health dimensions, as well as in its global and transnational dimension and not only in
its national and state-centric dimension.
The work of military forces in
the context of C O V I D - 1 9
crisis
Nº1 | 
Latin American Security and Defence Network

secretaria@resdal.org