Chapter 1:
The Legal Framework

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

What do Constitutions defi ne?
Argentina (1853, Last reform 1994)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: No reference.
Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces (Sec.99, sub. 12).
Declare war with the approval of Congress (Sec. 99, sub. 15) and the state of
siege in case of external attacks, for a limited period of time, with the approval
of the Senate (Sec. 99, sub. 16).
Appoint senior offi cers with the approval of the Senate (Sec. 99, sub. 13).
Arrange, organize and deploy the Armed Forces (Sec. 99, sub. 14)
Powers of Congress:
Approve the declaration of war (Sec. 75, sub. 25) and the declaration of state of
siege in case of external attacks (Sec. 61).
Authorize the president to make peace (Sec. 75, sub. 25).
Authorize the entry of foreign troops to the national territory and allow the de-
ployment of national troops outside the country (Sec. 75, sub. 28).
Establish the Armed Forces (Sec. 75, sub. 27).
The Chamber of Deputies has the law-making initiative on raising revenues and
the recruitment of troops (Sec. 52).
Organize and govern the Armed Forces (Sec. 75, sub. 27).
Levy direct taxes for a certain amount of time, in all the territory of the Nation,
as long as the defence, common security and State general welfare policies so
require (Sec. 75, sub. 2).
Approve or dismiss treaties entered into with other nations and with international
organizations, as well as the concordats with the Holy See (Sec. 75, sub. 22).
Bolivia (2008)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces:
Provide the security and defence of the Nation (Sec. 172, sub. 16). They are composed of the Command-in-Chief, the Bolivian Army, Air Force and
Appoint and dismiss the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces and the Navy (Sec. 243).
Chiefs of the Army, the Air Force and Navy. (Sec. 172, sub. 17). Mission: defend and maintain national independence, security and stability of
Recommend to the Plurinational Legislative Assembly the promotions to Army the State and the national honor and sovereignty; secure the rule of the Political
General, Air Force General, Major General and Brigadier General; Admiral, Constitution, guarantee the stability of the legally-established Government and
Vice-Admiral and Rear-Admiral (Sec. 172, sub. 19). participate in the overall development of the country (Sec.244).
Exercise the powers as Capitán General (Commander) of the Armed Forces and Organization: Relying on hierarchy and discipline principles. The Armed For-
make use of them for the defence of the State, its independence and territorial ces are to be obedient, non-deliberating, and subject to the laws and military
integrity (Sec. 172, sub. 25). regulations. As an institutional body, the Armed Forces shall not carry out any
The Executive shall have direct access to information on budgeted and execu- political action; individually, the members of the Armed Forces are entitled to
ted expenses of the Armed Forces through the appropriate Ministry (Sec. 321, exercise their citizen rights under the terms established by Law (Sec. 245). Ac-
sub. 5). tive members of the Armed Forces shall not be eligible for public offi ce at
elections, unless they have previously resigned at least three months before the
Powers of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly1 : election day (Sec. 238, sub. 4).
Approve the entry of foreign troops to the national territory and the deplo- The Armed Forces report to the President of the Nation and follow his/her or-
yment of national troops outside the country (Sec. 158, sub. 1, 21 and 22). ders on administrative matters, through the Minister of Defence and, on te-
Approve in each legislature the military strength to be maintained in times of chnical matters, through the Commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces (Sec.
peace (Sec. 159, sub.10). 246, sub. 1).
Ratify promotions proposed by the Executive to Army General, Air Force Gene- In the case of war, operations shall be headed by the Commander-in-Chief of
ral, Major General and Brigadier General; Admiral, Vice-Admiral, Rear-Admiral the Armed Forces. (Sec. 246, sub. 2).
and Bolivian Police General (Sec. 160, sub. 8). No foreign citizen shall be appointed to any command or administrative posi-
tion in the Armed Forces without prior authorization by the Capitán General of
Supreme Defence Council of the Plurinational State : the Armed Forces (Sec. 247, sub. 1).
Makeup, organization and powers established by law, presided over by the Promotions in the Armed Forces shall be determined by law (Sec. 250).
Capitán General of the Armed Forces (Sec. 248). In case of international war, the Bolivian Police Force shall report to the Com-
mand-in-chief of the Armed Forces for the duration of the confl ict (Sec. 254).
The Armed Forces’ fundamental duty is to secure the defence, security and con-
trol of the border security areas. The Armed Forces shall participate in overall
sustainable development policies for these areas and shall ensure their perma-
nent physical presence there (Sec. 263).
Brazil (1988. Last reform 2014)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces:
Initiate laws, on its own, to establish or modify the number of regular military The Armed Forces are a national permanent, regular and non-political institu-
members, rule over members of the military, their justice system, promotions, tion, organized on the bases of hierarchy and discipline They are composed of
stability, assignment of positions, remuneration, reform, and transfer to the the Navy, the Army and the Air Force (Sec. 142).
reserve (Sec. 61, sub. 1). Mission: defend the Motherland and guarantee constitutional powers as well
Order the state of defence and state of siege (Sec. 84, sub. 9). as, on the latter initiative, law and order (Sec.142).
Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces (Sec 84, sub. 13). Service member incorporation, age limits, rights, obligations, remuneration,
Appoint the Chiefs of the Armed Forces, and promote general offi cers (Sec. prerogatives and other special situations of military members, given the nature
84, sub. 13). of their activities, including duties under international commitments and war
Convene and preside over meetings of the Council of the Republic and the shall all be determined by law (Sec.142).
National Defence Council (Sec. 84, sub. 18). The members of the military on active duty are not entitled to join labor unions
Declare war with the approval of the Congress, in the event of a foreign ag- or go on strike; neither can they join a political party (Sec. 142, sub. 4); they
gression (Sec. 84, sub. 19). shall not be candidates at elections (Sec. 14, sub. 8), habeas corpus does not
Make peace, with the approval of the Congress (Sec. 84, sub. 20). apply to military disciplinary punishment (Sec. 142, sub. 2).
Allow the entry of foreign troops (Sec. 84, sub. 22). Military service is compulsory in accordance with the law (Sec. 143).
Military justice: it shall be incumbent upon the Military Courts to try and judge
1Asamblea Legislativa Plurinacional.

Chapter 1: The Legal Framework

Powers of the Congress: military crimes defi ned by law. Military justice organization, operation and com-
Determine and modify the strength of the Armed Forces (Sec. 48, sub. 3). petence shall be determined by law (Sec. 124).
Authorize the President to declare war, make peace and approve the deploy-
ment of troops (Sec. 49, sub. 2).
Approve the state of defence and federal intervention (Sec. 49, sub. 4).
Council of the Republic2:
It is the President’s higher consultation body (Sec. 90).
Expresses position on federal intervention, state of war and state of siege (Sec.
90, sub. 1).
National Defence Council3:
It is the President’s consultation body on issues related to national sovereignty
and the defence of the democratic State (Sec. 91).
Expresses its position on war declaration and peace settlement (Sec. 91, sub.
1); declaration of the state of defence, state of siege and federal intervention
(Sec. 91, sub. 2).
Proposes the criteria and conditions for the use of areas which are key to the
security of the national territory, and expresses opinion on its effective use,
especially on border zones and those associated with the preservation and ex-
ploitation of natural resources of any kind (Sec. 91, sub. 3).
Chile (1980. Last reform 2014)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces:
Maintain external security (Sec. 24).
Composed of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force (Sec. 101).
Appoint and remove the Commanders-in-Chief of the Army, the Navy and the Air
Force (Sec. 32, sub. 16; Sec. 105). Mission: defend the Motherland (Sec. 101); safeguard the public order during
Appoint, promote and remove offi cers (Sec. 32, sub. 16). elections (Sec. 18).
Arrange, organize and deploy the Armed Forces depending on national security The members of the military on active duty cannot be elected Deputies or Se-
needs (Sec. 32, sub. 17). nators unless they resign and retire during the year preceding the election (Sec.
Supreme Chief of the Armed Forces in times of war (Sec. 32, sub. 18). Declare 57, sub. 10).
war once the pertinent law has been adopted, and after hearing the National Depend on the National Ministry of Defence, they are essential to the national se-
Defence Council (Sec. 32, sub. 19). curity, they are obedient, non deliberant, professional and disciplined, and follow
Order payments not authorized by law to meet the pressing needs derived from a hierarchical order (Sec. 101).
external aggressions, internal confl ict and serious harm or danger to national Incorporation to the Armed Forces is performed through their own schools, ex-
security (Sec. 32, sub. 20). Declare the state of assembly in case of external war,
cept in the case of professional scales and civilian personnel (Sec. 102).
with the approval of the National Congress (Sec. 40).
The President has the legal initiative to establish the air, land and sea forces, and Obligatory military service (Sec. 22).
the ones for the entry and deployment of troops (Sec. 65; Sec. 63, sub. 13). Appointments, promotions, retirement of offi cers, ranks, incorporation, social
security, seniority, command succession and budget are determined by constitu-
Powers of Congress: tional organic law (Sec. 105).
Indict (only Representatives) and judge (only Senators) Generals and Admirals The right to a legal defence, in the administrative and disciplinary spheres, shall
(Sec. 52, sub. 2, d; Sec. 53, sub. 1). be governed by the relevant regulations of the respective bylaws (Sec. 19, sub 3).
Approve or dismiss international treaties introduced by the President in order to
be ratifi ed (Sec. 54, sub. 1).
The Chamber of Deputies (Lower House) has the lawmaking initiative regarding
recruitment matters (Sec. 65).
National Security Council4:
Advise the President on national security (Sec. 106).
Powers of the President: The Military Forces6:
Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces (Sec. 189, sub. 3). The Military Forces comprise the Army, the Navy and the Air Force (Sec. 217).
Conducts operations when deemed necessary (Sec. 189, sub. 5). Mission: defend the sovereignty, independence, integrity of the nation’s terri-
Provide to external security (Sec. 189, sub. 6). tory and constitutional order (Sec. 217).
Declare war with the approval of the Senate, except in case of foreign aggres- The members of the military on active duty are not entitled to join labor unions
sion and accord peace, informing Congress (Sec. 189, sub. 6). (Sec. 39), vote, make petitions except on issues related to their service, or to
Allow, when the Senate is in recess, with the approval of the State Council, the participate in political activities and debates (Sec. 219). The Commanders of
transit of foreign troops through the territory of the Republic (Sec. 189, sub. 7). the Military Forces cannot be elected President before one year following their
previous position (Sec. 197).
Powers of Congress: In case of a manifest violation of a constitutional rule to the disadvantage of
Dictate general rules with objectives and criteria to establish wage levels and any person, the responsibility shall fall exclusively on the superior who has is-
social benefi ts for the military (Sec. 150, sub. 19, e). sued the order (Sec. 91).
Approve the appointment of senior offi cers (Sec. 173, sub. 2). Professional, cultural and social promotion systems for members of the public
Approve the entry of foreign troops (Sec. 173, sub. 4). Approve the declaration force shall be determined by law. The fundamentals of democracy and human
of war (Sec. 173, sub. 5). rights shall be taught during the professional training phase (Sec. 222).
Military justice for military crimes (Sec. 221, Sec. 250), civilians may not be tried
State Council5: by the Martial Law (Sec. 213).
Act as the supreme advisory body of the Government in administration matters.
In case of foreign troops’ transit through the national territory, and of stay or
transit of foreign warships or combat aircraft in national waters or airspace, the
government shall fi rst take the advice of the State Council (Sec. 237, sub. 3).
Powers or the Legislative Assembly The Army is abolished as a permanent institution. The police forces necessary
Approve or dismiss international agreements, public treaties and concordats. for the monitoring and maintenance of public order are provided for.
Public treaties and international agreements that assign or transfer certain The organization of military forces will be only permitted through continental
powers to a community legal order in order to achieve regional and common agreement or for the purpose of national defence; in either case they shall
objectives require the approval of the Legislative Assembly, through a vote of always be subordinate to the civil power: they may not deliberate or make
no less than two-thirds of its members. statements or representations individually or collectively (Sec. 12).
2Conselho da República.
3Conselho de Defesa Nacional.
4Consejo de Seguridad Nacional.
5Consejo de Estado.
6Denomination used in the constitutional text.
lizarB
Colombia (1991. Last reform 2014)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Costa Rica (1949, Last reform 2011)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Protocols of lesser range derived from public treaties or international agreements Serving members of the military cannot be elected as deputies or run as candi-
approved by the Assembly do not require legislative approval when such instru- dates. (Sec. 109, sub. 5)
ments expressly authorize such derivation.
Approve or disapprove the entry of foreign troops onto national territory and
permission for warships or planes to stay at ports and airfi elds.
Authorize the Executive to declare a state of national defence and to make peace.
(Sec. 121, sub. 4,5 and 6)
Powers of the President:
Supreme Commander of the Public Forces (Sec. 139, sub. 3)
The following are duties and powers that correspond jointly to the President
and respective Government Minister: Appoint and remove members of the
Public Force, employees and offi cials who hold positions of trust, and others
determined, in very specifi c cases, by the Civil Service Law.
Maintain the order and peace of the Nation; take the necessary measures to
safeguard public freedoms.
Preside over the Republic’s international relations.
Employ the Public Force to maintain the country’s order, defence and security.
Government Council:
Composed of the President of the Republic and Ministers, it is under the pri-
mary authority of the Presidency and exercises the following function: request
the Legislature to declare a state of national defence and authorization to decree
military recruitment, organize the army, and negotiate peace (Sec. 147, sub. 1).
Cuba (1976. Last reform 1992)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the National Assembly of People’s Power7: Revolutionary Armed Forces12:
Approve the general foreign and domestic policy guidelines (Sec. 75, sub. h). The members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces and other armed organiza-
Declare the state of war in case of military aggression and approve peace trea- tions have the right to vote and be elected as any Cuban citizen (Sec. 134).
ties (Sec. 75, sub. i).
Powers of the State Council8:
Decree general mobilization when required for the defence of the country and
assume the powers assigned to the National Assembly by the Constitution to
declare war in case of aggression or make peace, when this Assembly is in
recess or cannot be summoned with the necessary celerity and security condi-
tions. (Sec. 90, sub. f).
Powers of the President of the State Council and Head of State:
Preside over the National Defence Council (Sec. 93, sub. h).
Powers of the Council of Ministers9:
Provide for national defence, maintenance of internal order and security, and the
protection of human life and assets in case of natural disasters. (Sec. 98, sub. ch).
National Defence Council10:
Convened and prepared in times of peace to lead the country under state-of-war
conditions, during war, general mobilization or state of emergency. (Sec. 101).
Local Bodies of the People’s Power11 :
The Province and Municipal Assemblies of the People’s Power are responsible for
reinforcing the defensive capacity of the country (Sec. 105 and Sec. 106, sub. m).
The Defence Councils of the Provinces, Municipalities and Defence Zones are
created and prepared in times of peace to lead their respective territories in a
state of war, during the war, general mobilization or state of emergency, based
on a general defence plan and the role and responsibilities of the army’s military
councils (Sec. 119).
Dominican Republic (2010. Last reform 2013)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces:
Direct foreign and domestic policies and conduct civilian and military adminis- The Armed Forces are responsible for the Nation’s defence (Sec. 252).
tration. Supreme authority of the Armed Forces (Sec. 128). Their mission is to defend the independence and sovereignty of the Nation, the
Appoint or dismiss members of the military jurisdiction (Sec. 128, sub. 1, c). integrity of its geographical spaces, the Constitution and the institutions of the
Enter into and sign international treaties or conventions and submit them for Republic (Sec. 252, sub. 1).
approval to the National Congress (Sec. 128, sub. 1, d). Their nature shall be essentially defensive (Sec. 259).
Decide on all issues related to the Armed Forces; lead the Armed forces directly They shall intervene, as ordered by the President of the Republic, in programs in-
or through the relevant ministry, always maintaining the supreme command tended to promote the social and economic development of the country, mitigate
thereof. Establish their strength and make use of the Armed forces to perform disasters or public catastrophe situations, and provide assistance to the National
public service duties (Sec. 128, sub. 1, e). Police to maintain or restore public order in exceptional cases (Sec. 252, sub. 2).
Take the necessary measures to provide and ensure the legitimate defence of They are essentially obedient to the civil power, are not affi liated to any political
the Nation, while informing the National Congress of any rules adopted (Sec. party and are not entitled to deliberate under any circumstance (Sec. 252, sub. 3).
128, sub. 1, f). Declare the states of exception if the National Congress were The members of the military on active duty cannot run for President or Vice-
not in session (Sec. 128, sub. 1, g). President unless they have retired at least three years before the election (Sec.
Decide on anything related to the military zones (Sec. 128, sub. 1, i). 123, sub. 4).
The Armed Forces shall be responsible for the custody, supervision and control
Powers of the Congress: of all weapons, ammunitions and other military supplies, as well as war mate-
Authorize (Senate) the presence of foreign troops to perform military exercises rial and equipment, entering the country or produced by the national industry,
in the territory of the Republic, under the request of the President of the Re- subject to the restrictions established by law (Sec. 252).
public, provided there is no previous agreement (Sec. 80, sub. 6), and approve No discrimination shall be exerted in the admission, appointment, promotion
and disapprove the deployment of national troops outside the country in peace and retirement of Armed Forces members, in accordance with their organic law
missions authorized by international organizations (Sec. 80, sub. 7). and other complementary laws (Sec. 253).
7 Asamblea Nacional del Poder Popular.
8 Consejo de Estado.
9 Consejo de Ministros.
10 Consejjo de Defensa Nacional.
11 Órganos locales del poder Popular.
12Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
aciR
atsoC

Chapter 1: The Legal Framework

Declare the state of national defence (Sec. 93, sub. 1, f). The military jurisdiction shall only have competence to try military infractions
Determine, under the request of the President of the Republic, the creation determined by the relevant laws. The Armed Forces shall have a military disci-
of permanent public security or defence corps composed of members of the pline regime applicable to those offenses that do not constitute an infraction
Armed Forces and the National Police, subordinated to the ministry or institu- under the military criminal justice system (Sec. 254).
tion of the sphere of their respective competences in accordance with the law
(Sec. 261).
National Security and Defence Council13:
Advise the President of the Republic on the design of national security and
defence policies and strategies and on any other matter requested by the Presi-
dent. The Executive shall regulate its make-up and operation (Sec. 258).
Ecuador (2008. Last reform 2011)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: Armed Forces:
Exercise the highest authority of the Armed Forces and appoint the military Mission: defence of territorial sovereignty and integrity (Sec. 158).
senior staff (Sec. 147, sub. 16). The Armed Forces and the National Police are institutions designed to protect citizens’
Assume the political direction of the national defence (Sec. 147, sub. 17). human rights, liberties and guarantees. The members of the Armed Forces shall be
Decree the state of exception in all or part of the national territory in case of ag- trained in accordance with the fundamental principles of democracy and human
gression, international or internal armed confl ict, grave internal unrest, public rights, and shall respect the dignity and rights of the people (Sec. 158).
catastrophe or natural disaster (Sec. 164). They shall be obedient and non-deliberating and shall comply with their mission un-
Once the state of exception is declared, the President shall be entitled to make der strict observance of the civilian control and the Consitution. The Armed Forces
use of the Armed Forces and the National Police and summon the whole or senior leadership shall be responsible for their orders. Obedience to orders issued by
part of the reserved forces, as well as personnel of other institutions, for active senior offi cers of the Armed Forces shall not relieve subordinates from their respon-
service (Sec. 165, sub. 6). sibility (Sec.159).
Voting shall not be compulsory for members of the Armed Forces (Sec. 62, sub. 2).
Powers of the National Assembly14: Members of the force on active duty cannot be candidates for elections subject to
Approve or reject international treaties when appropriate (Sec. 120, sub. 8). popular vote nor ministers of State (Sec. 113, sub. 8 and Sec. 152, sub. 3).
The ratifi cation or rejection of international treaties shall require prior approval The recruitment of candidates to the armed forces shall not be based on discrimi-
of the National Assembly if: 1. They are related to territorial or border matters. nation. The members of the Armed Forces shall be subject to the specifi c laws re-
2. They establish any political or military alliance (Sec. 419). gulating their rights and obligations, as well as their system of promotions based
on merit and gender equality criteria. Their stability and professionalization shall be
guaranteed (Sec. 160).
Civil and military service is voluntary and shall be carried out under the respect of
citizens’ rights and diversity. All kinds of forced recruitment are forbidden (Sec. 161).
The Armed Forces shall only be allowed to participate in economic activities related
to the national defence and shall provide their resources to support national deve-
lopment in accordance with the law. Their reserves shall be organized based on the
needs for the compliance of their duties. The State shall allocate the necessary resour-
ces for their equipment, training and education (Sec. 162).
Military barracks are not places authorized for the custody of civil population (Sec.
203, sub. 1).
The members of the Armed Forces shall make a sworn statement of their assets prior
to any promotion or retirement (Sec. 231).
The Armed Forces shall have a special social security regime in accordance with the
law; their social security entities shall form part of the integral public health network
and the social security system (Sec. 370).
Disciplinary arrests of military members shall be conducted in accordance with the
law (Sec. 77).
The members of the Armed Forces shall be tried by the Judiciary Branch bodies; in
the case of crimes committed while at a specifi c mission, they shall be tried by courts
specialized in military matters, which form part of the same Judiciary Branch. Disci-
plinary offenses shall be tried by the competent bodies established by law (Sec. 160).
Under the principle of jurisdictional unit, Armed Force members shall be tried by the
ordinary justice system (Sec. 188).
Powers of the President: The Armed Force17:
General Commander of the Armed Force (Sec. 157). It is a permanent institution at the service of the Nation. It is obedient, professio-
Maintain intact the sovereignty and integrity of the territory (Sec. 168, sub. 2). nal, apolitical and non-deliberating (Sec. 211).
Sign treaties and international concordats, subjecting them to the Legislative Its mission is to defend the sovereignty of the State and the integrity of the
Assembly (Sec. 168, sub. 4).
territory. The main government branches, the Legislative, the Executive and the
Report on what the Assembly requires, except in the case of secret military
plans (Sec. 168, sub. 7). Judiciary, may use the Armed Forces to enforce any resolutions adopted within
Organize, maintain and arrange the Armed Forces, confer military ranks in ac- their respective jurisdictions, to ensure full compliance with the Constitution. The
cordance with the law (Sec. 168, sub. 11). Armed Force shall cooperate with efforts of public benefi t assigned by the Exe-
Summon the Armed Force for the defence of national sovereignty and excep- cutive Power and shall help the people in case of a national disaster (Sec. 212).
tionally, if no other means rest for the maintenance of internal peace, for the The Armed Force is obliged to cooperate with the special commissions of the
public security and tranquillity of the State (Sec. 168, sub. 12). Legislative Assembly (Sec. 132).
Direct war and accord peace treaties with the approval of the Assembly (Sec. It is part of the Executive branch and it is subordinated to the authority of the
168, sub. 13). President as General Commander in chief. Its structure, legal system, doctrine,
Determine the number of active troops of the Armed Forces on an annual basis organization and operation are determined by law, rules and special regulations
(Sec. 168, sub.19). the President adopts (Sec. 213).
Powers of the Legislative Assembly15: The military professional career and promotions are strictly based on rank and
In case of invasion, legally declared war or public calamity, the Assembly shall in accordance with the law (Sec. 214).
impose obligatory loans if ordinary public taxes are not enough to cover the Military service is obligatory (Sec. 215).
costs (Sec. 131, sub. 6). The members of the military on active duty cannot be part of any political party,
Declare war and ratify peace (Sec. 135, sub. 25). or be candidates for elections. They can only be elected President three years
Approve or dismiss the transit of foreign troops on the national territory, (Sec.
after they retire (Sec. 82; Sec. 127; Sec. 152). They have no right to unionize.
135, sub. 29).
(Sec. 47).
Executive Body on the Branch of Defence and Public Security16: Military justice jurisdiction: purely military crimes and offenses (Sec. 216).
Determine the number of troops annually according to the needs of the service
(Sec. 213).
13Consejo de Seguridad y Defensa Nacional.
14Asamblea Nacional
155Asamblea Leggislativa.
16Órgano Ejecutivo en el Ramo de Defensa y Seguridad Pública.
17Denomination used in the constitutional text.
cilbupeR
nacinimoD
El Salvador (1983, Last reform 2012)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Guatemala (1985, Last reform 1993)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Army18:
General Commander of the Army (Sec. 182, 183 and 246). Give orders via the It is unique and indivisible, essentially professional, apolitical, obedient and non
general offi cer or colonel or his equivalent at the Navy, who serves as Minister deliberant. It is composed of the land, air and maritime forces. Organization:
of National Defence (Sec. 246). hierarchy, based on the principles of discipline and obedience (Sec. 244). It is
Provide for the defence and security of the Nation (Sec. 183, sub. b). regulated by the Constitution, its Statutory Law and other military laws and
Confer promotions, decorations, military honors and extraordinary pensions regulations (Sec. 250).
(Sec. 246, sub. b). They are not obliged to carry out illegal orders or those which involve commit-
Decree the mobilization and demobilization of troops (Sec. 246 sub. a). ting a crime (Sec. 156).
Mission: maintain independence, sovereignty and the honor of Guatemala, the
Powers of the Congress: integrity of the territory and internal and external peace and security (Sec. 244);
Declare war and sign peace treaties (Sec. 171, sub. f). cooperate in emergency situations or public calamity (Sec. 249).
Approve the transit of foreign troops on the national territory and the sojourn To be an offi cer it is required to be a native Guatemalan citizen and not have
of foreign military (Sec. 172, sub. a). adopted any foreign nationality at any time (Sec. 247).
Approve treaties which affect or may affect the security of the State or conclu- The members of the military on active duty cannot be elected Deputies (Sec.
de a state of war (Sec. 172, sub. b). 164, sub. f) or President, only if they were discharged or retired fi ve years be-
The Army depends on the Congress if the President continues in the position fore taking offi ce (Sec. 186, sub. e), they are not entitled to vote or to make
once the constitutional period has come to an end and is not recognized by the political or collective petitions (Sec. 248).
Congress (Sec. 165, sub. g). The military courts shall acknowledge the crimes or offenses committed by the
The ministers of State are not obliged to come forward to the Congress to members of the Guatemalan Army (Sec. 219).
answer questions related to diplomatic issues or pending military operations
(Sec. 166).
Haiti (1987)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces
Guarantor of the independence and territorial integrity of the Nation (Sec. The “Public Forces” are composed of two distinct bodies: a. The Armed Forces
138). Head of the Armed Forces, although never commands them in person of Haiti, and b. The Police Forces. No other armed body may exist in the na-
(Sec. 143). tional territory. All members of the police and armed forces shall take an oath
Negotiates and signs international treaties, conventions and agreements and of loyalty and respect for the Constitution and the fl ag at the time of their
presents them to the National Assembly for ratifi cation (Sec. 139). enlistment (Sec. 263, sub. 1 and 2).
Declare war, and negotiate and sign peace treaties with the approval of the The Armed Forces of Haiti were created to guarantee the security and territorial
National Assembly (Sec.140). integrity of the Republic (Sec. 264).
With the approval of the Senate, the President appoints, by decree issued by The functions of the Armed Forces are: a. to defend the country in case of war;
the Council of Ministers, the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces and b. protect the country against any foreign threats; c. ensure the surveillance of
Commander in Chief of the Police (Sec. 141). land, sea and air borders; d. to assist the police at the request of the Executive
when the former is unable to handle the situation; e. assist the Nation in the
Powers of the Prime Minister: event of a natural disaster; f. in addition to their regular duties, the Armed
Together with the President of the Republic, is responsible for national defence Forces may be assigned to development work (Sec. 266).
(Sec. 159, sub. 1). They are apolitical. Members cannot be part of any political group or party,
and must demonstrate the strictest neutrality. Members of the Armed Forces
Powers of the National Assembly19: exercise their right to vote under the Constitution (Sec. 265).
Ratify any decision to declare war, when all efforts at conciliation have failed; Military personnel on active service may not be appointed to any public offi ce,
approve or reject international treaties and agreements. Decide when a state except temporarily for the provision of specialized services. To be a candidate
of siege should be declared, and, together with the Executive, order the sus- for elected offi ce, military personnel on active service must be inactive or retired
pension of constitutional guarantees and decide on any request to renew this one year prior to the publication of the electoral decree. The military career is
measure (Sec. 98, sub.3). a profession. Its hierarchical structure, conditions of enlistment, ranks, promo-
tions, demotions, and removals are determined by the regulations of the Armed
Forces. Military personnel are under the jurisdiction of a military court only for
offenses and crimes committed in wartime or for disciplinary violations. They
cannot be dismissed, placed on inactive service, placed on half pay, or removed
prematurely without their consent. If such consent is not given, the individual
may appeal to the relevant court authority. The state must provide benefi ts to
military personnel of all ranks, fully guaranteeing their physical security (Sec.
267).
In the framework of compulsory civilian service for both sexes, the Armed For-
ces are involved in the organization and supervision of this service. Military
service is compulsory for all Haitians over the age of eighteen years. The law
provides for the procurement procedure, duration and regulations for the im-
plementation of these services (Sec. 268).
Honduras (1982, Last reform 2014)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces:
General Commander of the Armed Forces, exercises the Command-in-Chief They are permanent, apolitical, professional, obedient and non deliberant (Sec. 272).
(Sec. 245, sub. 16; Sec. 277). They are composed of the High Command, the Army, the Air Force, the Navy,
Maintain the peace and external security; repel external attacks or aggression the Public Security Force and other organizations determined by the Statutory
(Sec. 245, sub. 4), adopt measures for the defence of the Republic (Sec. 245, Law (Sec. 273).
sub. 16). Their operation is regulated by the Statutory Law, laws and regulations (Sec. 274).
Declare war and make peace if the Congress is in recess (Sec. 245, sub. 17). The orders given by the President of the Republic shall be abided by and execu-
Sign international treaties and agreements of a military nature, regarding the ted respecting the Constitution of the Republic and the principles of lawfulness,
territory and sovereignty with the consent of the Congress (Sec. 245, sub. 13). discipline and military professionalism (Sec. 278).
Allow the transit of foreign troops on the national territory and the deployment The members of the military are not obliged to carry out illegal orders or those
of national troops outside the country with the approval of the Congress (Sec. that involve committing a crime (Sec. 323).
245, sub. 43 and 44). They are instituted to defend the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the
Confer military ranks (second lieutenant to captain) suggested by the Secretary Republic, maintain the peace, public order and the rule of the Constitution,
of National Defence (Sec. 245, sub. 36; Sec. 290). the principles of free suffrage and alternation of the Presidency of the Republic
Ensure that the Armed Forces are apolitical, essentially professional, obedient (Sec. 272), cooperate with the National Police in the maintenance of public or-
and non deliberant (Sec. 245, sub. 37). der (Sec. 272); and with State Secretariats, municipalities and other institutions,
at their or the President’s request, in public security, literacy, education, agri-
culture, environmental protection, transport, communications, health and land
18Denomination used in the constitutional text.
19Denomination used in the constitutional text

Chapter 1: The Legal Framework

Powers of the Congress: reform. Guidelines emanating directly from the President are also functions
Declare war (Sec. 205, sub. 28). and duties of the Military Police of Public Order.
Make peace (Sec. 205, sub. 28). They participate in international peacekeeping missions; provide logistical and te-
Confer military ranks (from major to general) suggested by the Executive Power chnical support in communications and transport; in the fi ght against drug traffi c-
(Sec. 205, sub. 24; Sec. 290). king; collaborate through the provision of personnel and resources in response to
Approve the entry of foreign troops to the national territory and the deployment natural disasters and emergency situations; as well as in programs to protect and
of national troops outside the country (Sec. 205, sub. 26 and 27). conserve the ecosystem, in the academic education and technical training of its
Determine the number of permanent troops (Sec. 205, sub. 25). members and others in the national interest. Cooperate with public security insti-
Authorize reception of foreign military missions of assistance or technical coope- tutions at the request of the Security Secretariat, to combat terrorism, arms traffi c-
ration in Honduras (Sec. 205, sub. 29). king and organized crime, as well as in the protection of the powers of the State
and the Electoral Tribunal, at their request, for their installation and operation.
Secretary of State in the National Defence Dispatch20: The Military Police of Public Order (MPOP) form part of the Armed Forces, and
The Secretary shall be appointed and removed freely by the President of the their duties and obligations are set out in their Special Law. Municipalities, areas
Republic (Sec. 280). under the special regime of Employment and Economic Development Zones
(EEDZ), and other State agencies may, in special circumstances, request the Pre-
National Defence and Security Council21: sident of the Republic to order the Armed Forces to participate in public security
Creation (Sec. 287). and crime reduction tasks through the Military Police of Public Order or other
Organization and operation determined by law (Sec. 287). bodies (Sec. 274).
Promotions strictly determined by law (Sec. 290).
Board of Commanders of the Armed Forces22: Appointments and removal of the members of the military, related with the admi-
It is the consulting body for all the matters related to the Armed Forces. It rules nistrative order, shall be granted in accordance with the Law of Public Administra-
over issues of its competence and acts as a Superior tribunal of the Armed Forces tion. In the operative area, appointments and removals shall be conferred by the
on matters which shall be subject to its knowledge. The Statutory Law of the Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff, in accordance with the organic structure of
Armed Forces and its Regulations rule over its operation (Sec. 285). the Armed Forces, the Statutory Law, and other legal regulations, including the
It is composed of the Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff, the General Inspector personnel of troops and auxiliaries (Sec. 282).
and the Commanders of each Force (Sec. 286). Voluntary military service (Sec. 276 and 288).
The members of the military on active duty are not entitled to vote (Sec. 37), and
Joint Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces23: they shall be eligible in the cases not prohibited by the law (Sec. 37). They cannot
The Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff is selected and removed freely by the be elected Deputies prior to six months after they retire (Sec. 199, sub. 4 and 6) or
President among the members of the Board of Commanders (Sec. 280). twelve months in case they are running for President (Sec. 240, sub. 2, 3 and 4).
The Joint Chiefs of Staff is the superior technical body of consultation, planning, National Defence College: it is the highest house of studies for the Armed Forces.
coordination and supervision, which depends on the Secretary of National De- It trains selected military and civilian personnel, so they take part in the national
fence; its tasks are assigned by the Statutory Law of the Armed Forces (Sec. 283). strategic planning (Sec. 289).
It shall issue a statement previous to conferring the promotions to the offi cers Institute of Military Social Security: for the protection, welfare and social security
(Sec. 290). of all the members of the military, presided by the Chairman of the Joint Chief of
Staff, shall operate in accordance with the specifi c Law (Sec. 291).
For defence and national security reasons, the territory shall be divided in military
regions commanded by a Chief of Military Region. Their organization and opera-
tion shall be in accordance with the Statutoryy Law of the Armed Forces ((Sec. 284)).
MMiilliittaarryy jjuussttiiccee ffoorr mmiilliittaarryy ccrriimmeess aanndd ooffffeenncceess ((SSeecc. 9900 aanndd SSeecc. 9911)).
A special law shall regulate the operation of military courts (Sec. 275).
Mexico (1917, Last reform 2014)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Force24:
Appoint and dismiss Colonels and other senior offi cers with the Senate’s appro- It is required to be a Mexican citizen by birth to join the Army in times of peace
val (Sec. 89, sub. 4) and the rest of the offi cers according to the law (Sec. 89, or the Navy and Air Force at all times, and to be appointed to any position or
sub. 5). perform any assignment in these forces (Sec. 32).
Declare war with the approval of the Congress (Sec. 89, sub. 8). The armed forces are composed of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force (Sec.
Preserve national security and make use of the permanent Armed Forces and the 73, sub. 14).
National Guard to safeguard the security and external defence (Sec. 89, sub. 6) Members of the military cannot be elected Deputies unless they retire ninety
and the National Guard (Sec. 89, sub. 7). days before the election (Sec. 55, sub. 4) or six months in case of the President
Direct foreign policy and sign international agreements (Sec. 89, sub. 10). (Sec. 82, sub. 5).
In times of peace, no military authority may perform any functions other than
Powers of the Congress: those that are directly connected with military discipline (Sec.129).
The Chamber of Deputies has the legal initiative on recruitment of troops (Sec. Crimes and offenses against military discipline shall be tried by military courts;
72, sub. h). however, under no circumstances and for no reason shall military courts extend
Declare war in view of the information submitted by the Executive Power (Sec. their jurisdiction over persons who are not members of the Army (Sec. 13).
73, sub. 12).
Raise and maintain the Armed institutions and regulate their organization and
service (Sec. 73, sub. 14).
Enact laws on national security (Sec. 73, sub. 29, m).
Approve (Senate) international treaties and conventions subscribed by the Exe-
cutive Power, as well as conclude, denounce, suspend, modify, amend, with-
draw reserves and formulate interpretations (Sec. 76, sub. 1).
Approve the appointment of senior offi cers (Sec. 76, sub. 2; Sec. 89, sub. 4).
Approve the transit of foreign troops on the national territory and the deploy-
ment of national troops outside the country, and the sojourn of squadrons of
other powers in Mexican waters (Sec. 76, sub. 3).
20 Secretario de Estado en el Despacho de Defensa Nacional.
21Consejo Nacional de Defensa y Seguridad.
22 Consejo Superior de las Fuerzas Armadas.
23 Jefe del Estado Mayor Conjunto de las Fuerzas Armadas.
24Denomination used in the constitutional text.
sarudnoH

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Nicaragua (1986, Last reform 2014)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Army26:
Supreme Commander of the Army (Sec. 95 and 144). Mission: to defend national sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity (Sec. 92).
In exceptional cases can the President, in a Council of Ministers, order the in- It is a national institution of professional character, unaffi liated with any politi-
tervention of the Nicaraguan Army to support the National Police, when the cal party, apolitical, obedient and non-deliberant. Members of the Army should
stability of the Republic is threatened by serious internal disorder, calamities or receive permanent patriotic and
natural disasters (Sec. 92). civic education and be trained in international human rights law (Sec. 93).
Direct international relations of the Republic. Negotiate, celebrate and sign Organization, structures, activities, ranks, promotions, retirements and everything
treaties, pacts, agreements or the like to be approved by the National Assembly related to its operational development is specifi ed in the law (Sec. 94).
(Sec. 150, sub. 8). The Army is strictly subject to the Political Constitution, to which it respects and
obeys, and is subject to civil authority as exercised by the President. No other
Powers of the National Assembly25: armed bodies may exist in the national territory, or military ranks other than
Approve the deployment of national troops outside the country (Sec. 138, sub. those specifi ed by law (Sec. 95). Members of the Army are able to temporarily
26) and the entry of foreign troops only for humanitarian purposes (Sec. 92). occupy positions within the Executive for reasons of national security when the
Approve or dismiss international agreements celebrated with countries or orga- Nation’s supreme interests dictate it. In this case the individual will be under
nizations subject to International Law (Sec. 138, sub. 12). commission of external service for all legal purposes. (Sec. 95).
Bodies of the Army are prohibited from engaging in activities of political es-
pionage (Sec. 96).
They cannot perform party-political activities or hold a position in political or-
ganizations; they cannot stand for public offi ce if they have not left their active
military post at least a year prior to the elections (Sec. 94); they cannot be
Ministers, Deputy Ministers, Presidents or Directors of government or autono-
mous entities, Ambassadors (Sec. 152), magistrates of justice (Sec. 161, sub. 6)
or of the Supreme Electoral Council (Sec. 171, sub. d). In the last two cases they
must leave their post twelve months prior to the elections.
There is no obligatory military service, and all kinds of forced recruitment into
the Army or the Police are forbidden (Sec. 96).
Crimes and offenses of strictly military nature committed by members of the
Army come under the jurisdiction of Military Tribunals. Common crimes and
offenses committed by the military are under the jurisdiction of common courts.
In no case will civilians be subject to the decisions of military courts (Sec. 93).
For the purpose of national security: a) in no case is it permissible to esta-
blish systems that alter or affect national communication systems; b) points of
communication for purposes of national defence within the national territory
should be under the ownership of the State; c) radio and satellite spectrums are
owned by the State and must be regulated by the regulatory body (Sec. 92).
Panama (1972, Last reform 2004)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Republic of Panama shall have no army. All Panamanians are obliged to
To ensure the preservation of public order (Sec. 183). take up arms to defend national independence and the territorial integrity of
To head foreign relations; conclude international treaties and agreements, which the State. For the preservation of public order, for the protection of life, honour
will be submitted for consideration to the Legislature; and accredit and receive and property of those under the jurisdiction of the State, and for the prevention
diplomatic and consular agents. Confer promotion to members of police services of criminal offenses, the Law shall organize the necessary police services, with
according to the police career and applicable legal provisions (Sec. 184). separate controls and career.
In the face of foreign aggression, special police services may be temporarily
Powers of the National Assembly27: organized by law for the protection of the Republic’s borders and jurisdictional
Approve or reject, prior to their ratifi cation, international treaties and agree- territory. The President is the chief of all the services established; and as agents
ments made by the Executive. Declare war and empower the Executive to make of the State these shall be subordinate to the civil power and therefore abide
peace (Sec. 159). by orders issued by national, provincial or municipal authorities in the exercise
of its statutory functions (Sec. 130).
Government Council: The police services have no deliberative function and may not make political
It is the meeting of the President, who presides it along with the Vice President statements or representations in individual or collective form. They may not
of the Republic and State Ministers (Sec. 199). Its functions include, under the become involved in partisan politics, other than in exercising their right to vote
collective responsibility of all its members, decreeing states of emergency and (Sec. 131).
the suspension of relevant constitutional provisions (Sec. 200, sub. 5).
Paraguay (1992)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
The Armed Forces:
Powers of the President: They are a permanent, professional, non deliberant and obedient institution,
Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces (Sec. 238, sub. 9). subordinated to the powers of the State, to the provisions of the Constitution,
Adopt the necessary measures for the national defence (Sec. 238, sub. 9). and to the law (Sec. 173).
Declare the state of national defence, in case of external aggression, with the Mission: safeguard the territorial integrity and defend the legitimately constitu-
approval of the Congress (Sec. 238, sub. 7). ted authorities (Sec. 173).
Make peace with the approval of the Congress (Sec. 238, sub. 7). The members of the military on active duty will conform their actions to the
Appoint senior offi cers of the public force (Sec. 238, sub. 9). laws and regulations. Military service is compulsory and must be based on full
Issue military regulations and arrange, organize and distribute the Armed For- respect of human dignity. In times of peace, it will not exceed twelve months
ces (Sec. 238, sub. 9). (Sec. 129).
They cannot be affi liated to any political party or movement or engage in any
Powers of the Congress: type of political activity (Sec. 173); they cannot be elected President or Vice Pre-
Approve or dismiss international treaties (Sec. 141 and Sec. 202, sub. 9). sident, except for those who retire at least one year prior to the day of election
Approve the appointment of senior offi cers (Senate) (Sec. 224, sub. 2). (Sec. 235, sub. 7).
Authorize the entry of foreign troops to the territory of the Republic and allow Police or military personnel on active duty cannot be candidates for senators
the deployment of national armed forces outside the country, except in cases or deputies (Sec. 197).
where this is required for courtesy reasons. (Sec. 183 sub.3). Military courts will hear only crimes and offences of a military nature, com-
Approve the entry of foreign troops to the national territory and the deploy- mitted by military personnel on active duty. Their decisions can be overturned
ment of national troops outside the country (Senate) (Sec. 224, sub. 5). by courts of law (Sec. 174). Only in cases of an armed international confl ict
can military courts have jurisdiction over civilians and retired military personnel
(Sec. 174).
25 Asamblea Nacional.
26Denomination used in the constitutional text.
27Denomination used in the constitutional text.

Chapter 1: The Legal Framework

Peru (1993, Last reform 2009)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces:
Ensure external security (Sec. 118, sub. 4). The Armed Forces are composed of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force (Sec. 165).
Preside the national defence system; organize, deploy and arrange the Armed Forces Mission: guarantee the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, to take
(Sec. 118, sub. 14). control of the internal order in state of emergency if so provided by the President
Adopt the necessary measures to ensure the defence of the Republic, the integrity of (Sec. 165)
the territory and the sovereignty of the State (Sec. 118, sub. 15). The respective laws and regulations determine the organization, functions, specializa-
Declare war and accord peace with the approval of the Congress (Sec. 118, sub. 16). tion, training, use and discipline (Sec. 168).
Authorize Peruvians to serve in a foreign army (Sec. 118, sub. 23). They are non deliberant and are subordinated to the constitutional power (Sec. 169).
Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces (Sec. 164 and Sec. 167). The ethical and civic training and the teaching of the Constitution and human rights
Grant promotions to Generals and Admirals (Sec. 172). are compulsory both in the civilian and military education process. (Sec. 14).
Determine the number of troops (Sec. 172). The members of the military are not entitled to make collective petitions (Sec. 2, sub.
Declare the state of siege in case of invasion, foreign or civil war, in accordance with 20). They cannot run for elections) or perform political activities while on active duty
the Council of Ministries (Sec. 137). (Sec. 34); to set up unions or go on strike (Sec. 42). Members of the Armed Forces on
Sign international treaties on national defence (Sec. 56, sub. 3). active duty cannot be elected members of Parliament unless they have retired six (6)
months prior to the election (Sec. 91, sub. 4).
Powers of the Congress: They may not enter the fl oor of Congress without authorization from its President
Approve international treaties on national defence (Sec. 56, sub. 3). (Sec. 98).
Have the troops available as requested by the President of the Congress (Sec. 98). They can be ministers of State (Sec. 124).
Approve the entry of foreign troops to the national territory as long as it does not The law allocates funds for the logistical requirements of the Armed Forces (Sec. 170).
affect the national sovereignty in any way (Sec. 102, sub. 8). The Armed Forces and the National Police participate in the social and economic
Approve the declaration of war and the signing of peace treaties (Sec. 118, sub. 16). development of the country, and in civil defence according to the law (Sec. 171).
Military justice is established for the Armed Forces and the National Police (Sec. 139,
sub. 1). Military courts may have jurisdiction over civilians in the cases of treason and
terrorism (Sec. 173).
Uruguay (1967. Last reform 2004)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces:
Maintain and defend external security (Sec. 168, sub. 1). The members of the military are regulated by special laws (Sec. 59, sub. A).
Command the Armed Forces (Sec. 168, sub. 2). Members of the military on active duty cannot have a position in the govern-
Provide military posts and confer promotions, Grant retirements and manage ment, form part of commissions or political parties, subscribe to party mani-
pensions for civil and military employees in accordance with the law (Sec. 168, fests, authorize the use of their name and execute any other public or private
sub. 3, 9 and 11). political act, except voting (Sec. 77, sub. 4).
Order to break off relations and, based on a prior resolution by the General They cannot run for the election of Representatives (Sec. 91, sub. 2; Sec. 92),
Assembly, declare war if arbitration or other peaceful means have not been Senators (Sec. 100) or for President (Sec. 171) unless they resign and retire at
effective to avert a war (Sec. 168, sub. 16). least three months before the election.
Take prompt security measures in serious unexpected events of external attack Military justice for military crimes in state of war. Common crimes committed
or internal unrest, upon informing the General Assembly (Sec. 168, sub. 17). by members of the Armed Forces in times of peace, wherever they are commit-
Enter into and sign treaties, which shall later be ratifi ed with the approval of the ted, shall be subject to ordinary justice (Sec. 253).
Legislative Branch (Sec. 168, sub. 20).
Powers of the General Assembly28:
Declare war and approve peace treaties (Sec. 85, sub. 7).
Approve the appointment of senior offi cers (Sec. 168, sub. 11).
Approve the entry of foreign troops to the national territory and the deploy-
ment of national troops outside the country (Sec. 85, sub. 11 y 12).
Approve the number of Armed Forces personnel (Sec. 85, Sub. 8).
Establish militia regulations and determine time and number of recruitment
(Sec. 85, sub. 15).
Venezuela (1999)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The National Armed Force31:
Commander-in-Chief of the National Armed Force. Exercise the highest autho- It is an essentially professional institution, with no political orientation, organized
rity (Sec. 236, sub. 5) and the supreme command (Sub. 236, sub. 6). by the State, at the exclusive service of the Nation. It is founded on discipline, obe-
Establish the armed forces strength (Sec. 236, sub. 5). dience and subordination. The National Armed Force is composed of the Army, the
Promote offi cers starting at the rank of colonel or naval captain and appoint Navy, the Air Force and the National Guard Its mission is to guarantee the indepen-
them to the positions exclusively reserved to them (Sec. 236, sub. 6). dence and sovereignty of the Nation and ensure the integrity of its geographical
Convene and preside over meetings of the National Defence Council (Sec. 236, space, through military defence, cooperation in the maintenance of internal order,
sub. 23). and active participation in national development (Sec. 328).
The President of the Republic, in a Council of Ministers, can declare the state Their essential responsibility is the planning, execution and control of military ope-
of exception (Sec. 337). rations, as required to ensure the defence of the Nation. The National Guard shall
The President can declare the state of internal or external emergency in case of cooperate in the development of these operations and shall have as basic respon-
internal or external confl ict seriously endangering the security of the Nation, its sibility that of conducting operations as required maintaining internal order within
citizens or institutions (Sec. 338). the country. The National Armed Force shall carry out activities of administrative
policing and criminal investigation as provided by law (Sec.329).
Powers of the National Assembly29: Members of the military on active duty can vote. They are not allowed to run
Authorize the operation of military missions abroad or foreign military missions for elections, or to participate in propaganda, militancy or proselytizing (Sec. 330).
within the country (Sec. 187, sub. 11). It shall regulate and control, in accordance with the pertinent legislation, the ma-
Approve any international treaties or agreements signed by the National Exe- nufacture, importing, exporting, storage, transit, registration, control, inspection,
cutive (Sec. 187, sub. 18). trade, possession and use of weapons, ammunition and explosives (Sec. 324).
Military promotions shall be effective in accordance with merit, hierarchy and va-
National Defence Council30: cancies. They are the exclusive prerogative of National Armed Forces in accordance
It is the highest consultative body for planning and advising the Public Authority with the corresponding law (Sec. 331).
on matters related to the integral defence of the Nation, its sovereignty and the Military justice for military crimes, its judges shall be elected by competitive proce-
integrity of its geographical space and it establishes the strategic concept of dures (Sec. 261).
the Nation. It is presided over by the President and includes the Vice President, The General Controller of the National Armed Forces: monitors, controls and audits
the President of the National Assembly, the Chairman of the Supreme Tribunal revenues, expenses and property allocated to the National Armed Force and their
of Justice, the Chairman of the Republican Moral Council, and the Ministers dependencies; it shall be under the responsibility of the General Controller of the
of Defence, Internal Security, Foreign Affairs and Planning, and other whose Armed Forces, appointed by means of a competitive process (Sec. 291).
participation may be deemed appropriate (Sec. 323).
28Asamblea General. Source: Compilation based on the Constitution of each country.
29 Asamblea Nacional.
30 Fuerza Armada Nacional.
31 Consejo de Defensa de la Nación.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Military Criminal Justice Systems
In addition to jurisdiction over active military
personnel, they also hold jurisdiction over:
Mixed Model
Chile*: retired military personnel; civilian personnel from the armed
forces, police, or other security forces.
Colombia: police or members of other security forces.
55% Dominican Republic: police or members of other security forces.
El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua: only military personnel.
Guatemala: retired military personnel or personnel from the police
or other security forces.
of countries in the
Uruguay: retired military personnel.
Civilians participate in the region have adopted
system through Supreme this system. Venezuela: retired military personnel, civilian personnel from the
Courts, which are the highest Armed Forces, civilians not related to defence, and police or
appeal body. members of other security forces.
Military Model
53%
Bolivia and Brazil: retired military personnel, civilian personnel from
the Armed Forces, civilians not related to defence and police or
members of other security forces.
Cuba: police or members of other security forces.
of countries in the Mexico**, Paraguay and Peru: only military personnel.
region have adopted
this system.
Courts are composed of
members of the Armed Forces
only.
Civilian Model
Only
2 In Argentina military jurisdiction was repealed by Law Nº 26394,
while in Ecuador it was amended by the Political Constitution of
the Republic. From these frameworks it is established that all
offenses committed by military personnel will be tried within
common courts.
countries in the
Courts responsible for trying
military crimes are composed of region have adopted
civilians only. The military justice this system.
system is within the civil criminal
system.
In Haiti the Constitution states that military courts hold jurisdiction in the case of conflict between
military personnel or in a situation of war; although they may not try civilians. In situations where crimes
are committed against civilians, it is the common courts that hold jurisdiction.
* In , the Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional several provisions of the Military Justice Code in a case involving the crime of grievous bodily harm against
a civilian.
** In , reform to military justice was published in the Offi cial Newspaper. Among other things, it contains the competences of civil tribunals to preside over the trials
of military personnel that commit crimes of a civil nature against civilians.
Source:Compilation based on the following laws:Ley que deroga el Código de Justicia Militar, aprueba modifi caciones al Código Penal y al Código Procesal Penal
de la Nación, aprueba instrucciones para la población civil en tiempo de guerra y otros confl ictos armados, el Código de Disciplina de las Fuerzas Armadas y la orga-
nización del servicio de justicia conjunto de las Fuerzas Armadas(Nº 26394 – 2008/08/26) (Argentina). Decreto Ley de organización judicial militar y el Código Penal
Militarr(Decree Law Nº 13321 – 1976/04/02) (Bolivia). Código Penal Militarr (Decree Law Nº 1001 – 1969/10/21. Last reform: Ley Nº 12432 – 2011/06/30) andLey de
organización judicial militar (Nº 8457 – 1992/09/04. Last reform: Law Nº 10445 – 2002/05/07) (Brazil). Código de justicia militarr (Decree Law Nº 806 – 1925/12/23.
Last reform: Law Nº 20477 – 2010/12/30) (Chile).Código penal militarr (Law Nº 1407 – 2010/08/17) (Colombia).Ley procesal penal militarr (Nº 6 – 1977/08/08) and
theLey de los delitos militares(Nº 22 – 1979/02/15) (Cuba). Código de justicia de las Fuerzas Armadass (Law Nº 3483 – 1953/02/13. Last reform: Law Nº 278-04
-2004/08/13) (Dominican Republic).Constitución Política and Ley reformatoria al Código Penal para la tipifi cación de los delitos cometidos en el servicio militar y
policial (2010/05/19) (Ecuador).Código de justicia militar (DL Nº 562 – 1964/05/29. Last reform: DL Nº 368 – 1992/11/27) (El Salvador). Código militarr (Decree Nº
214 – 1878/09/15. Last reform: Decree Nº41-96 – 1996/07/10) (Guatemala). Constitución Política (Haiti). Código penal militar (Decree Nº 76 – 1906/03/01. Last
reform: Decree Nº 47– 1937/01/22) (Honduras).Código de justicia militarr (DNL Nº 005 – 1933/08/31. Last reform: DOF 2012/04/09) (Mexico).Código penal militar
(Law Nº 566 – 2006/01/05) (Nicaragua). Código penal militar (Law Nº 843 – 1980/12/19) (Paraguay). Código Penal Militar Policial (DL Nº 1094 – 2010/09/01) (Peru).
Códigos Militares (Decree Law Nº 10326 – 1943/01/28) andLey marco de defensa nacionall(Nº 18650 – 2010/03/08. Last reform: Law Nº 18896 - 2012/05/10)
(Uruguay).Código orgánico de justicia militarr (GO Nº 5263 – 1998/09/17) (Venezuela).