2025 Stockholm Forum on Peace and Development
A Decade of Youth, Peace and Security:
Fostering Intergenerational Action on
Climate, Peace and Security
Overview
At the 2025 Stockholm Forum on Peace and Development, the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), the Folke Key Questions
Bernadotte Academy (FBA), the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), and the Kofi Annan Foundation (KAF)
convened young leaders and decision-makers in an
intergenerational dialogue on climate, peace, and security (CPS).
“What concrete actions can
The session built upon findings from Beyond Vulnerability: A governments, international
Guidance Note on Youth, Climate, Peace, and Security, published organizations, or donors take
by FBA, SIPRI, and UNDP, and on KAF and SIPRI's youth-led to better support and scale
research, Resilience Rising: Youth Research Informing Global youth-led initiatives working
at the intersection of climate,
Climate and Conflict Responses. Young experts from diverse
peace, and security?”
contexts shared their experiences, challenges, and successes in
addressing CPS issues on the ground, including Sylvain Obedi
(Democratic Republic of the Congo), Jayaa Jaggi (Pakistan), Kafia
Abdifitah Ajab (Somalia), Nisreen Elsaim (Sudan), Fatou Jeng (The “What action are you taking
Gambia) and Aaliyah Nabanga (Uganda). The session fostered in your current role, and how
can it be amplified?”
meaningful collaboration across generations, allowing participants
to engage directly with young experts and explore how youth-led
CPS initiatives can be strengthened and scaled. The discussion was
guided by the following key questions:

Outcome
From the discussions, participants identified the following recommendations for stakeholders at the intersection
of youth- and climate-based issues:
1. Recognition and support towards the Youth, Climate, Peace and Security Agenda
Promote youth-led, locally-based and Ultimately, policymakers should move beyond
community-driven strategies to tackle shared tokenism and merely consulting youth; instead,
climate, peace and security challenges: they should prioritize working hand-in-hand with
Programs aimed at supporting the youth, climate, young people to co-create solutions and shape
peace and security nexus should center outcomes together. More systematic support is
partnerships with local youth networks and needed for informal youth groups and spaces and
organizations while drawing upon local voices as start-ups to help ensure that the drive and
a source of technical expertise. Governments and expertise of youth actors is transformed into
international organizations should ensure that action.
both information and funding reach the local
level, and that programming is shaped by local Integrate youth leadership and CPS expertise
needs. Communities must work, with the support into governance structures: Climate, Peace and
of local and national governments, to establish Security should be mainstreamed in current and
local youth bodies and networks, such as councils future governance structures, while CPS
and advisory bodies, as a platform for amplifying mechanisms should be integrated in mediation
youth perspectives and coordinating grassroot and diplomacy and city-level violence prevention.
efforts. Governments should also acknowledge, include,
and consult with non-governmental youth and
Formally recognize Youth, Peace and Security climate entities. When possible, governments
as a national priority: National governments should simplify bureaucratic processes to better
should ensure young people’s meaningful facilitate engagement with informal youth
participation in decision-making processes at all organizations.
levels – as highlighted in the Youth, Peace, and
Security agenda and the Pact for the Future. This Include young people in international decision-
also includes developing and adopting National making processes: Youth representation must be
Action Plans (NAPs) on Youth, Peace and Security prioritized by stakeholders at multilateral
to create space for youth leadership within official convenings on climate, peace, and security and
structures. related issues. This includes systematically
including young people, promoting
Institutionalize meaningful opportunities for intergenerational dialogue, and raising youth
intergenerational dialogue and co-creation: priorities in the United Nations General Assembly
Legislators and elected leaders should update (UNGA), the United Nations Security Council
existing legal and institutional frameworks to (UNSC) and other high-level international fora.
foster conditions for youth to meaningfully
participate in peace and climate action and
policy-making, including through bottom-up,
government-supported platforms that promote
intergenerational dialogue and youth inclusion at
all levels of climate governance and peace and
security decision-making. Representatives must
similarly make space in existing governance
structures for meaningful participation from young
experts. Legislators must seek out youth expertise
on climate policy while increasing government
spending towards youth-led, community-based
climate, peace, and security initiatives.

2. Ensure safe and inclusive representation by bridging the gap between local realities
and global policy:
Ensure inclusive participation for young people Protect youth in civic and political spaces:
in all their diversity: Youth is not a homogenous Programs should ensure safe, discreet, dedicated,
group, so the inclusion of diverse youth groups and principled support for youth partners.
through an intersectional lens is paramount to Programs should implement strong protection
tackling YPS and CPS challenges. Many young mechanisms for young people in the CPS space.
people are working to address climate change Moreover, there is a need to support
out of necessity, rather than choice: the organizations at different levels, especially
conditions of poverty and conflict are especially community-based organizations.
exacerbated by climate change, emphasizing the
need to address the YPS and CPS agendas via Ensure safe, accessible spaces for youth
intersectional channels. Thus, stakeholders dialogue: Stakeholders should facilitate
should foster dialogue with young people in all discussion across topics, identities, and
their diversity to shape inclusive policies that geographies while taking into consideration local
reflect how different young people experience needs and sensitivities. It is crucial that
and respond to the intersecting risks of climate stakeholders ensure steadfast support to youth
and insecurity. engagement through safe and discreet
mechanisms in politically constrained
Uplift and amplify the climate leadership of environments. Programs should address barriers
young women through expanded WPS, YPS and confronting marginalized youth, especially young
CPS synergies. Young women face unique and women, and seek structural change to remove
intersectional risks and barriers to recognition and these.
inclusion; thus, programmes should actively work
to ensure expanded WPS, YPS and CPS synergies Uphold high standards of transparency and
and prioritize gender-senstive support. The accountability for supporting youth leadership
leadership of young women is critical to advance in CPS: Organizations should map and share data
these agendas. on their youth initiatives. Organizations should
also track the distribution and impact of their
grants across allocations and projects.

3. Increase investments and resources for youth leadership:
Commitment to flexible, accessible funding for Improve CPS literacy and educational access:
youth progammes on CPS: Funding mechanisms Legislators must ensure that themes of peace,
for youth programming must go beyond rigid climate, and civic engagement—shaped by input
project formats and offer flexible, accessible and recommendations gathered through
support that enables organic growth and long- consultations with local communities—are
term engagement for youth-led grassroot integrated into national education curricula. They
organizations. This includes offering un- should also promote both formal and informal
earmarked, long-term, and accessible grants for education rooted in human rights, sustainable
youth-led organizations working at the climate stewardship, and inclusivity. Educational
intersections of climate, peace, and security. Local actors should provide instruction, visuals, and key
and national organizations should promote words to improve accessibility. Further, it is crucial
budgeting that prioritizes youth to leverage local media (e.g. community radios)
recommendations. Youth-specific grants and sub- and ensure access to information and translation
grants for youth initiatives, particularly to non- of materials in local languages.
traditional, informal, and early-stage groups,
should be prioritized, along with mentorship and
apprenticeship opportunities. International donors
and funds should also mobilize local resources,
both through government and private sector
partnerships, while supporting local fundraising
and resource mobilization efforts. Innovative
approaches should be considered, such as video
applications.
Investment in youth-led CPS research: Donors
should fund youth-led, youth-for-youth and youth
principal-led participatory research on climate,
peace and security. Researchers should also
strive to understand how integrating CPS
mechanisms in mediation and diplomacy
improves overall development and peace
outcomes.
4. Expand cross-sectoral support for youth and dismantle institutional silos:
Support youth leadership in humanitarian Support beyond capacity-building: Support to
action: While at the frontlines of humanitarian youth on climate, peace and security should not
action and the YPS agenda, young people are still focus solely on training and capacity-building and
largely excluded from humanitarian decision- knowledge sharing, but move to shared decision-
making and response structures. Youth-led action making power.
should be integrated into humanitarian responses
at the intersection of the YPS and CPS agendas. Create channels for intergenerational exchange:
Better targeting and end-to-end support is Programmes should work to encourage
needed of marginalized groups, including youth knowledge exchange, mutual learning, and
climate refugees. collaboration between different generations.
Break down silos and enhance youth, climate, Embrace power-sharing with young leaders: To
peace and security integration: Programs should foster an environment in which youth leadership
work to break institutional silos between youth, can flourish, communities and partners must
climate, and peace and security agendas. share decision-making power across generations
and create space for meaningful impact.