Figure 1. Key statistics
Note: Climate change projections are based on the Sixth Phase of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP6) and the Shared Socioeconomic Pathway (SSP) 1–2.6.
Sources: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), ‘IPCC WGI Interactive Atlas’, accessed 7 Sep. 2025; Nilsson, D. and Svensson, I., ‘Pushing the doors open: Nonviolent
action and inclusion in peace negotiations’, Journal of Peace Research, vol. 60, no. 1 (Feb. 2023); United Nations, Security Council, ‘Protection of civilians in armed conflict’, Report
of the Secretary-General, S/2024/385, 14 ; UN Women and UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Progress on the Sustainable Development Goals: The Gender
Snapshot 2024 (UN Women: 2024); and Gender Climate Tracker, ‘Women’s participation on party delegations’, accessed 7 Sep. 2024.
kcotsrettuhS
:otohP

Climate, Peace and Security Thematic Fact Sheet
Women, Peace and Security
Climate-related security risks are not gender-neutral; they intersect RECOMMENDED ACTIONS:
with existing social, political and economic inequalities, shaping
people’s exposure to risk, capacity to adapt and inclusion in ▶ United Nations agencies, multilateral donors and national
peacebuilding. Gender inequalities, such as limited access to financial governments should provide sustained financial, technical
resources and exclusion from decision making, undermine the ability and institutional support to grassroots women’s groups
of women and marginalized groups to respond to climate change and and local peacebuilders. Funding mechanisms such as
contribute to sustainable peace. To address climate-related security the UN Peacebuilding Fund and the Green Climate Fund
risks effectively, gender considerations must be integrated into should expand dedicated windows for gender-responsive,
analysis, planning and implementation. locally led climate adaptation and peacebuilding,
particularly to advance women, peace and security (WPS)
•
Social norms and gender roles constrain the adaptive capacity of priorities for women’s participation, relief and recovery in
women and sexual and gender minorities. Discriminatory laws, climate and conflict-affected contexts.
unpaid care burdens and exclusion from leadership limit access to
▶ The UN system should strengthen protection for displaced
resources and reduce resilience.
women, men, girls and boys at risk of gender-based
•
Climate stressors and shocks deepen gender inequalities by violence, forced recruitment, labour exploitation and other
increasing food insecurity, displacement and gender-based gendered threats. To foster policy coherence, it should
violence, particularly in fragile and conflict-affected areas, support governments in identifying synergies between
although impacts are highly context specific. WPS national action plans and climate instruments such
• as national adaptation plans. This includes establishing
Women are disproportionately affected but they are also leading
coordination mechanisms across ministries and
climate adaptation and peacebuilding. Across regions, women
institutions to align gender-responsive climate action in
innovate locally grounded solutions that sustain livelihoods,
their agendas and policy frameworks.
manage natural resources and foster social cohesion. Unlocking
their full potential requires dismantling structural barriers to ▶ UN peacekeeping operations and special political
participation. missions, UN country teams and national governments
should further engage local women mediators,
•
Amplifying and investing in women-led initiatives, including environmental defenders, Indigenous leaders and local
through both the women, peace and security (WPS) agenda communities in climate-related conflict prevention, crisis
and the climate, peace and security (CPS) agenda, is essential to response and peacebuilding. Gender and climate expertise
strengthening community resilience and advancing sustainable should guide these efforts to ensure that peace processes
peace. in climate-affected contexts are gender-responsive and
conflict-sensitive to avoid unintended harm.
Advancing gender-responsive climate, peace and security measures
requires broad participation and commitment. This includes ▶ UN member states and regional organizations should
empowering underrepresented groups and engaging those with embed climate change as a cross-cutting theme in
social and political power to advance the CPS and WPS agendas and WPS national action plans and ensure that gender
foster inclusive governance. Several United Nations resolutions and is systematically addressed in climate, peace and
initiatives already recognize these links, for example, the mandate security policies and climate strategies. This includes
of the UN Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to develop gender- strengthening thematic actions on food security, energy
differentiated climate risk assessments and the UN Peacebuilding access and disaster risk reduction. Also, strengthening
Fund’s increasing support for women-led initiatives addressing climate attention to men’s and boys’ gendered experiences,
and conflict. However, gender remains inconsistently addressed in accelerating measures to advance women’s leadership
climate policies, while climate risks are largely absent from WPS and meaningfully integrating Indigenous knowledge into
frameworks, highlighting the need for more coordinated, intersectional climate action and peacebuilding strategies.
approaches across both agendas.
Gender inequalities Women’s participation Climate projection, 2039
Food insecurity impacts 26.7 per cent of women Between 1989 and 2018 in Africa and the Americas,
and 25.4 per cent of men women’s groups participated in 9 per cent of all formal
peace negotiations
In 2023, 4 out of 10 recorded civilian deaths
were women, 3 out of 10 were children, and Between 1989 and 2018 in Africa and the Americas,
3 out of 10 were men women’s groups participated in 12 per cent of all non-
violent actions pushing for peace processes
By 2050, climate change is projected to push
158 million more women and girls and At COP29 in 2024, women represented only 35 per cent
142 million men and boys into poverty of delegates
Mean air temperature change in °C
Over 75 per cent of agricultural policies recog- Between 2015 and 2023 in the UN Security Council, only Mean temperature change in °C
nize women’s roles, but only 19 per cent treat 22 per cent of member states’ permanent representatives
gender equality or women’s rights as explicit were women
policy objectives 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0

2 Climate, Peace and Security Thematic Fact Sheet: Women, Peace and Security
The CPS and WPS agendas Livelihood impacts
The CPS and WPS agendas are distinct but have overlapping Livelihoods dependent on natural resources are especially vulnerable
frameworks. The WPS agenda is the global framework recognizing to climate change. In many conflict-affected settings, a large share
the vital role women play in conflict prevention, peacebuilding and of the population relies on rain-fed agriculture, pastoralism and
recovery, and highlighting the connection between a gender-equal fishing. These sectors are highly exposed to climate hazards such
world, community resilience and positive peace.1 The CPS agenda as heatwaves, floods, droughts and deforestation. For vulnerable
focuses on how climate change interconnects with conflict and households and communities with limited livelihood options, climate
security, and the potential for climate-informed peacebuilding. As hazards worsen existing challenges, often disrupting livelihoods and
climate change and conflict amplify existing inequalities, increase driving climate-induced migration.7
insecurity and complicate recovery and peacebuilding, the two
Women are often responsible for collecting water, firewood and other
agendas can converge to offer integrated solutions.2
resources, which are tasks that in conflict-affected settings can expose
The WPS agenda acknowledges climate change as a factor shaping them to greater risks of sexual and gender-based violence.8 Delays
peace and security, allowing for its integration through national at overcrowded water points can lead to punishment and domestic
action plans.3 Its four pillars provide an entry point for climate violence, while long distances increase exposure to attacks.9 Resource
action.4 Participation can ensure women’s and marginalized groups’ scarcity has also contributed to school dropout rates among girls.
knowledge and leadership in climate action and peacebuilding are In Sri Lanka and Mozambique, this has included early marriage as a
supported. Protection can strengthen legal frameworks, safeguarding survival strategy during prolonged conflict and climate stress, further
women environmental defenders and peacebuilders, as women reinforcing gender inequalities.10
are on the frontlines and face disproportionate risks of violence
Many small-scale farmers in low- and middle-income countries are
and criminalization. Prevention offers opportunities to anticipate
women, who are responsible for household food security but face
and reduce climate-related security risks by addressing structural
barriers such as limited land rights, decision-making power and access
inequalities and promoting adaptive capacity. Relief and recovery
to technology, education and training.11 These inequalities not only
can ensure post-conflict and post-disaster responses are gender-
restrict their participation in climate action, but risk sidelining their
responsive and climate-smart, thus building resilience.
valuable knowledge of local ecosystems and adaptation strategies.
References to women, men, boys and girls continue to be added into Nevertheless, women are already key to advancing climate adaptation.
frameworks without deeper analysis of the different groups’ roles, In Chad, women make up 60 per cent of the agricultural workforce
vulnerabilities or privileges. Sexual and gender minorities also remain and have sustained food production despite land degradation and
largely invisible in data and policy, despite facing disproportionate risks water scarcity. Their leadership in adapting farming techniques and
due to discrimination and exclusion.5 managing resources has been vital in climate and conflict-affected
areas.12
To effectively address peace and security challenges, UN member
states and regional organizations should embed climate considerations Greater investment in women-led adaptation and resilience initiatives
as a cross-cutting theme across all the pillars in WPS national action is needed, alongside consistent financial, technical and institutional
plans, while ensuring gender is systematically integrated into CPS support to grassroots women’s groups and local peacebuilders. The
frameworks. Greater attention needs to be given to the two less participation and relief and recovery pillars of the WPS agenda are
utilized WPS pillars, prevention and relief and recovery, with a focus particularly relevant here. Increasing women’s representation in
on sectors such as food security, energy and disaster risk reduction. By decision making strengthens resilience and often improves social
integrating women’s leadership into climate action, climate, peace and cohesion outcomes. The relief and recovery pillar can be directly
security governance can move beyond short-term responses towards applied to reconstruction following climate-related security risks.
sustainable peace.
Migration and mobility
Climate-related peace and security risks
Gender provides a framework for considering the implications of
Climate change is rarely the main driver of conflict, but it can
climate-induced migration.13 Climate-induced migration and mobility
can be influenced by socially constructed gender roles, in which men
undermine development gains, exacerbate the dynamics of ongoing
are expected to migrate for new opportunities and women to stay
violence, amplify existing tensions and disrupt fragile peace processes.
Violent conflict and political instability can also weaken community
behind to fulfil household and childcare duties.14 This has been the case
for communities in countries such as Bangladesh, Ecuador, Ethiopia,
resilience to the effects of climate change. This fact sheet uses four
interrelated pathways to navigate the relationship between climate
Mali and Nepal.15 For the men who migrate, the journeys to find better
economic opportunities, and the jobs themselves, can be dangerous
change, peace and security: (a) livelihood impacts, (b) migration and
and exploitative; and they can be separated from their families for
mobility, (c) armed actors and security, and (d) political and economic
grievances.6 Integrating the WPS agenda into climate, peace and
years.16 For the women who stay, this often entails assuming new
roles as the heads of households, challenging oppressive gender
security analysis helps identify both gendered vulnerabilities and
relations and emerging as stakeholders in resource management. At
capacities that are often overlooked in the different pathways.
the same time, traditional gender norms are often enforced by male
relatives or other community members, including restricted mobility.17
1 Baldwin, G. and Bertea, M., ‘Where next for the women, peace and security agenda?’, Health, vol. 18, no. 1 (2023).
SIPRI WritePeace Blog, 1 Oct. 2024. 11 Canas, F. and de Haan, N., ‘Investing in women is the key to resilient food systems’,
2 Cohn, C. and Duncanson, C., ‘Women, peace and security in a changing climate’, CGIAR Blog, 7 Mar. 2025.
International Feminist Journal of Politics, vol. 22, no. 5 (Oct. 2020). 12 Bociaga, R., ‘Resilient women farmers in Chad battle climate challenges and social
3 UN Security Council Resolution 2242, 13 Oct. 2015. barriers’, Mongabay, 29 Aug. 2024.
4 The four pillars are: participation, protection, prevention, and relief and recovery. 13 Detraz, N. and Windsor, L., ‘Evaluating climate migration: Population movement,
5 Coomaraswamy, R., Preventing Conflict, Transforming Justice, Securing the Peace: insecurity and gender’, International Feminist Journal of Politics, vol. 16, no. 1 (2014).
A Global Study on the Implementation of United Nations Security Council 1325 on 14 Majidi, N., Pfister, L. and Falsini, S., ‘Leading the way: Women navigating climate
Women, Peace and Security (UN Women: 2015). change, mobility and resilience in Africa: Case studies from Somalia, Kenya and
6 Mobjörk, M., Krampe, F. and Tarif, K., ‘Pathways of climate insecurity: Guidance for Nigeria’, Working paper, Samuel Hall and UNDP, 2025.
policymakers’, SIPRI Policy Brief, Nov. 2020. 15 CARE Climate Change and Resilience Platform (CCRP), Evicted by Climate Change:
7 Tarif, K. et al., ‘Climate, Peace and Security Research Paper: Insights on Climate, Peace Confronting the Gendered Impacts of Climate-Induced Displacement
and Security’, NUPI and SIPRI, Dec. 2023. (CARE: The Hague, 2020).
8 Castañeda Camey, I. et al., Gender-based Violence and Environment Linkages (IUCN: 16 Braham, M., ‘Gender and climate-induced migration in the Mediterranean: From
Gland, 2020). resilience to peace and human security’, Mediterra 2018: Migration and Inclusive
9 Yoshida, K. et al., Defending the Future: Gender, Conflict and Environmental Peace Rural Development in the Mediterranean (Presses de Sciences Po: 2018).
(LSE/GAPS/WIPC: 2021). 17 Majidi, Pfister and Falsini (note 14); Henriksen, S. et al., ‘Climate migration amplifies
10 Pope, D. H. et al., ‘What is the current evidence for the relationship between the gender inequalities’, DIIS Policy Brief, 19 Aug. 2024; and Serraglio, D. A. and
climate and environmental crises and child marriage? A scoping review’, Global Public Thornton, F. ‘Women on the move? Mainstreaming gender policies and legal

 3
In Somalia and Kenya, women reported
Figure 2. Global overview of national action plans and women environmental
that handling the heavy workload of
defender casualties
old and new responsibilities without
spousal support often comes with Women, peace and security (WPS) national action plans (NAPs)
considerable psychological stress and a 2025
decline in overall wellbeing.18 Women’s No NAP NAP published NAP published referencing climate change
lack of access to education, information,
decision making and resources, as well
as restricted mobility, further heightens
their vulnerability to climate-related
security risks and negatively affects
their adaptive capacity.19
Disasters can also drive displacement,
which in turn heightens people’s
vulnerability to climate-related
security risks. Climate- and conflict-
induced displacement can increase the
competition for resources and heighten No. of women
the risk of conflict between host environmental
communities and internally displaced defender
persons.20 Moreover, climate-related casualties
displacement increases the risk of As of 31 Jan. 2022
domestic, sexual and gender-based

violence against women, as it often

disrupts social structures and limits

access to essential services, leaving
women more exposed to violence. This Note: Women environmental defender casualties also include missing bodies.
is particularly the case for women who
are forced to live in emergency shelters Sources: University of Sydney, 'WPS national action plans', accessed 20 Aug. 2025; and Tran, D. and Hanacek, K., ‘A global analysis of violence against
women defenders in environmental conflicts’, Nature Sustainability, vol. 6, no. 9 (Sep. 2023).
and displacement camps, where access
to information, recovery services
and support is often very limited or to join armed groups in cases of conflict, climate-related shocks or
completely absent.21 For example, internally displaced women in lack of alternative livelihoods. In Uganda’s Karamoja region, men’s
Somalia have reported that they live in constant fear of rape and sexual cultural identities are tied to cattle ownership and food provision,
violence, and that the absence of both formal and informal judicial and but prolonged drought, crop failure and livestock losses have led
social structures undermines their protection.22 some men to engage in cattle raiding and theft, which contributes
to insecurity.27 In Myanmar, men, women and sexual and gender
Specialized UN agencies and humanitarian organizations should
minorities have joined armed groups both voluntarily and under
pay greater attention to specific gendered vulnerabilities created or
coercion, and in Sierra Leone climate variability has been linked to
exacerbated by climate-related migration and displacement. This
a rise in the recruitment of children, especially girls, who are often
includes strengthening protection for women-headed households
targeted because they are perceived to require fewer resources.28
and displaced women and girls, while also addressing risks faced by
men and boys. The UN system should further support governments Military deployment in climate adaptation and disaster response can
in developing and strengthening legal and policy frameworks and pose security risks. In Colombia, security personnel assigned to clean
instruments that address the interlinkages between climate-induced energy projects have reportedly threatened women environmental
migration and displacement and gender.23 defenders, including with sexual violence. Military involvement in
combating environmental crimes has led to the criminalization of
Armed actors and security
Indigenous, Afro-descendant and peasant small-scale subsistence
practices, while large-scale environmental crimes by other actors have
The environmental impacts of climate change and related livelihood
gone unpunished. Moreover, military-led disaster responses typically
losses can exacerbate sociopolitical and economic vulnerabilities and
do not improve civilian safety and may divert resources away from
aggravate conflict dynamics, increasing the risk of recruitment by
government services and civil society.29
armed groups.24 In Cameroon, Chad, Niger and north-eastern Nigeria
former members of armed groups have cited climate change impacts Globally, environmental rights defenders are targeted by both state
as a contributing factor in their recruitment.25 In the absence of a and non-state actors, and often criminalized, threatened or killed.30
state presence, armed groups gain legitimacy in local communities Such threats are exacerbated in contexts of armed conflict. Despite
by positioning themselves as alternative service providers and first the risks, women continue to play critical roles in peacebuilding. As
responders during disasters, and as dispute mediators.26 grassroots mediators, they engage diverse voices such as youth,
minorities and civil society, and work towards trust building in
Gendered expectations influence these dynamics. Societal norms
communities and among conflict parties.31 In Yemen’s war-affected
that position men as breadwinners and protectors can pressure them
frameworks addressing climate-induced migration’, Comparative Migration Studies, 25 UNIDIR (note 24).
vol. 12, no. 53 (2024). 26 Tarif et al. (note 7).
18 Majidi, Pfister and Falsini (note 14). 27 Dwyer, A. and Nuckhir, G., Gender, Cultural Identity, Conflict and Climate Change:
19 CARE CCRP (note 15); and International Organization for Migration (IOM), ‘Gender, Understanding the Relationships (Conciliation Resources: London, Sep. 2023).
migration and climate change’, accessed 1 . 28 Bakaki, Z. and van der Haer, R., ‘The impact of climate variability on children:
20 Burson, B., Displacement in a Changing Climate (IFRC: Geneva, 2021). The recruitment of boys and girls by rebel groups’, Journal of Peace Research, vol. 60,
21 CARE CCRP (note 15). no. 4 (Aug. 2022); and UN Human Rights Council, ‘Courage amid crisis: Gendered
22 Nicolle, H., Identifying Climate Adaptive Solutions to Displacement in Somalia, IOM impacts of the coup and the pursuit of gender equality in Myanmar’,
and UNEP Assessment Report (Samuel Hall: Feb. 2021). A/HRC/56/CRP.8, 1 .
23 UN Women, Integrating Climate Change into National Action Plans for Women, Peace 29 DCAF, Women Speak: The Lived Nexus Between Climate, Gender and Security (DCAF:
and Security. In Focus: Asia and the Pacific, Guidance Note (UN Women Regional Geneva, 2022); and Hynes, T. and Yadav, P., ‘Dissolving interagency siloes: The WPS
Office for Asia and the Pacific: 2025); and Serraglio and Thornton (note 17). agenda on the disaster-conflict continuum’, Global Observatory, 15 Oct. 2020.
24 Tarif et al. (note 7); UN Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR), ‘Climate 30 Front Line Defenders, Global Analysis 2024/25 (Front Line Defenders: Dublin/
change is driving people into armed groups: Five takeaways’, ; and Brussels, ); and Schleiter Nielsen, A., ‘Where environmental defenders are
Bertrand, B. and Koko, A. D., Climate Change and Armed Groups, UNDPO Report criminalized, democracy suffers’, International IDEA, 30 Nov. 2023.
(SeeD: Nicosia, 2023). 31 Al-Saidi, K. et al., ‘Climate change, conflict and gender: Insights and perspectives

4 Climate, Peace and Security Thematic Fact Sheet: Women, Peace and Security
regions of Taiz and Lahj, women
Figure 3. Global overview of insecurity, climate vulnerability and
facilitated dialogue committees with
tribal leaders, community figures gender inequality
and legal experts to negotiate civilian Insecurity, climate vulnerability and gender inequality score
access to water tanks with military
As of 2022
actors, improving local resource access Low High No data
and reducing tensions.32 Yet women
mediators face barriers such as lack of
resources, exclusion from policy spaces
and restrictive sociocultural norms.33
The meaningful participation of
women mediators, environmental
defenders, Indigenous groups and local
communities in climate-related conflict
prevention and resolution is essential
for inclusive, lasting peace. This reflects
the prevention and participation pillars
of WPS resolutions and supports the
CPS goal of addressing resource-based
conflict drivers through inclusive
dialogue. As WPS national action plans
are often developed through broad
networks, including governments, civil
society, regional bodies and security
actors, they offer a key entry point for
aligning with the CPS agenda. Climate Note: The score was calculated using three key indexes. The Fragile States Index is based on a conflict assessment framework using 12 cohesion,
policies and peace processes should be economic, political and social conflict risk indicators. The ND-GAIN Country Index covers 2 key dimensions of climate change adaptation: vulnerability
to climate change and readiness to adapt. The Women, Peace and Security Index scores and ranks countries in terms of women's security, justice and
gender-responsive and conflict-sensitive inclusion.
to avoid unintended harm, including the
Source: United Nations Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs (DPPA), 'Promoting peace by addressing the linkages between gender,
securitization of climate governance.
climate change and security', Politically Speaking, 31 Mar. 2022.
Peacebuilding programmes, including
national peacebuilding and development
policymaking or neglected by public institutions, especially in the
plans, should address the nexus between climate change and gender
context of repeated shocks resulting from climate change and
to better foster resilience and reduce insecurity.
deteriorating livelihoods, the risk of social unrest and instability
Political and economic grievances increases.
In many of the countries most affected by climate change, national Masculine norms and structural barriers that prevent the inclusion
climate policies still inadequately address gender perspectives. of women and Indigenous people in decision making also weaken
Although the vast majority of climate change national adaptation plans peacebuilding efforts and climate security outcomes and can prevent
submitted to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change as of young men from rejecting those norms and pursuing feminine-coded
 referenced gender, these references are often superficial community work. Excluded groups often hold valuable knowledge
or disconnected from implementation.34 Consequently, adaptation and about local ecosystems, adaptation strategies and mediation practices,
mitigation efforts frequently fall short of addressing and responding yet are routinely excluded from (or added in the final stages of) formal
to gendered needs, and, in the worst case, they reinforce structural negotiations and high-level decision making.37 This undermines the
inequalities and fuel political and economic grievances.35 quality, inclusivity and sustainability of the negotiated outcomes. To
reduce the risk of grievance-based insecurity and promote climate
Several African and Caribbean countries have cited specific challenges resilience, governments must ensure the full, equal and meaningful
and barriers in implementing gender-responsive climate adaptation participation of women, Indigenous peoples and other under-
programmes, including a lack of disaggregated data, limited analytical represented groups from the earliest stages of decision-making
capability, low capacity to mainstream gender into climate policies processes. This includes strengthening concrete measures to advance
and weak institutional coordination between climate and gender women’s participation, addressing structural inequalities through
sectors.36 These gaps reduce the legitimacy, effectiveness and equity gender-responsive climate finance, investing in local capacities and
of climate policies and can deepen mistrust between governments strengthening accountability and governance frameworks.
and marginalized communities. When people feel excluded from
from the Middle East and North Africa’, MEDRC Transboundary Environments (NAP) Processes, NAP Global Network Synthesis Report 2023–2024
Practitioners Briefing Series no. 22, 2025; and Papastavrou, S., ‘Intersecting (IISD: Winnipeg, Dec. 2024).
priorities: Advancing the women, peace and security agenda through climate security 35 Dwyer and Nuckhir (note 27); and Sinswat, W. et al., Beyond a Seat at the Table:
initiatives’, IAI Commentaries 24, 29 . Pathways for Gender-equitable Participation in Climate Adaptation Decision-making
32 Al-Saidi et al. (note 31). (CARE France: 2024).
33 Al-Saidi et al. (note 31); and Arino, M. V., ‘Women peacebuilders in mediation efforts: 36 Dazé and Hunter (note 34).
Challenges and pathways for inclusion’, IAI Commentaries 25, 23 Apr. 2025. 37 Papastavrou (note 31).
34 Dazé, A. and Hunter, C., Advancing Gender-Responsive National Adaptation Plan
The Climate, Peace and Security Fact Sheets are produced jointly by the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs (NUPI) and the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute (SIPRI), with funding from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Norway and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark. The information in this thematic fact sheet does not
necessarily reflect the views of these partners.
The Climate, Peace and Security Fact Sheets aim to generate reliable, relevant, timely and actionable information and analysis on climate-related peace and security risks in
selected countries and regions on the United Nations Security Council agenda.
Series editors: Dr Cedric de Coning (NUPI) and Dr Florian Krampe (SIPRI)
Contributors: Ingvild Brox Brodtkorb (NUPI), Bárbara Magalhães Teixeira (SIPRI), Gretchen Baldwin (SIPRI), Kheira Tarif (SIPRI), Katongo Seyuba (SIPRI),
Thor Olav Iversen (NUPI) and Minoo Koefoed (NUPI)
Visuals: Jules Duhamel