global asia Cover story a Nuclear south Korea? global asia Vol. 18, No. 1, 
A Russian Perspective
1 “Yoon keeps possibility of Seoul’s possession of nuclear weapons 5 “Over 76% of South Koreans support development of nuclear
open,” Korea Times, Jan 12, 2023. weapons,” Korea Times, Jan 30, 2023. 
nation/2023/01/356_343477.html nation/2023/01/205_344519.html
on South Korea’s Risky 2 “Yoon reaffirms commitment to nuclear treaty in Davos,” Yonhap 6 “DPRK Strategic Capabilities and Security on the Korean
News, Jan 20, 2023. en.yna.co.kr/view/AEN20230120004100315 Peninsula: Looking Ahead,” a joint study by the Center for Energy
3 “Report on 6th Enlarged Plenary Meeting of 8th WPK Central and Security Studies and the International Institute for Strategic
Nuclear Ambitions Committee,” Korean Central News Agency, Jan. 1, 2023, Studies, July 14, 2021, 
en/article/q/e6667bf3afa7c65e0939f77ee83eabf9.kcmsf dprk-strategic-capabilities-security-korean-peninsula
4 “Austin in South Korea as Yoon seeks greater US nuclear assurances,” 7 Peter Hayes, “Park Chung Hee, the CIA & the Bomb,” Global Asia,
Reuters, Jan. 31, 2023, (Vol. 6, No. 3), 
By Vladislav Chernavskikh park-chung-hee-the-cia-&-the-bomb_peter-hayes
& Anton Khlopkov
Attempts to reinvigorate regional security dia- between 1982 and 2000 the country carried out
logue involving the key stakeholders — the for- activities related to uranium conversion, chemi-
mer participants in the Six-Party talks — have cal and laser enrichment (including production
been unsuccessful so far. Against this backdrop, of highly-enriched uranium) and plutonium sep-
elements of South Korea’s political establish- aration, all of which were not reported to the
ment and some experts are increasingly vocal in IAeA, contrary to South Korea’s obligations under
South Korea would have much In JAnUArY this year, South Korean President asking how much reliance can be placed on the the comprehensive Safeguards Agreement.8 It’s
Yoon Suk-yeol said that due to the “growing threat” US “nuclear umbrella” in the event of an open worth remembering that in 2002-03 Seoul denied
to lose by pursuing a nuclear
from north Korea, Seoul might consider deploy- military conflict in the region.4 IAeA inspectors the right to access the experimen-
weapons program, a hypothetical
ing US tactical nuclear weapons in the country Second, there is no doubt that South Korea tal uranium enrichment facility in South Korea as
idea that its president raised or pursuing its own military nuclear program.1 has sufficient scientific, technical, industrial and well as to collect environmental samples.9 Fur-
recently. It would entail Seoul the latter openly contradicts South Korea’s obli- economic capacity. In speaking about the pos- thermore, in 1997-2001, South Korean agents
gations under the treaty on the non-Proliferation sibility of the country acquiring its own nuclear were known to have attempted to illegally obtain
withdrawing from the Nuclear
of nuclear Weapons (nPt).2 Yoon later dialed arsenal, President Yoon emphasized that if the components for intercontinental ballistic missiles
Non-Proliferation Treaty,
back the statement and assured the media that political decision were made, nuclear weapons capable of carrying nuclear warheads.10
triggering a cascade of negative for now South Korea intends to adhere to its nPt could be produced in a relatively short amount
consequences. For Russia, that obligations, but his initial statement has already of time due to already existing expertise. Accord- hyPothEtiCal sCENarios aNd outCoMEs
provoked lively discussions on the risks of further ing to some sources, representatives from South It’s reasonable to assume that as long as the South
would effectively halt bilateral
nuclear proliferation on the Korean Peninsula. Korea’s nuclear industry speak about being able Korea-US alliance is seen by Seoul as a criti-
co-operation on peaceful uses
to produce nuclear weapons within six months cal element of national security, the US has the
of nuclear energy. whErE arE wE Now? of a political decision to do so. most effective political leverage to influence the
At present, there is no indication that Seoul is pur- third, support for the acquisition of nuclear nuclear policy of the South Korean leadership.
It’s time for international
suing a military nuclear program or taking practi- weapons continues to increase steadily among however, Washington has not always been able to
stakeholders to renew efforts cal steps toward that goal. But there seems to be a South Koreans. According to the latest South prevent its allies from developing nuclear weap-
to reduce tensions on the critical mass of external and internal factors that Korean public opinion polls, three out of four ons — the example of Pakistan comes to mind.
are compelling nonproliferation experts to pay people are in favor of the country possessing its South Korea could make a political decision
Korean Peninsula and create a
closer attention to South Korea’s nuclear policy. own nuclear weapons.5 to develop and produce nuclear weapons, either
sustainable regional security
First, it is reasonable to assume that Seoul Fourth, South Korea’s nonproliferation record through a clandestine military nuclear program
architecture with the long-term might have incentives to consider further is far from perfect historically. In 1973, South or an open withdrawal from the nPt. A combina-
goal to free the entire peninsula enhancing its military capabilities, including a Korea developed a long-term plan to produce tion of these is also hypothetically possible.
possible move toward possession of a “super- nuclear weapons. Incidentally, information about In the first case, sooner or later, the IAeA is
from nuclear weapons, write
weapon.” the security environment on the the nuclear activities in South Korea under Presi- likely to find indications that Seoul is not comply-
Vladislav Chernavskikh
Korean Peninsula is tense, and a worrying dent Park chung hee was one of the factors that ing with its safeguards agreement. Such indica-
and Anton Khlopkov. trend toward further escalation has taken form led to Pyongyang’s sustained interest in pursu- tions may include anomalies in the accounting
in recent months. north Korea continues to ing its own nuclear program.6 South Korea’s clan- data of the reported nuclear material or detec-
develop its nuclear and missile programs — in destine military nuclear program went on for sev- tion of undeclared nuclear material, facilities and
late , the leader of north Korea eral years even after its accession to the nPt and activities. this would be followed by an IAeA
(the Democratic People’s republic of Korea), was finally rolled back in the late 1970s under US investigation and a report to the IAeA Board of
Kim Jong Un, announced plans to begin mass pressure.7 Still, South Korea continued working Governors. If South Korea refuses to comply with
production of tactical nuclear weapons and to with sensitive nuclear technology. According to the IAeA requirements regarding noncompli-
further build up the country’s nuclear arsenal.3 the International Atomic energy Agency (IAeA), ance, russia in co-operation with other countries
56 57

global asia Cover story a Nuclear south Korea? global asia Vol. 18, No. 1, 
8 “Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement in the 12 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, UN Office for
Republic of Korea,” Report by the Director General, IAEA, Nov 11, Disarmament Affairs, 
2004, 13 George Bunn and Roland T Imerbaev, “The Right to Withdraw
9 “South Korea’s Nuclear Surprise,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty: the views of two NPT
Vol. 61, No. 11 (2005), pp. 40-49, doi.org/10.2968/061001011 negotiators,” originally published in Russian in Yaderny Kontrol,
10 “South Korea Missile Overview,” Nuclear Threat Initiative, Vol. 111, No.3 (Fall 2005), 
Apr 21, 2016, Right_to_Withdraw_from_NPT.pdf
“A businessman’s confession: I brought ICBMs into Korea,” 14 World Nuclear Performance Report 2022, World Nuclear
Chosun Ilbo, Aug. 1, 2020 (in Korean), Association, 
data/html_dir/2011/06/24/2011062401222.html 4c3f-ab80-f5024883d9da/World-Nuclear-Performance-
If Seoul withdrew from 11 UN Security Council, S/RES/1737 (2006), Report-2022.pdf.aspx
securitycouncil/s/res/1737-%282006%29
the NPT, it could also deal
a serious blow to South will likely support the subsequent transfer of the proliferation regime. the emergence of a new cri-
South Korean nuclear dossier to the Un Security sis would put additional pressure on the regime,
Korea’s energy sector and council to adopt a resolution urging the coun- reduce its chances of functioning effectively to
try to return to compliance with its nPt obliga- resolve existing problems, and create risks of fur-
tions. In 2006, after the IAeA’s board of governors ther proliferation of nuclear weapons. Seoul’s
economy. As a result of likely
adopted a resolution on Iran’s noncompliance decision to withdraw from the nPt would also
with its safeguards agreement, the Un Security probably put an end to the long history of mul-
sanctions, its nuclear power
council adopted resolution 1737 (2006),11 which, tilateral diplomatic efforts to create conditions
among other things, decided that all states should for the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.
plants, which provided prevent the supply and transfer of certain sensi- Some analysts have also emphasized in infor-
tive nuclear technology and materials to Iran. mal conversations that the US may decide to
27 percent of the country’s It is worth emphasizing that, as of now, accord- veto a Un Security council resolution impos-
ing to the data available, the IAeA has found no ing sanctions on South Korea. this would result
electrical power generation evidence that South Korea is not complying with in further deepening disagreements among the
its safeguards agreement. Moreover, this year, permanent Un Security council members on
according to some sources, the IAeA strength- nuclear nonproliferation issues and would effec-
in 2022 and are fully
ened its inspection activities in the country due tively paralyze the council’s ability to fulfill its
to the overall growth of South Korean scientific, responsibilities in this area.
dependent on imported
technological and industrial nuclear capabilities. If Seoul withdrew from the nPt, it could also
A second hypothetical option could be a South deal a serious blow to South Korea’s energy sec-
uranium and uranium
Korean announcement of its withdrawal from tor and economy. As a result of likely sanctions,
the nPt. According to Article X of the nPt,12 all its nuclear power plants, which provided 27 per-
enrichment services, parties to the treaty and the Un Security council cent of the country’s electrical power generation
should be notified of such a decision three months in 2022 and are fully dependent on imported
would be at risk of in advance. this is likely to be followed by a meet- natural uranium and uranium enrichment ser-
ing of the three depositary states of the treaty vices, would be at risk of shutting down.14 As the
shutting down. to co-ordinate their positions. Subsequently, a country’s nuclear fuel reserves become depleted,
South Korean withdrawal statement would be operators of South Korean nuclear power plants
discussed at the Un Security council, which is would likely be forced to first reduce capacity and
capable of taking action against South Korea if then to shut down operations completely within
its withdrawal is deemed a “threat to peace and three years at the latest.
security.”13 Moscow would likely co-ordinate with Such a scenario would effectively nullify South
Beijing and propose measures against Seoul to Korea’s nuclear export potential — developing
be included in the resolution, encouraging South nuclear exports has been named as one of the
Korea to remain in the nPt. At the first stage, goals of the Yoon administration.15 A decision to
these could include banning the export of mate- withdraw from the nPt would also impact the
rials and technologies that could contribute to US capacity to build new nuclear power plants,
Seoul’s missile and nuclear programs. including small modular reactors (SMrs), since
One of the global consequences of any decision the US industry is currently significantly depend-
by South Korea to withdraw from the nPt would ent on South Korea in manufacturing and sup-
be a further weakening of the global nuclear non- plying major equipment for reactors. As a result,
58 59

global asia Cover story a Nuclear south Korea? global asia Vol. 18, No. 1, 
15 “Yoon pledges to export 10 nuclear power plants by 2030 if and the Government of the Russian Federation on Cooperation on 19 “South Korea suffers 22.6 percent fall in trade with Russia amid concerning a Joint Statement on the Korean Peninsula Issues,”
elected,” Yonhap News Agency, Dec 29, 2021, en.yna.co.kr/view/ the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy,” May 28, 1999, war in Ukraine,” Aju Business Daily, Feb 22, 2023, International Atomic Energy Agency, Aug. 14, 2017,
AEN20211229005400315 fissilematerials.org/library/rok99.pdf com/view/20230222105952530 
16 “The Statute of the IAEA,” International Atomic Energy Agency, 18 “Decision No. 973 of Dec. 15, 2000, on the export and import 20 “Communication received from the Permanent Representatives infcircs/2017/infcirc922.pdf; “Russia, China coordinate new
 of nuclear materials, equipment, special non-nuclear materials of the Russian Federation and the People’s Republic of China plan on settlement on Korean Peninsula — diplomat,” TASS,
17 “Agreement Between the Government of the Republic of Korea and related technologies,” Government of the Russian Federation, Nov. 20, 2019, tass.com/world/1090677
docs.cntd.ru/document/901777341
russia and china would have additional oppor- russia and South Korea on co-operation in the the international community should place the Overall, one of the first steps toward reduc-
tunities in the global market. Field of Peaceful Uses of nuclear energy, nuclear nuclear issue of the Korean Peninsula in a broader ing tensions in the region could be an agreement
South Korea would also lose its diplomatic exports as well as nuclear and non-nuclear mate- context of creating a sustainable regional secu- to suspend joint US and South Korean military
influence and scientific presence in relevant inter- rials, installations and equipment received by rity architecture, and that the long-term goal of exercises in the region in exchange for the sus-
national forums. It is a member of the IAeA Board Seoul under the agreement cannot be used for the key stakeholders should be denuclearization pension of north Korean missile test launches.
of Governors, and in 2021-22 the South Korean military purposes and must be subject to IAeA of the entire Korean Peninsula. In this regard,
representative chaired the board. In 2012, Seoul safeguards throughout their use within South there is an urgent need for fresh initiatives that
hosted the second nuclear Security Summit, and Korean territory or under its jurisdiction.17 rus- would pave the way to reduce tensions and envis- Vladislav Chernavskikh is a research
in 2016-17 it chaired the nuclear Suppliers Group. sian export control legislation also establishes age a possible structure for a regional security associate at the Center for Energy and
the country is actively involved in technical pro- that exports of nuclear goods and technologies to architecture. One option here could be to update security studies (CENEss).
jects within the OecD neA, Generation IV Inter- non-nuclear-weapon states may be carried out on the plan of action for the comprehensive resolu-
national Forum and other platforms. these for- condition that the recipient country has a valid tion of the Korean Peninsula issues suggested in anton khlopkov is the director of the
mats of scientific co-operation would be denied to safeguards agreement with the IAeA that covers the past jointly by russia and china.20 Center for Energy and security studies.
South Korea if it were to withdraw from the nPt. all of its nuclear activities.18
It can be assumed that South Korea’s intention consequently, the russian nuclear industry
to withdraw from the nPt, and its subsequent would have to abandon co-operation with South
withdrawal, would be addressed in other relevant Korean companies. In particular, co-operation on
international forums besides the Un Security the russian-constructed el Dabaa nuclear power Would you "The Morning Peace" published by the
council. certainly, we can expect this issue to be plant in egypt would be terminated — currently,
Koreapeaceforum will satisfy you
reflected in the nPt review process. At the next Korea hydro & nuclear Power is scheduled to sup- like to know
Preparatory committee session or the review ply US$2 billion worth of equipment to the egyp- “The Morning Peace” selects and provides columns
and press reports which cover unifi cation, South-North
conference itself, many states would probably tian site. Shipments of enriched uranium prod- the opinion
relations and Korean peninsula’s peace issues in most
insist that the draft final document include provi- ucts from russia to South Korea under an exist-
reasonable and balanced viewpoints in Korea.
sions condemning South Korea’s actions and urg- ing 2020-2030 long-term contract worth US$500 in Korea?
If you send your email address to us,
ing it to return to the nPt and comply with the million would also be suspended. Overall, the
we will provide you with regular newsletters.
relevant Security council decisions. downward trend in trade between the two coun-
At the IAeA, in accordance with its statute, tries, which fell by more than 20 percent to about Subscribe our newletter by sending email to:
members may advocate for a decision by the US$21 billion in 2022 would likely intensify.19 Koreapeaceforum@gmail.com
board of governors to suspend South Korea’s
participation in the agency’s programs and pro- CoNClusioN
jects.16 In addition, one could expect that South the statements by South Korea’s president have
Korea’s intention to withdraw from the nPt already damaged the country’s reputation as a
would be condemned in such major international responsible nuclear exporter and, given the cur-
gatherings as the G20, the Shanghai co-opera- rent situation on the Korean Peninsula, caused
tion Organization and BrIcS. reasonable concern among nuclear nonprolifera-
Introduction to the Korea Peace Forum
Any technical and commercial nuclear co- tion experts. however, it is premature to say that
“The reunification 'Dream Team' that seeks reconciliation for the two Koreas”
operation between russia and South Korea could Seoul has launched a nuclear weapons program.
be expected to be halted even if a Un Security the recent IAeA’s safeguards activities have not This organization is comprised of former officials from the Ministry of National Unification and diplomats
who have planned and executed the engagement policy towards North Korea, scholars who constructed the
council resolution is blocked by the US or other detected indications that Seoul is noncompliant
theoretical foundation for the engagement policy, civil society members who have worked on the ground to
permanent members of the council. According to with its safeguards agreement. lead exchanges between the two Koreas seeking inter-Korean reconciliation and cooperation in all fields.
the 1999 Intergovernmental Agreement between the current situation once again proves that
60 61