INDUSTRY BRIEF
An initiative of the HAI Corporate Members Program
Education
and AI

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Introduction
Effective learning solutions are fundamental developing AI that facilitates high-quality
to creating a higher quality of life that is personalized learning at scale, creates grading
accessible to everyone. At HAI, we support systems that augment the teaching and
researchers who are empowering our assessment experience, and automatically
understanding of learning across cultures, designs intentional learning environments and
ages, identities, and abilities, which as a infrastructures that help all individuals thrive.
result will improve the experience of learners,
We believe motivating the development of
teachers, and institutions. The community at
technology that uplevels all learners requires
large is leveraging technologies and data to
efforts and discussions at the intersection of
revolutionize and democratize educational
research, industry, and government. Through
opportunities by making how we learn more
highlighting how we could creatively disrupt
scientific, learner-centered, and collaborative.
and augment existing methods in education
In this Industry Brief, we present a cross- by employing AI, we hope thought leaders,
section of the key research at HAI and investors, operators, teachers, learners, policy
more broadly at Stanford, including within and decision-makers will find the brief useful
Stanford’s new Transforming Learning as a point of further exploration and begin
Accelerator, that can help shape the future meaningful conversations.
of education. You will find researchers
HAI’s mission is to advance AI research, education, policy and practice to improve
the human condition. To learn more about HAI, visit hai.stanford.edu

INDUSTRY BRIEF
“Education is one domain where AI research has great
potential to develop solutions that improve the daily
experiences of students and lifelong learners. We've
shown that machine learning systems can automate part
of the role of a skilled human tutor, allowing the human
tutor to concentrate on what they do best. This is one
demonstration of how technology can help broaden
access to high quality and personalized education.
AI technology does this, not by removing humans from
the equation, but rather by putting them at the center
and giving them tools to be more effective.”
–Peter Norvig, HAI Distinguished Education Fellow

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Education

Personalized and Adaptive Learning
•
Natural Language Interactions
•
Augmented Teaching

Learning Sciences

Learning Infrastructure

INDUSTRY BRIEF

EDUCATION
PERSONALIZED AND Natural Langage
ADAPTED LEARNING Interactions
WHAT’S NEW?
Because of recent advancements in large language models, complex NLP tasks are more
feasible by applying out-of-the-box algorithms accompanied by domain adaptation.
Researchers on campus are leveraging these models to pioneer natural language
applications such as chatbot engines to serve demands in teacher training and fuel 5
improvements in student proficiencies, especially in language learning or other “The best educators
communication intensive settings. Furthermore, AI algorithms can quantify and evaluate
understand and help
responses from learners that were never previously encountered, then proceed to predict
student performance, deploy better-suited exercises, and grant personalized feedback. their students through
an ongoing dialogue
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW?
surrounding ideas,
According to a GlobalNewsWire report, amidst the pandemic, the global market for private
tutoring was estimated at $123.8B in 2020 and is projected to reach $201.8B by 2026.1 approaches, and reasons.
The demand for private and personalized education--driven by increased competition
As AI tools become
in admissions and the rising prevalence of lifelong and remote learning--points to an
opportunity for education firms and startups to supply comprehensive, scalable, and more facile at using
interactive technologies powered by natural language processing and understanding.
natural language they
Natural language technologies flexibly enhance student education on digital platforms
in contexts such as online courses, self-guided explorations, and supplemental classes. will join this dialogue
Besides being able to readily streamline current methods of instruction, they have proven
benefits of increasing student learning rates as well as evoking higher learning times. to supplement and
support teachers, to
EYE ON CAMPUS
scaffold the kind of
Researchers on campus are...
joyful, individualized
• B uilding in-house algorithms to rate and classify open-ended text. The models are
embedded in chatbots that can identify English writing proficiency and in digital kiosks learning experience that
to assist the community in better navigating buildings.
is currently inaccessible
• E xploring targeted question generation by fine-tuning pre-trained language models for
to most students. At the
deep knowledge tracing (LM-KT) to predict the probability of correct student answers
and generalize to unseen questions. The LM-KT is also used to generate new questions same time, as classroom
conditioned on a given student and target difficulty. Their findings suggest that the
education becomes
model succeeds in generating novel, well-calibrated language translation questions
for second language learners from a real online education platform. This step in increasingly intertwined
personalization allows systems to adapt from an infinite space of questions and enables
with online experience
the fine-grain ability to choose questions, rather than selecting from heustrics or
template-based methods driven by a small pool of predefined questions. it will provide new data
• D eveloping a novel natural language processing targeting mechanism, and new opportunities to
HAI which relative to more traditional multiple-choice targeting, is able to
develop AI tools.”
provide optimal and adaptive feedback from fewer student interactions and
RESEARCH
generalize to previously unseen prompts.
–Noah Goodman,
• I mplementing a chatbot engine that converses with language coaches as part of a
Associate Professor of
training curriculum, in order to help coaches improve their assessment skill of language
proficiency in another adult learner. Psychology, Computer
• D eveloping a language learning chatbot that converses with students Science, and Linguistics;
interactively on college-related topics and provides adaptive feedback.
HAI HAI Faculty Affiliate
Evaluation shows increase in student fluency, higher engagement, and users
RESEARCH voluntarily spent 2.1x more time interacting with EnglishBot compared to
listening or repeating pre-existing materials. 55
[1] Global Private Tutoring Market to Reach $201.8 Billion by 2026. (2021, July). GlobeNewswire.

INDUSTRY BRIEF

EDUCATION
PERSONALIZED AND Augmented
ADAPTED LEARNING Teaching
WHAT’S NEW?
AI-augmented teaching demonstrates the potential for educators to cater to specific learning
needs by tracing student skill progression and to alleviate teachers from repetitive efforts of
offering identical feedback. Where institutions were previously limited to stale or outdated
curriculums, teachers can use such systems to adaptively sequence practice activities as well 6
as generate real-time customized narration to boost student engagement and performance. “The pandemic has
As digital testing data increases, scalable assessments also allow instructors to focus on
highlighted the potential
communicating crucial concepts and minimize tedious grading without compromising on the
quality of feedback since new algorithms are able to associate mistakes to specific parts of an
impact of new AI
individual solution and explain common misconceptions.
systems that can adapt
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW?
to not only a student’s
In an Economic Policy Institute Report, projections reveal a national teacher shortage
of sizable magnitude, growing, and worse than expected when indicators of teacher cognitive state, but
quality are taken into account—with high-poverty schools suffering most acutely.1
And this massive gap in the teaching workforce is exactly at odds with the desire and also to the full complex
need to deliver personalized learning experiences. However, because of the advent
context of a human
of scalable machine learning infrastructure that can interpret student data, design
roadmaps, and support each learner on an individual basis, the impact of educators learner. The last 1.5 years
may now be amplified within their respective classrooms.
further stressed the
EYE ON CAMPUS
demands for instructors,
Researchers on campus are...
yielding a new need and
• Proposing Variational Deep Knowledge Tracing (VDKT) that not only traces
opportunity for AI tutors
a student’s knowledge change using deep recurrent neural networks
but also incorporates new latent variables representing stochasticity in
that amplify the capacity
the learning process such as partial understanding, making slips, and
guessing answers. The VDKT outperforms baseline and previous state of of human teachers. Such
the art methods by evaluation on two Duolingo language learning datasets
and provides interpretable analyses and offers insights into students’ AI teaching assistants
HAI stochastic behavior in language learning.
can support students
RESEARCH • Introducing a human-in-the-loop “rubric sampling” approach to tackle
the “zero-shot” (no training examples) feedback challenge for code with many tasks, as
education. They provided autonomous feedback for first students working
well as automatically
on an introductory programming assignment with accuracy outforming
data-hungry algorithms and results approaching human-level fidelity.
intelligently loop in
This rubric-sample requires minimal teacher effort, associates feedback
with specific parts of the student's solution, and articulates student’s human instructors at
misconceptions in the language of the instructor.
appropriate times.”
• P roposing an approach for automatically adaptively sequencing practice activities for an
individual student. This new approach builds on the construction of curriculum graphs –Emma Brunskill,
and advancing students through a graph using multi-armed bandits, and is effective
because it requires fewer hyperparameters and a smaller dataset. They found that for Assistant Professor of
a Korean language learning game, the adaptive algorithm had a statistically significant
Computer Science;
positive effect on learning efficiency metric defined using in-game performance.
• C reating an interactive, tablet-based learning platform with a multi-step math task HAI Faculty Affiliate
designed using Common Core State Standards. They showed that embedding learning
activities into narratives boosted children’s engagement, and integration of tutoring

chatbot improved learning outcomes on the assessment.
[1] García, E. & Weiss, E. (2019, March 26). The teacher shortage is real, large and growing, and worse than we
thought. Economic Policy Institute.

INDUSTRY BRIEF

EDUCATION
LEARNING
SCIENCES
WHAT’S NEW?
Researchers are using modeling techniques to help instructors understand both
distinct individual learning processes and abilities across diverse student groups in an
effort to inform the organization of future curriculums and assessments that are useful

in real-time scenarios. Their contributions enable fine-grained analysis of student
behaviour, which opens up new avenues in predicting learning outcomes. AI is able to “The application of Artificial
interpret data in various realistic learning environments to classify student learning
Intelligence to education is in
processes and strategies and subsequently give human instructors the resources
needed to administer real-time feedback and interventions. its infancy, but the prospects
are excellent. On one side
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW?
of the coin, researchers are
Previously, instructors relied heavily on standardized and periodic testing as
automating difficult aspects
a proxy for student’s grasp of the course material that may overlook nuances
particular to an individual learner. Now equipped with scalable AI algorithms, of traditional instruction
teachers are empowered to monitor student progress throughout their learning
such as providing refined,
experience by building a real-time and multi-dimensional picture of the student
based on behavioral data. Given this information, models can determine features individualized feedback and
and strategies emblematic of successful learners, which in turn may aid teachers the automated generation
in designing more productive materials and help lagging learners course-correct
of timely examples. On the
immediately, rather than after cumulative assessments that occur less frequently.
other side of the coin, AI
EYE ON CAMPUS is enabling fundamentally
Researchers on campus are... new models of learning
• D eveloping variation Bayesian inference algorithms for Item Response Theory (model such as students teaching a
for understanding humans based on question responses) that is scalable, faster than
computer agent and using
heuristic algorithms, and more accurate than gold-standard methods. The open-source
implementation is easily usable in tasks like grading exams such as the SAT, PSAT, or in augmented reality to help
learning multi-dimensional student interactions.
children with autism learn to
• M odelling and analyzing student inquiry strategies in open-ended computer-based
recognize emotions in their
learning environments. They demonstrate inquiry strategies influence learning
outcome, and also are predictive of academic achievement. Furthermore, a clustering family members. AI may
algorithm is developed to segment students into different groups with similar learning
make great in-roads in the
strategies, which along with the inquiry-based environment, have the potential to
serve as an assessment tool for teachers and tutors. challenge of making superior
• E xtracting semantically meaningful features from student logged interaction data in a learning accessible to all.”
simulation-based task to predict their overall problem-solving ability and understand
–Dan Schwartz, I. James
their specific problem-solving practices.
• P resenting a new assessment framework (Posterlet) that collects student strategies Quillen Dean and Nomellini
and processes when they independently learn. Student choices to receive critical & Olivier Professor of
feedback and revision predict and measure learning outcomes, which can be used to
Educational Technology at
develop as well as evaluate models of instruction and assessments.
Stanford Graduate School
• S uggesting actionable and individualized interventions to help students stuck in wheel-
spinning (repeatedly failing an education task for learning a skill). The trained model of Education; HAI Faculty
requires minimal expert input and uses interpretable machine learning to identify
Affiliate
correct interventions matching expert-level prescription.
• E xploring online recurrent neural network models for classifying students in open-
ended and interactive environments that can also provide real-time guidance. 77

INDUSTRY BRIEF

EDUCATION
LEARNING
INFRASTRUCTURE
WHAT’S NEW?
Learning infrastructures that support environments for learning are leveraging
data and AI to not only provide better customized classroom and remote
experiences, but also to suggest policies that align with intentional objectives

(e.g., school assignment choices that maximize factors like diversity). By “One of the most helpful
empowering and training local institutions and teams with tooling and
ways to augment education
resources powered by machine learning, high quality, adaptable, and human-
centric learning can be deployed to a breadth of geographic locations despite is to assist with the difficult
language, cultural, and teaching differences.
task of examining student
work and recognizing
WHY DOES THIS MATTER NOW? student mistakes. Computer
According to a 2021 McKinsey survey on the lingering effects of the pandemic systems that can do this
on student learning, 24% of parents are not convinced to choose in-person
would make feedback,
instruction for fall, and will select homeschool or other alternative options.1 The
reluctance to return to physical buildings warrants innovation for virtual learning grading, and class
models for the foreseeable future, serving demands of both homeschooling
preparation easier and more
families and of school districts. Separate from safety concerns, some parents feel
remote learning and hybrid approaches have positively impacted their children’s effective. Ten years ago,
social-emotional and mental health.
algorithms could perform
As we transition into schools of the future, firms innovating in edtech and
at about one tenth of the
specialists can collaborate to define new types of effective learning enabled
by AI and create infrastructures to distribute high-quality content to a global accuracy of humans, in the
student audience. In this future, each student will be given more flexibility and
context of understanding
choice in defining their individual learning journey.
student pseudo-code, a
[1] Dorn, E., Hancock, B., Sarakatsannis, J., & Viruleg, E. (2021, July 27). COVID-19 and education:
The lingering effects of unfinished learning. McKinsey & Company. bellwether task. Just this
year, we built a deployable
system to make real
classrooms smarter. This
transformative technology
is one ingredient that we
will use in our broader effort
to make education's digital
future more inspiring, more
joyful, and less lonely.”
–Chris Piech, Assistant
Professor of Computer
Science Education; HAI
Faculty Affiliate

INDUSTRY BRIEF

EDUCATION
LEARNING
INFRASTRUCTURE
CONTINUED
EYE ON CAMPUS
Researchers on campus are...
• D esigning high quality open-source course-
• D eploying a meta-learning model that adapts
in-a-box CS curriculum easily adaptable
to give feedback to student code for a new
to a variety of local teaching practices,
programming question with only a few
languages, and cultures already delivered to
annotated solutions. This is the first successful
over 1,000 highschool students around the
HAI deployment of machine learning based
globe. Joint teaching methods consisting
feedback to open-ended code. The approach
of localized instructors and undergraduate RESEARCH
generated feedback for 16,000 student exam-
student-teachers in conjunction with
solutions in an online programming course,
automated feedback are scalable
where it wasn't previously possible for
HAI and provide high-impact professional
instructors to provide feedback.
development experiences.
RESEARCH
• C ollaborating with The San Francisco
Unified School District (SFUSD) to develop
an optimization and simulation engine to • P resenting a workflow for knowledge externalization in
suggest and evaluate potential student science text comprehension and prototyping tools to assist
school assignment policies to promote learners in organizing knowledge by effectively creating
predictability, proximity, and diversity. Using active diagrams without disrupting reading. This is powered
this tool, they recommended a policy passed by natural language processing on key terms to reduce cost
by the San Francisco Board of Education of producing diagrams while maintaining cognitive effort
that will take effect for 2023-24 school year. required for comprehension.

INDUSTRY BRIEF
The Transforming Learning Accelerator (TLA), part of
Stanford’s Vision, aims to combine science and design
in order to advance novel approaches to understanding
learning, and create a sustainable model to turn
discovery into scalable and equitable solutions.
Among other initiatives, researchers are... Let's work together.
• Strengthening child literacy by
Are you planning to deploy AI
introducing a literacy support network
initiatives for education within your
amplifying educator-parent-student
organization or company?
connections through messages, AI,
and tutoring
We're interested in your ideas for
• Using AI analysis of mobile games to improving learning solutions as a
track and treat a continuum of early partner, researcher, supporter,
childhood learning or co-creator.
• Automating online assessment of reading Reach out to learn about our projects
ability to enable personalized education and collaboration opportunities.

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Industry Take
Industry will play a critical role in scaling the
applications of AI research. For this reason, it is a
goal and privilege of HAI to convene stakeholders
from industry in addition to those in academia,
government, and civil society to address the
technical and societal challenges posed by AI.
Leading venture investors, positioned at the
frontlines of startup innovation, can provide
a unique perspective on the impact and
role of AI technologies in education.

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Industry Take
“From the K – 12 and higher education segments to the corporate and lifelong
learning categories, AI is providing key benefits across the multi-trillion dollar
education sector. In the formal schooling environments, AI is delivering
key insights and data to educators so they can create more personalized
experiences for learners and focus on individual or small group instruction.
When it comes to adult learning and the future of work, AI is allowing companies
to better understand how they can continue to remain competitive by offering
their employees critical opportunities to reskill and upskill. In these ways, AI is
reshaping what education will look like over a lifetime for the next generation of learners.”
–Amit Patel, Managing Director, Owl Ventures
“All people deserve equal access to the future--technological innovations in learning
and workforce skilling at scale are key to realizing this vision. There is no more
important development than the mainstream movement of AI to support the
personalization and adaptivity of learning, skilling and assessment platforms.
We’ve already seen success with automated grading in higher education and
subject-specific coaches for grammar, math, and writing. The future of education
will be characterized by this kind of “invisible learning and assessment” – highly
efficacious education that occurs when an AI-driven platform augments and reduces
the burden on educators and accelerates the learning of students.”
–Deborah Quazzo, Managing Director, GSV Ventures
“The successful application of AI to edtech is best evidenced by tools that boost
productivity, for example with personalized coaching or targeted content
consumption. One of our companies develops NLP algorithms to provide just-in-
time coaching for litigators on appropriate case precedents. The algorithms can
also identify case chronology, significant actors in disputes, and other meaningful
data that help accelerate the learning curve for legal teams. You can see how this
same formula, applied in schools or in the workforce, can help learners focus on the
most high-impact tasks and topics for their education and work.”
–Alex Spiro Latsis, Partner, Brighteye

INDUSTRY BRIEF
CORPORATE
ENGAGEMENT
Corporate
Engagement
Stanford HAI seeks corporate members
who will enable it to lead with the
unparalleled interdisciplinary breadth
and excellence of Stanford University,
and a laser focus on human-centered
development and deployment of AI
technology. We invite engagement
from companies that share our
mission to advance AI research,
education, policy, and practice to
improve the human condition.

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Are you prepared for the
next wave of change?
THINGS YOU SHOULD KNOW.
52%
$15.7 T
of Fortune 500 companies in value will be added
were extinguished by by AI to the global
digital disruption between economy by 20303
2000 and 20141
$1.4B
50%
of the S&P 500 in 2018 in annualized value can
was forecasted to be be gained by AI-led
replaced in just ten years2 transformation of a
Fortune 500 company4
References:
[1] Wang, R. (2014, February 18) “Research Summary: Sneak Peeks From Constellation’s Futurist Framework And 2014 Outlook On Digital Disruption,”
Constellation Research.
[2] Anthony, S. D., Viguerie, S. P., Schwartz, E. I., & Landeghem, J. V. (2018a, February). 2018 Corporate Longevity Forecast: Creative Destruction is
Accelerating. Innosight.
[3] “PwC’s Global Artificial Intelligence Study: Sizing the prize,” PricewaterhouseCoopers, Retrieved March 1, 2021. 14
[4] “Incorporate enterprise A.I. now or risk getting disrupted,” Fortune + C3. Ai, Retrieved March 1, 2021.

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Education Today
A RIPE OPPORTUNITY FOR INNOVATION
414M
$400B
higher ed students are
are deployed globally by
projected in 2030, double
enterprises training their
from 207M today and
workforces2
with all of the growth
happening online1
$1T
500M
of market value is forecasted
of learners around the
to be occupied by Digital
world visit MOOCs in a
Learning by 2026, close to
given month3
doubling the growth rate
projected before COVID-194
References:
[1][4] Dawn of the Age of Digital Learning. (2020, January 14). GSV Ventures.
[2][3] 2020 Education Outcomes Report. (2020, December 7). Owl Ventures.

INDUSTRY BRIEF
CORPORATE
ENGAGEMENT
Up to $11.5T could be added to
global GDP by 2028 if countries
succeed in better preparing
learners for the needs of the
future economy.1
COVID-19 sent 1.4B students
home, and even before the
pandemic, low-income countries
were struggling to get students
the basic primary level skills.2
Do you want to know how AI
can help educate your future
workforce?
[1] Schools of the Future: Defining New Models of Education for the Fourth Industrial Revolution. (2020, January 14). World Economic Forum.
[2] United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. (2020, March 24). 1.37 billion students now home as COVID-19 school closures expand,
ministers scale up multimedia approaches to ensure learning continuity. UNESCO.

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Become a
corporate
member today.
50% of companies are likely to
miss the window of opportunity.1
Let’s talk.
Learn more about the
Corporate Members Program
and the Stanford advantage.
Panos Madamopoulos,
Managing Director for Industry
Programs and Partnerships
1 Jacques Bughin, “Wait-and-See Could Be a Costly AI Strategy,” MIT Sloan Management Review, June 15, 2018.

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Appendix

Artificial
Intelligence
Definitions
Intelligence might be defined as the ability to learn such as winning games, without explicit examples of
and perform suitable techniques to solve problems and good techniques, enabling autonomy.
achieve goals, appropriate to the context in an uncertain,
Deep Learning is the use of large multi-layer
ever-varying world. A fully pre-programmed factory robot
(artificial) neural networks that compute with
is flexible, accurate, and consistent but not intelligent.
continuous (real number) representations, a little like the
Artificial Intelligence (AI), a term coined by hierarchically-organized neurons in human brains. It is
emeritus Stanford Professor John McCarthy in 1955, was currently the most successful ML approach, usable for all
defined by him as “the science and engineering of making types of ML, with better generalization from small data
intelligent machines”. Much research has humans program and better scaling to big data and compute budgets.
software agents to behave in a clever way, like playing
An algorithm lists the precise steps to take, such
chess, but, today, we emphasize agents that can learn, as
as a person writes in a computer program. AI systems
human beings navigating our changing world do.
contain algorithms, but often just for a few parts like a
Autonomous systems can independently plan and learning or reward calculation method. Much of their
decide sequences of steps to achieve a specified goal behavior emerges via learning from data or experience,
without micro-management. A hospital delivery robot which is a sea change in system design that Stanford
must autonomously navigate busy corridors to succeed in alumnus Andrej Karpathy dubbed Software 2.0.
its task. In AI, autonomy doesn’t have the sense of being
Narrow AI is intelligent systems for particular tasks,
self-governing that is common in politics or biology.
e.g., speech or facial recognition. Human-
Machine Learning (ML) is the part of AI studying level AI, or Artificial General Intelligence
how computer systems can improve their perception, (AGI), seeks broadly intelligent, context-aware
knowledge, decisions, or actions based on experience or machines. It is needed for effective, adaptable social
data. For this, ML draws from computer science, statistics, chatbots or human-robot interaction.
psychology, neuroscience, economics, and control theory.
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence is
In supervised learning, a computer learns to AI that seeks to augment the abilities of, address the
predict human-given labels, such as dog breed based on societal needs of, and draw inspiration from human
labeled dog pictures; unsupervised learning does beings. It researches and builds effective partners and
not require labels, sometimes making its own prediction tools for people, such as a robot helper and companion
tasks such as trying to predict each successive word in for the elderly.
a sentence; reinforcement learning lets an agent Text by Professor Christopher Manning, v 1.1, 
learn action sequences that optimize its total rewards, Learn more at hai.stanford.edu

References Ruan, S., Wei, W., & Landay, J. (2021). Variational Deep
Knowledge Tracing for Language Learning. LAK21: 11th
International Learning Analytics and Knowledge Conference,
EDUCATION & AI 323–332. 
The teacher shortage is real, large and growing, and worse than
we thought: The first report in &#8216;The Perfect Storm in the
Teacher Labor Market&#8217; series. (n.d.). Economic Policy
Institute. Retrieved September 5, 2021, from 
epi.org/publication/the-teacher-shortage-is-real-large-and-
Natural Language Interactions
growing-and-worse-than-we-thought-the-first-report-in-the-
perfect-storm-in-the-teacher-labor-market-series/
Conversational AI to Accelerate Skill Integration | Office of Innovation
& Technology. (n.d.). Retrieved July 26, 2021, from Wu, M., Mosse, M., Goodman, N., & Piech, C. (2018). Zero Shot
stanford.edu/conversational-ai-accelerate-skill-integration Learning for Code Education: Rubric Sampling with Deep
Learning Inference. ArXiv:1809.01357 [Cs, Stat]. 
Kolchinski, Y. A., Ruan, S., Schwartz, D., & Brunskill, E. (2018).
abs/1809.01357
Adaptive natural-language targeting for student feedback.
Proceedings of the Fifth Annual ACM Conference on Learning at
Scale, 1–4. 
Learning Sciences
NLP | Office of Innovation & Technology. (n.d.). Retrieved July 26,
2021, from Cutumisu, M., Chin, D. B., & Schwartz, D. L. (2019). A digital
game-based assessment of middle-school and college
ReportLinker. (2021, July 15). Global Private Tutoring
students’ choices to seek critical feedback and to revise. British
Market to Reach $201.8 Billion by 2026. GlobeNewswire
Journal of Educational Technology, 50(6), 2977–3003. https://
News Room. 
doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12796
release/2021/07/15/2263310/0/en/Global-Private-Tutoring-
Market-to-Reach-201-8-Billion-by-206.html Käser, T., & Schwartz, D. L. (2019). Exploring Neural Network
Models for the Classification of Students in Highly Interactive
Ruan, S., Jiang, L., Xu, Q., Liu, Z., Davis, G. M., Brunskill, E., &
Environments. 10. 
Landay, J. A. (2021). EnglishBot: An AI-Powered Conversational
System for Second Language Learning. 26th International Käser, T., & Schwartz, D. L. (2020). Modeling and Analyzing
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, 434–444. Inquiry Strategies in Open-Ended Learning Environments.
 International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 30(3),
504–535. 
Srivastava, M., & Goodman, N. (2021). Question Generation for
Adaptive Education. ArXiv:2106.04262 [Cs]. Mu, T., Jetten, A., & Brunskill, E. (2020). Towards Suggesting
abs/2106.04262 Actionable Interventions for Wheel-Spinning Students. 11.

Wang, K. D., Salehi, S., Arseneault, M., Nair, K., & Wieman,
Augmented Teaching
C. (2021). Automating the Assessment of Problem-solving
Practices Using Log Data and Data Mining Techniques. In
Metz, C. (2021, July 20). Can A.I. Grade Your Next Test? The New
Proceedings of the Eighth ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale
York Times. 
(pp. 69–76). Association for Computing Machinery. 
ai-education-neural-networks.html
org/10.1145/3430895.3460127
Mu, T., Wang, S., Andersen, E., & Brunskill, E. (2021). Automatic
Wu, M., Davis, R. L., Domingue, B. W., Piech, C., & Goodman,
Adaptive Sequencing in a Webgame. In A. I. Cristea & C.
N. (n.d.). Variational Item Response Theory: Fast, Accurate, and
Troussas (Eds.), Intelligent Tutoring Systems (Vol. 12677, pp.
Expressive. 12. 
430–438). Springer International Publishing. 
org/10.1007/978-3-030-80421-3_47
Ruan, S., He, J., Ying, R., Burkle, J., Hakim, D., Wang, A., Yin,
Y., Zhou, L., Xu, Q., AbuHashem, A., Dietz, G., Murnane, E. L.,
Brunskill, E., & Landay, J. A. (2020). Supporting children’s math
learning with feedback-augmented narrative technology.
Proceedings of the Interaction Design and Children Conference,
567–580. 

References
EDUCATION & AI
Learning Infrastructure
COVID-19 and education: The lingering effects of unfinished
learning | McKinsey. (n.d.). Retrieved September 26, 2021, from

sector/our-insights/covid-19-and-education-the-lingering-
effects-of-unfinished-learning
Improving Diversity and Equity in School Choice | Center for
Comparative Studies in Race & Ethnicity. (n.d.). Retrieved July
26, 2021, from 
diversity-and-equity-school-choice
Piech, C., Yan, L., Einstein, L., Saavedra, A., Bozkurt, B.,
Sestakova, E., Guth, O., & McKeown, N. (2020). Co-Teaching
Computer Science Across Borders: Human-Centric Learning at
Scale. Proceedings of the Seventh ACM Conference on Learning @
Scale, 103–113. 
Subramonyam, H., Seifert, C., Shah, P., & Adar, E. (2020).
texSketch: Active Diagramming through Pen-and-Ink
Annotations. Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–13. 
org/10.1145/3313831.3376155
Wu, M., Goodman, N., Piech, C., & Finn, C. (2021).ProtoTransformer:
A Meta-Learning Approach to Providing Student Feedback.
ArXiv:2107.14035 [Cs]. 
Other
Education 4.0. (n.d.). World Economic Forum. Retrieved
September 26, 2021, from 
learning-4-0/
 (2020, March 24). 1.37
billion students now home as COVID-19 school closures expand,
ministers scale up multimedia approaches to ensure learning
continuity. UNESCO. 
students-now-home-covid-19-school-closures-expand-
ministers-scale-multimedia
Dawn of the Age of Digital Learning | by Michael Moe | GSV
Ventures | Medium. (n.d.). Retrieved October 4, 2021, from

learning-4c4e38784226
Outcomes | Owl Ventures. (n.d.). Retrieved October 4, 2021, from

INDUSTRY BRIEF
Acknowledgments
This brief was produced by the HAI Partnerships team as one of its strategic initiatives, with research and writing led by Alex
Ker. We are grateful for the generosity of the following people for providing their time, helpful suggestions, and constructive
feedback in the creation of this brief (names listed in no particular order): Alice Hau, Brooke Donald, Carl Wieman, Chris
Piech, Dan Schwartz, Denise Pope, Emma Brunskill, Irene Lo, Jiayu He, Joshua Weiss, Noah Goodman, Peter Norvig,
Hariharan Subramonyam, Karen Wang, Nick Haber, Paul Kim, William Cai, Peter Norvig, and the HAI Staff.