CALIBRATING DETERRENCE
Disruptors of Strategic Stability on
NATO’s New Northern Flank
barbara kunz and aino esser

STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL
PEACE RESEARCH INSTITUTE
SIPRI is an independent international institute dedicated to research into
conflict, armaments, arms control and disarmament. Established in 1966,
SIPRI provides data, analysis and recommendations, based on open sources,
to policymakers, researchers, media and the interested public.
The Governing Board is not responsible for the views expressed in the
publications of the Institute.
GOVERNING BOARD
Stefan Löfven, Chair (Sweden)
Dr Mohamed Ibn Chambas (Ghana)
Ambassador Chan Heng Chee (Singapore)
Dr Noha El-Mikawy (Egypt)
Jean-Marie Guéhenno (France)
Dr Radha Kumar (India)
Dr Patricia Lewis (Ireland/United Kingdom)
Dr Jessica Tuchman Mathews (United States)
DIRECTOR
Karim Haggag (Egypt)
Signalistgatan 9
SE-169 70 Solna, Sweden
Telephone: +46 8 655 97 00
Email: sipri@sipri.org
Internet: 

CALIBRATING DETERRENCE
Disruptors of Strategic Stability on
NATO’s New Northern Flank
barbara kunz and aino esser

Knowledge for a

peac

eful and secure
wor
ld
Y E A R S

© SIPRI 2026
DOI: 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of SIPRI or as
expressly permitted by law.

Contents
Abbreviations v
Acknowledgements vi
Executive summary vii
1. Introduction 1
2. Strategic stability and its disruptors 2
3. Geographic scope and regional characteristics 4
Figure 3.1. Map of the High North and the Arctic 5
4. Military capabilities as potential disruptors of strategic stability 7
Military technology in the naval domain 8
Military technology in the air and land domains 11
Conclusions: Military capabilities as potential disruptors of strategic stability 14
5. Military activity as a potential disruptor of strategic stability 15
Exercises and overflight 16
The nuclear dimension and nuclear signalling 18
Structural change in organizing armed forces and increased cooperation 20
Conclusions: Military activity as a potential disruptor of strategic stability 25
Figure 5.1. Nordic military facilities and areas accessible to the United States 24
under defence cooperation agreements near the Russian border
Table 5.1. The scope of United States defence cooperation agreements 25
6. Conclusions: Managing disruptors in the absence of dialogue 26
Risk reduction 26
Avoid surprises by ensuring situational awareness 27
Avoid surprises by ensuring predictable behaviour and information 27
Carefully monitor the effects of climate change 27
Work towards overcoming implicit divisions among the Nordic states and 27
within NATO
Ultimately: Find a new basis for strategic dialogue—once peace in Ukraine has 28
been achieved
Appendix A. Military exercises in the High North and in the Arctic 30
(Apr. 2023–Dec. 2025)
About the authors 44

Abbreviations
ABM Treaty Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems
ASW Anti-submarine warfare
DCA Defence cooperation agreement
FLF Forward Land Forces
GIUK Greenland–Iceland–UK
ICBM Intercontinental ballistic missiles
INCSEA Incidents at Sea agreement
INF Treaty Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty
ISR Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance
JFC Joint Force Command
NAPC Nordic Airpower Concept
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
New START 2010 Treaty on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of
Strategic Offensive Arms
NORAD North American Aerospace Defence Command
NORDEFCO Nordic Defence Cooperation
SSBN Nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine
SSGN Nuclear-powered guided-missile submarine

Acknowledgements
SIPRI and the authors express their sincere gratitude to the UK Foreign, Common-
wealth and Development Office (FCDO) for their generous financial support of this
project. The authors thank the external reviewer as well as SIPRI colleagues for their
thoughtful feedback. Thanks also to the SIPRI editorial department for excellent
cooperation.
The authors also wish to thank the project workshop participants for generously
sharing their time, knowledge and perspectives. The same applies to the experts and
officials who generously agreed to talk to the authors in background interviews.
The views and opinions in this report are solely those of the authors and do not
represent the official view of SIPRI or the FCDO. Responsibility for the content of this
report lies entirely with the authors.

Executive summary
Geostrategic conditions on the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s (NATO) northern
flank have evolved considerably in recent years. Finland’s and Sweden’s acces-
sion to NATO, changes in force posture, and advances in military technology are all
developments that could potentially impact strategic stability, both when it comes to
arms race stability and crisis stability.
Understanding strategic stability and its disruptors is essential to analysing and
designing a deterrence posture. First, this allows more accurate assessments of the
security threats posed by adversaries. Second, it is essential to fine-tuning and cali-
brating said deterrence posture in that it allows a better idea of the likely effects on
strategic stability of any measure taken with the aim to deter. Against this backdrop, this
report discusses two major categories of potential disr uptors at play in the High North
and the Arctic: military capabilities and military activity.
Military capabilities and technological advancements will first and foremost affect
arms race stability. Moreover, the spread of new weapon systems also has the potential
to affect stability in crisis, given that analysing their impact is so dependent on cont ext.
Both the United States and Russia are modernizing their nuclear arsenals and invest ing
in new weapon systems. Technology relevant to strategic stability includes strategic
submarines (also referred to as SSBNs) and attack submarines as well as anti-submarine
warfare (ASW) capabilities. The sur vivability of strategic submarines does yet not
appear to be a concern for the fores eeable future. Relevant technology also includes
conventional long-range precision strike capabilities, in which both NATO countries
and Russia continue to invest. These weapons can impact strategic stability given their
accuracy and earth-penetration capabilities and take on roles that used to be reserved
for nuclear weapons such as in counter-force missions. Following NATO’s northern
enlargement, allied capabilities can now be deployed in close proximity to assets Russia
considers strategic.
The effects of military capabilities are often cumulative, linked to factors such as
deployment options and command structures. Consequently, how and where states
choose to use or deploy their capabilities, the way armed forces are structured and what
sort of activities they engage in are also important. Military activity in the High North
and in the Arctic has increased on both sides in recent years, especially when it comes to
exercises which are an important element in any deterrence posture. Following NATO
enlargement, allied activity occurs much closer to areas Russia considers strategic-
ally relevant, in a context of growing tension, shows of force and nuclear signalling.
Both Russia and NATO have sought to strengthen their military posture in the region
through structural and force posture adapations. These factors, combined with new
Nordic capabilities and new potential deployment options for the USA on the basis of
bilateral defence cooperation agreements, increase the potential impact of military
activity on crisis stability.
Managing these potential disruptors of strategic stability is challenging given the
absence of dialogue between NATO and Russia. There is currently no risk reduction
regime that covers the High North and the Arctic. Instruments that would allow
crisis situations to be addressed in the northern European and Arctic context are not
available for most scenarios. As a result, managing the potential effects of disruptors
becomes more complicated, or even impossible, if a crisis were to emerge. Given the
geopolitical context, unilateral measures on the NATO side consequently appear to be
the most realistic.
The report recommends five measures to manage disruptors of strategic stability in
the High North and the Arctic.

viii calibrating deterrence
Avoid surprises by ensuring situational awareness
The better the situational awareness that NATO and its member states have, the fewer
surprises they will need to fear. A priority area is, and should remain, Intelligence, Sur-
veillance and Reconnaissance, and notably European capabilities. Removing obstacles
to intelligence sharing and secure real-time communications is another priority.
Avoid surprises by ensuring predictable behaviour and transparency
NATO members should continue to behave in a predictable manner, e.g. by communi-
cating and displaying maximum transparency regarding exercises and other military
activities, as well as avoiding overly aggressive behaviour that could reasonably leave
the other side in doubt about intentions. NATO and its member states should therefore
continue to adhere to the Vienna Document and other notification instruments.
Carefully monitor the effects of climate change
The effects of climate change—such as an ice-free Arctic during summer in a few
decades—will impact security in the High North and and in the Arctic. These
developments therefore need to be monitored carefully and incorporated into strategic
analysis and military planning.
Work towards overcoming implicit divisions among the Nordic states and within
NATO
NATO members have different ideas of how deterrence ‘works’. They also hold divergent
views on whether safety valves, for example in the form of risk reduction regimes, are
a necessity or a way to undermine effective deterrence. These differences are rarely
addressed but at times pose fundamental problems when it comes to jointly defining a
deterrence posture. Working to overcome these differences is therefore an important
element in a wider transatlantic and European context, with concrete ramifications for
the High North and the Arctic.
Find a new basis for strategic dialogue—once peace in Ukraine has been achieved
The High North and the Arctic currently lack regional governance forums involving all
Arctic states that would allow security concerns to be addressed. While re-establishing
any kind of dialogue forum before the end of Russia’s war against Ukraine is unrealistic,
a possible peace agreement could constitute a starting point for resumed strategic
dialogue on security and strategic stability in the High North and the Arctic, thereby
allowing for safer management of an adversarial relationship.

1. Introduction
In a geopolitical context characterized by tensions between the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), its member states and Russia, the High North and the Arctic are
back at the centre of attention. In case of conflict, the region would likely play a crucial
strategic role. While increased militarization in the region predates Russia’s annexation
of Crimea in 2014, it has amplified in recent years.1 Geostrategic conditions on NATO’s
northern flank have evolved considerably following Finland’s and Sweden’s accessions
in 2023–24, bringing the alliance closer to military assets that Russia considers vital.
Advances in military technology mean that although many fundamental cold war ques-
tions related to strategic stability remain relevant, the situation in the early 21st century
is different. Both NATO member states and Russia have developed and acquired—or
are about to acquire—capabilities, such as conventional long-range precision-strike
systems, that change the picture from a strategic stability vantage point compared to
the cold war. What is more, the developments described in this paper take place against
the backdrop of the collapse of arms control. With the expiration of the 2010 Treaty on
Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (New
START) in , there are no more limits on any kind of nuclear weapons.
Frameworks for data exchanges and verification have disappeared.
Understanding strategic stability and its disruptors is essential to managing the
security dilemma that is invariably exacerbated when states seek to deter each other.
In many current debates, the focus tends to be on the deterrent effect of capabilities
and military activities, rather than their impact on strategic stability. However, aware-
ness and understanding of potential disruptors of strategic stability are crucial for two
reasons. First, this allows more accurate assessments of the security threats posed by
adversaries. Second, it is essential to fine-tuning and calibrating a deterrence posture
in that it allows a better idea of the likely effects of any measure taken with the aim to
deter.
Given the considerable geopolitical and technological evolutions, a fresh look is
warranted at developments on NATO’s northern flank and what they mean for strategic
stability. The main goal of this paper is to inform readers about the various factors that
might affect strategic stability in the High North and the Arctic. Assessing the strat-
egies and military policies of the respective sides in and vis-à-vis the region, and how
these disruptors fit into them, is beyond the scope of this study. Rather, it intends to
provide an overview of the capabilities and activities that may be considered dis rup-
tors of strategic stability. In so doing, the paper considers NATO and Russian military
capabilities and activities alike, given that both sides’ perceptions are fundamental to
strategic stability. Chapter 2 introduces the notion of strategic stability and its disr up-
tors. Chapter 3 defines the geographic scope of the study. Chapters 4 and 5 discuss the
two major categories of disruptor: military capabilities and military activity. Chapter 6
draws conclusions on managing disruptors in the absence of strategic dialogue and
makes recommendations to that effect.
1 Wezeman, S. T., ‘Military capabilities in the Arctic: A new cold war in the High North?’, SIPRI Background
Paper, Oct. 2016.

2. Strategic stability and its disruptors
Strategic stability is generally understood as a state of affairs in which states have no
perceived incentive to build up their nuclear weapons or to use them first in a crisis.2
One key reason why a state would have no such incentive is because it can be confident
that other states cannot undermine its nuclear deterrence capability, and in particular
its ability to launch a second strike. Confidence in nuclear deterrence capability matters
both in the long term and in an immediate crisis. In the long term, it matters because
a state might be driven to acquire a larger, more capable or more diverse arsenal of
nuclear weapons and delivery systems if it assumes that an adversary has or may acquire
an ability to undermine its nuclear deterrence. This dimension of strategic stability is
commonly referred to as ‘arms race stability’.3 During an acute crisis, a state might use
nuclear weapons first in order to pre-empt an adversary’s assumed ability to undermine
nuclear deterrence. This dimension of strategic stability is commonly referred to as
‘crisis stability’. 4 Alongside these two dimensions of strategic stability, the first use of
nuclear weapons could also be driven by other considerations, such as escalation control
or retaliation for a major conventional attack. Attempts to understand strategic stability
unavoidably take place in the context of debates on nuclear strategy, which now include
questions related to the integration of conventional strategic weapons systems. There is
no universally agreed definition of strategic stability, either between the United States
and Russia, or in academic and policy circles.5 Nonetheless, it seems fair to argue that
there are factors that would increase incentives to launch a first nuclear strike for fear
that second-strike capability is not assured, and factors that would increase incentives
to acquire weapons and other systems intended to increase the survivability of second-
strike capabilities.
Debates surrounding strategic stability in the current geopolitical context continue
to be characterized by different ideas. Beyond the obvious fact that NATO and Russia
consider each other to be threats, both also have different theories on how a war would
start. In western discussions, the scenario arguably considered most likely is one in
which a minor incident leads to uncontrollable escalation and eventually results in
major war. Other widely discussed scenarios include Russia ‘testing’ NATO’s article 5,
for example in one of the Baltic states. In Russian thinking, on the other hand, an out-
of-the-blue disarming first nuclear strike or massed aerospace attack by NATO are
considered possibilities.6
Moreover, debates on strategic stability are difficult to disentangle from debates
about and ideas on the causal mechanisms of deterrence, which are usually referred to
as theories of deterrence. The same applies to broader discussions on nuclear doctrine,
such as debates surrounding US damage limitation capabilities or counterforce strat-
egies. Actual nuclear posture is another essential factor.
Seeking a pragmatic approach, this paper therefore aims to identify potential dis-
ruptors of strategic stability, rather than assess strategic stability itself. A disruptor is
here defined as anything that could reasonably impact a state’s perception of its adver-
sary’s ability to undermine that state’s nuclear deterrence capability. Such a disruptor
2 For a thorough discussion—and criticism—of the notion of strategic stability, see the various contributions
to Colby, E. and Gerson, M. S. (eds), Strategic Stability: Contending Interpretations (US Army War College Press:
Carlisle, 2013).
3 Schelling, T. C. and Halperin, M. H, Strategy and Arms Control (Pergamon-Brassey’s: Washington, 1985).
4 Schelling and Halperin (note 3).
5 Bidgood, S., ‘What we talk about when we talk about US–Russia strategic stability’, Journal for Peace and
Nuclear Disarmament, vol. 6, no. 1 (2023), pp. 9–27.
6 Bruusgaard, K. V., ‘Deterrence asymmetry and strategic stability in Europe’, Journal of Strategic Studies, vol. 47,
no. 3 (), p. 345.

strategic stability and its disruptors 3
could have a direct effect (e.g. new weapon technologies or capabilities for anti-
submarine warfare, ASW) or an indirect effect (e.g. changes in the physical environm ent
affecting the detectability of submarines) on nuclear capabilities. This paper focuses on
the northern flank of NATO; that is, the High North and the Arctic. Strategic stability
would for instance be affected if targets relevant to nuclear deterrence located in the
region were hit or if an actor’s behaviour could be interpreted as a sign of an imminent
attack. Any weapon system or activity that could theoretically serve that purpose must
therefore be considered a potential disruptor of strategic stability. Military capabilities
commonly considered to impact strategic stability include strategic missile defence,
conventional precision-strike missiles and ASW. There is also concern regarding
anti-satellite capabilities and so-called emerging technologies, such as cyberwarfare,
quantum computing and artificial intelligence.

3. Geographic scope and regional characteristics
This paper covers NATO’s northern flank, understood as the contact zone between
Russia and the alliance in the High North and the European Arctic. This contact zone
comprises both land and sea borders, as seen in the map in figure 3.1.
The region has undergone massive geopolitical change since Finland’s and Sweden’s
accessions to NATO. New military capabilities have been added and the alliance’s
access to the territories of the two Nordic countries allows an entirely new take on
NATO military and defence planning for north-eastern Europe.
NATO members Norway and Finland have land borders with Russia, but a much
greater portion of the area is covered by water. It is thus in a vast maritime theatre that
NATO borders Russia’s Northern Fleet Military Administrative Territory. Despite the
change brought about by NATO’s northern enlargement, many of the fundamental
issues debated during the cold war are as relevant now as they were then. The Kola Pen-
insula remains of crucial strategic relevance to Russia and its bastion defence, as more
than half of its fleet of strategic submarines (also referred to as SSBNs) is based there.
Protecting sea lines of communication, crucial for reinforcement from North America
to European theatres, remains at the heart of NATO’s concerns. Similarly, preventing
Russian attack submarines from passing chokepoints such as the Greenland–Iceland–
UK (GIUK) gap and dispersing into the ocean, possibly putting the US mainland at
risk, remains high on the strategic agenda. That said, although these fundamentals are
unchanged, technological evolution means that the threats and risks of the 21st century
differ from those of cold war times.
Notably, technological evolution and the improved range and accuracy of weapon
systems make it increasingly difficult to locate specific threats or disruptors of strategic
stability. In approaching the study of potential disruptors of strategic stability in this
geographic space, it is therefore useful to resort to a framework that distinguishes
between threats to, through and in the Arctic.7 This paper is primarily concerned with
threats in, but also through the Arctic—the latter referring to threats emanating from
outside the region and passing through or over it to strike targets most likely also located
outside of the High North. The capabilities used to launch missiles that pose such a
threat may or may not be located in the Arctic and the same applies to the infrastructure
intended to counter them (e.g. radars for early warning).
Most of the permanent military infrastructure directly relevant to strategic stability
located in the area covered in this paper primarily belongs to Russia. For Russia, a key
concern is the Kola Peninsula, home to its Northern Fleet. When it comes to SSBN
operations, the preconditions for NATO countries and Russia are very different. While
the USA, France and the United Kingdom have direct access to open oceans, Russia’s
direct access is limited to the Arctic Ocean. Its nuclear subm arines at naval bases on the
Kola Peninsula have therefore been described as ‘sitting ducks’, giving Russian military
planners much less confidence when it comes to their survivability and leading them to
emphasize mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) instead, which constitute
about half the country’s ICBM arsenal. Ukraine’s attacks on Russian strategic bombers
must be assumed to have further undermined this confidence.8 Sweden’s and especially
Finland’s accessions to NATO reduce strategic depth from Russia’s perspective. As a
target for Russian attacks, NATO and individual member states’ military infrastructure
7 Lackenbauer, P. W., ‘Threats through, to, and in the Arctic: A framework for analysis’, North American and Arctic
Defence and Security Network Policy Brief, 23 Mar. 2021.
8 Gozzi, L. and BBC Verify, ‘How Ukraine carried out daring “Spider Web” attack on Russian bombers’, BBC
News, 2 .

geographic scope and regional characteristics 5
Sea of Okhotsk
Bering Sea
US
Eielson Air Force Base
ARCTIC
CIRCLE
CANADA
US
Arctic Ocean RUSSIA
Hudson
Bay
Franz Josef Land
Pituffik Space Base
Alexandra Land Novaya Zemlya
Svalbard
GREENLAND
Bear GapBa S r e e a nts
Severomorsk Naval Base
Jan Mayen Murmansk
KKoollaa PPeenniinnssuullaa
GIUK ggap
ICELANDNorwegian Sea SE FI
Keflavík
International Airport Faroe Islands Åland
NO
Gotland
Baltic
North SeaDK Sea
Atlantic Ocean
NATO member
Figure 3.1. Map of the High North and the Arctic
DK = Denmark, FI = Finland, GIUK = Greenland–Iceland–UK, NATO = North Atlantic Treaty Organ-
ization, NO = Norway, SE = Sweden, US = United States.
in the region is less directly relevant to strategic stability, not least because the Nordic
countries are not nuclear powers.
However, the Nordic states do or will operate weapon systems with the potential to
impact strategic stability, and temporary military activity by nuclear powers—the USA,
the UK and France—takes place on their territories, in their territorial waters and in
their airspace. Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark have also concluded bilateral
defence cooperation agreements (DCAs), which among other things allow the USA
access to military infrastructure such as airbases, some of which are in close proxim-
ity to the Russian border (see figure 5.1). NATO as an alliance is also present on the
Scandinavian Peninsula with boots on the ground, for example through its (future)
Forward Land Forces in Finland. Finally, the USA also has assets in the geographic area
covered in this report that are important for its security beyond the narrower context
of the High North and the Arctic. These include the Eielson US Air Force Base, missile
detection capabilities at Clear Air Force Station and ICBM interceptors at Fort Greely
in Alaska. They also include the US rotational naval air presence at Keflavík in Iceland
and the Pituffik space base in Greenland, which, inter alia, is instrumental in detecting
and tracking ICBMs launched against North America. Needless to say, the military
developments in the geographic area covered in this paper are relevant in much

6 calibrating deterrence
broader contexts. Notably from a North American perspective, the Arctic has not only
an Atlantic dimension but also a Pacific one.
The Arctic is disproportionally affected by climate change. Its exact implications for
strategic stability, however, remain to be seen. Climate change affects the operational
environment and may impact the functioning of technology.9 For instance, with regard
to critical infrastructure, more frequent and severe wildfires and the rising sea level in
the Arctic region could threaten runways and ports, including Russian submarine bases
in the Kola Peninsula.10 In addition, melting permafrost could have an impact on the
structural integrity of early-warning structures in the region (e.g. by damaging radar
systems).11 Popular narratives such as the one on the greater accessibility of the Arctic
due to melting ice are not unequivocally true. The region remains an environment
characterized by significant challenges to human activity, both military and civilian.
Ideas, for instance, of various routes ‘opening up’ for navigation therefore need to be
taken with a grain of salt and are not imminent. Reliable, seasonal access to the Central
Arctic Ocean by non-ice-strengthened vessels and the emergence of a transpolar sea
route are unlikely to be viable before 2050.12 Moreover, environmental hazards such as
storms, fog and icebergs will continue to pose navigational challenges and risks during
ice-free periods. Search and rescue infrastructure remains rudimentary. Assessments
of operational environments in the High North consequently require nuance and care-
ful distinction of realistic timeframes. In the long run climate change is likely to have
an increasing impact on security in the High North. Its impact on strategic stability is
more unclear.
9 Kwong, J., ‘A warning about warming: Climate change threatens Arctic nuclear security’, Royal United Services
Institute (RUSI), 11 Dec. 2018; see also NATO, The Effects of Climate Change on Security, Final report of the STO
Research Task Group SAS-182, STO Technical Report AC/323(SAS-182)TP/1315, Jan. 2026.
10 NATO, NATO Climate Change and Security Impact Assessment, 3rd edn (NATO: Brussels, 2024); and Good-
man, S. et al., Climate Change and Security in the Arctic (Center for Climate and Security: Washington, DC, Jan. 2021).
11 Kwong (note 9).
12 Pezard, S. et al., ‘The future of maritime presence in the central Arctic Ocean’, RAND Research Report, 30 , pp. 30–35.

4. Military capabilities as potential disruptors of
strategic stability
The intensified threat perceptions within both NATO and Russia have clearly translated
into increased investments in military capabilities on both sides, including when it
comes to the High North and the Arctic.13 The following sections are not intended to
provide a complete overview of the military capabilities present in the region. Rather,
they focus on those capabilities that are the most directly relevant to strategic stability
in that they qualify as potential disruptors as defined above.
States primarily acquire military capabilities based on the wars they believe they may
have to fight, but also in relation to the ways in which they believe deterrence works.
For non-nuclear powers, deterrence by denial will inevitably be more prominent than
deterrence by punishment. That said, in the context of NATO as a nuclear alliance with
a strong emphasis on extended deterrence, deterrence by punishment and the roles
that support it, such as Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) or allowing
nuclear operations on national territory, are equally part of the equation. Many defence
policy choices made by European NATO member states reflect this, including when it
comes to military capabilities operated.
The capabilities discussed below are not specific to the Arctic or the High North.
Rather, they pertain to technology and technological advances that happen to be pres-
ent in the region, operated by actors within it. Historically, when it comes to NATO’s
northern flank, the focus has been on the maritime dimension. When Norway was the
only NATO member to share a short land border with the Soviet Union, the High North
was primarily a naval theatre. As noted above, a key concern for NATO was and remains
preventing the Soviet (now Russian) Northern Fleet from crossing the GIUK gap and
dispersing in the Atlantic Ocean. Submarines and ASW were consequently the centre
of the attention throughout the cold war, and they continue to be a key issue in the cur-
rent context. NATO’s northern flank has undergone massive change since the cold war.
Finland’s and Sweden’s accessions in 2023 and 2024 respectively turned the area into
what may be described as a more traditional theatre, adding a significant air and land
dimension. In addition to these geopolitical changes in the region, military technology
has also evolved considerably in recent decades. Military operations—and deterrence—
are even more multidomain. There is now also an increasing role in deterrence for non-
nuclear weapon systems, including in counterforce missions against hardened targets,
which considerably complicates the picture from a strategic stability vantage point.
The following sections discuss military technology as potential disruptors of strategic
stability in the naval, land and air domains. Given that space is not geographically tied
to NATO’s northern flank, relevant systems such as satellites and anti-satellite (ASAT)
capabilities are not discussed in this paper—despite their obvious importance. The
focus is on the weapons with the most direct potential to impact strategic stability: first,
the naval dimension, especially submarines; and then the air and land domains, with a
special emphasis on conventional long-range precision-strike capabilities.
13 See e.g. Grisé, M., ‘Russia in the High North’, RAND Research Report, Feb. 2026; Kjellén, J., ‘The Russian
Northern Fleet and the (re)militarisation of the Arctic’, Arctic Review on Law and Politics, vol. 13 (2022), pp. 34–52;
Rumer, E., Sokolsky, R. and Stronski, P., ‘Russia in the Arctic: A critical examination’, Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace, Mar. 2021; Boulègue, M., ‘Russia’s military power in the Arctic. Managing hard power in
a “low tension” environment’, Chatham House Research Paper, ; and Pallin, K. et al., ‘Western military
capability in Northern Europe 2023: Part 1, National capabilities’, Swedish Defence Research Agency (FOI) Report
FOI-R–5527–SE, Mar. 2024.

8 calibrating deterrence
Military technology in the naval domain
Especially in the West, SSBNs are widely considered the most survivable and hence the
most important leg of the nuclear triad. The naval domain therefore requires particular
attention in any analysis of disruptors of strategic stability—notably in a geographic
area such as NATO’s northern flank, which is predominantly covered in water and
ice. The SSBNs themselves and the weapons they carry, but also the defences against
submarines and the means to detect them, as well as communications with them, are
all relevant to strategic stability.14 A long-standing key issue in this context is therefore
the survivability of submarines and the efficacy of ASW.15 Vulnerable SSBNs in a ‘trans-
parent’ ocean would severely undermine any state’s confidence in nuclear deterrence,
and the survivability of its second-strike capability in particular. This consequently
represents one of the most significant potential disruptors of strategic stability. Overall,
however, finding, tracking and possibly trailing a submarine is an extremely chal lenging
endeavour, not least as illustrated by incidents such as the collisions between US and
Russian submarines in the High North.16
SSBN survivability and strategic stability
Norman Friedman distinguishes between three different approaches to ASW:
One focuses on the enemy submarines; it is often called offensive ASW. It includes the use of long-
range sensors to cue attackers and the concentration of ASW forces at choke points. A second focuses
on making concentrations of targets (convoys or battle groups) dangerous for submarines to attack,
both deterring attacks and destroying submarines. A third focuses on protecting the targets rather
than on destroying submarines. The third approach includes evasion (usually based on knowledge of
submarine positions) and defensive measures such as anti-torpedo weapons.17
ASW involves a variety of technologies and capabilities: surface ships, submarines
and undersea sensors, specialized aircraft such as the P-8 Poseidon, but also unmanned
and space-based systems. The physical principles on which systems designed to detect
submarines are based can be acoustic or non-acoustic.18 Moreover, in the context
of strategic stability, submarine vulnerability refers not only to the detection (and
subsequent destruction) of SSBNs per se, but also to command and control (C2). If an
adversary could find a way to disrupt and/or detect communications with SSBNs, this
would have an impact on strategic stability. Technological progress notwithstanding,
options for communicating with a submerged submarine remain limited since radio
waves do not travel well in water.19 This makes C2 for SSBNs particularly sensitive.
SSBNs are not the only types of submarines relevant to strategic stability. Nuclear-
powered attack submarines (SSNs), nuclear-powered guided-missile submarines
(SSGNs) and diesel-electric attack submarines (SSKs) also matter, and these may be
even less detectable than SSBNs. In addition to an ASW context, they are relevant to
strategic stability in that they can more easily approach coastlines and hold nuclear
infrastructure in an adversary’s homeland at risk. Russia, for example, equipped its
14 Friedman, N., ‘Strategic submarines and strategic stability: Looking towards the 2030s’, eds R. Metcalf et al.,
The Future of the Undersea Deterrent: A Global Survey (Australian National University, National Security College:
Canberra, Feb. 2020), pp. 69–79.
15 Garwin, R. L., ‘Will strategic submarines be vulnerable?’, International Security, vol. 8, no. 2 (Fall 1983),
pp. 52–67.
16 Cushman, J. H., ‘Two subs collide off Russian port’, New York Times, 19 Feb. 1992; Miasnikov, E., ‘Submarine
collision off Murmansk: A look from afar’, DACS Breakthroughs (Winter 92/93), pp. 19–24; and Gordon, M. R., ‘US
and Russian subs in collision in Arctic Ocean near Murmansk’, New York Times, 23 Mar. 1993.
17 Friedman (note 14), p. 69.
18 For an overview of anti-submarine warfare technologies and systems see Friedman (note 14).
19 Carter, A., Steinbruner, J. D. and Zraket, C. A. (eds), Managing Nuclear Operations (Brookings Institution:
Washington, DC, 1987).

military capabilities as potential disruptors 9
Akula-class and Lada-class with Kalibr cruise missiles, suitable for attacking targets
on land, including in North America.20 Russia’s new Yasen-class SSGN in particular
is the kind of concern that underlies the undersea dimension of the North American
Aerospace Defence Command (NORAD) modernization. This was for instance empha-
sized by the Commander of the US Northern Command and NORAD in 2023, when he
argued that they ‘are designed to deploy undetected within cruise missile range of our
coastlines to threaten critical infrastructure during an escalating crisis’.21 These SSGNs
are very quiet and designed to carry Kalibr, Oniks and Tsirkon missiles and thus pose
a considerable threat to North America (in addition to potentially threatening NATO
naval forces, sealines of communication or critical undersea infrastructure).22
New questions arise in the face of technological advances.23 The new technologies
discussed in this context include quantum sensing, large networked sea bottom
matrices of sensors, or unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs). There is often a special
focus on non-acoustic methods, such as remote sensing from space with synthetic
aperture radars (SAR), which seek to detect submarines using wake waves on the
ocean surface.24 Overall, however, ‘[a]ttempts at non-acoustic submarine detection
have a long but generally unsuccessful history’.25 With regard to acoustic methods,
sensors have improved in recent decades but technological progress has occurred at
both ends: more advanced acoustic sensors are faced with even quieter submarines.
A 2025 study concludes that: ‘[t]he effectiveness of SSBN protection measures is very
likely to increase more rapidly than threats to SSBNs. The costs of threatening and
attacking SSBNs are likely to be high in the foreseeable future. As a result of this trend,
SSBNs are likely to be reliable second-strike nuclear forces over the next 20 years and
beyond.’26 At present, there seems to be no indicator that submarines are significantly
more vulnerable today than they were in the past.
Another question that arises in this context is regarding the impact of climate change
on SSBN survivability. Disappearing ice cover and warming waters are changing the
operational environment for SSBNs in the Arctic. Melting ice reduces the number of
‘hiding spots’ while reduced salinity of the water, alongside temperature and depth,
affects the range and resolution of acoustic sensors. In 1994, Eugene Miasnikov
published a study on the ranges at which Russian strategic submarines can be detected
in the High North. He concluded that ‘it is implausible that US attack submarines would
be able to trail covertly Russian SSBNs on a day-to-day basis in their patrol areas in the
Barents Sea, the Sea of Okhotsk and the Marginal Ice Zones of the Arctic, provided
that Russia applies advanced submarine silencing technologies and that the strategic
submarines are properly maintained and operated’.27 More recent research by Gilli et al.
suggests that climate change could affect detectability ranges.28 However, given the
overall complexity at play when it comes to detecting submarines, the great variation of
20 Sutton, H. I., ‘Russia increasing submarine cruise missile capacity as US navy decreases its own’, Royal United
Services Institute (RUSI), 19 Aug. 2021.
21 VanHerck, D. (Gen.), United States Air Force Commander, United States Northern Command and North
American Aerospace Defense Command, Statement before the House Armed Services Committee Subcommittee
on Strategic Forces, 1 Mar. 2022, p. 6.
22 Kaushal, S. et al., ‘The Yasen-M and the Future of Russian Submarine Forces’, RUSI Defence Systems, .
23 Stefanick, T. A., ‘Undersea nuclear forces: Survivability of Chinese, Russian, and US SSBNS’, Journal of Strategic
Studies, vol. 48, no. 2 (2025), pp. 334–406; and Friedman (note 14). See also Fetter, S. and Sankaran, J., ‘Emerging
technologies and challenges to nuclear stability’, Journal of Strategic Studies, vol. 48, no. 2 (2025).
24 Stefanick (note 23), p. 30.
25 Friedman (note 14), p. 77.
26 Stefanick (note 23), p. 2.
27 Miasnikov, E., ‘Can Russian strategic submarines survive at sea? The fundamental limits of passive acoustics’,
Science and Global Security, vol. 4 no. 2 (1994), pp. 213–51.
28 Gilli, A. et. al., ‘Climate change and military power: Hunting for submarines in the warming ocean’, Texas
National Security Review, vol. 7, no. 2 (2024).

10 calibrating deterrence
conditions in oceans around the globe and phenomena such as increased noise due to
maritime traffic or crackling Arctic ice, other experts warn against overstating climate
change as a single factor. Tom Stefanick, for example, argues that ‘[t]he amount of
variability is so great that a long-term trend of the sort . . . would be washed out’.29 It
is thus not a given that climate change will have a direct impact on strategic stability
when it comes to SSBN vulnerability. While climate change certainly does affect the
operational environment, and navies will have to adapt accordingly, these effects do not
necessarily appear to be destabilizing in the grander scheme of things.
Naval capabilities in the High North
While the survivability of SSBNs does not seem to be at stake, Arctic states continue
to make considerable investments in naval capabilities for various purposes: nuclear
deterrence, ASW, and surveillance and situational awareness, all of which have at least
indirect significance for strategic stability.
The USA bets heavily on its undersea deterrent. Russia is less reliant on its SSBNs
due to the ‘sitting duck’ problem (see above). Submarine-launched ballistic missiles
con stitute about one-third of Russia’s strategic nuclear delivery systems.30 What is
more, ‘Russia’s navy remains a force focused on countering the military capabilities
of the United States, and deterring other naval powers with conventional and nuclear
weapons’.31 Both Russia and the USA are currently implementing programmes to
moderni ze their SSBN fleets, suggesting that submarines will continue to play a key
role in nuclear deterrence in the High North and elsewhere. France and the UK also
operate SSBNs and are continuously developing their capabilities.32
Non-nuclear Arctic nations possess submarine and ASW capabilities and con-
sequently operate systems that are potentially relevant to strategic stability.33 Trends
clearly indicate more such acquisitions. Norway in particular prides itself on being
the ‘eyes and ears of NATO in the North’ and has long prioritized ASW. The country
operates five P-8 Poseidon maritime patrol aircraft, the first of which was delivered
in 2022.34 In addition, Norway plans to acquire new long-range maritime surveillance
drones to support P-8 operations in the Arctic.35 Building on its existing submarine
partnership with Germany and German manufacturer TKMS, Norway signed a contract
for four new submarines in 2021, for delivery estimated in 2029. These form the basis
for close cooperation with Germany. Norway announced its intention in to acquire two more.36 In , Norway announced another major invest-
ment in ASW capabilities and the purchase of British-built Type 26 frigates, which will
underpin intensified operational cooperation between the two countries (see below).37
29 Judah, J., ‘Submarines are hard to detect: Climate change might make it even harder’, New York Times, 12 .
30 Kristensen, H. et al., ‘Russian nuclear forces, 2025’, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 13 .
31 Kofman, M., ‘The role of nuclear forces in Russian naval strategy’, eds Metcalf et al. (note 14), pp. 32–35.
32 Brustlein, C., ‘The role of SSBNs in French nuclear posture and maritime strategy’, eds Metcalf et al. (note 14),
pp. 55–57; and Gower, J., ‘UK nuclear deterrence: Security and stability through SSBN CASD’, eds Metcalf et al.
(note 14), pp. 58–63.
33 For a comprehensive overview, see Pallin, K. et al., ‘Western military capability in Northern Europe 2023’,
Part 1, National capabilities, Swedish Defence Research Agency (FOI) Report FOI-R–5527-SE, Mar. 2024.
34 Norwegian Armed Forces, ‘Norway’s first P-8 Poseidon landed at Evenes Air Base’, 24 Feb. 2022.
35 Gosselin-Malo, E., ‘US vendors tussle over Norway’s maritime-surveillance drone business’, Defence News,
1 .
36 Norwegian Government, ‘Regjeringen går inn for anskaffelse av ytterligere to ubåter’ [The government settles
on acquiring two additional submarines], 5 Dec. 2025.
37 Black, E. and Kaushal, S., ‘Norway’s purchase of type 26 frigates’, Royal United Services Institute (RUSI)
Commentary, 15 Sep. 2025.

military capabilities as potential disruptors 11
Denmark’s 2025 Defence Agreement foresees major investments in naval capabilities.38
The country’s Second Agreement on the Arctic and North Atlantic—following a first
such package in and the adoption of a ‘Consensus on strengthening the
Danish Armed Forces’ ability to detect, identify, and react to threats, and establishing
facilities for the construction of larger ships’ in July of the same year—aims to signifi-
cantly strengthen Danish capabilities in the High North.39 Sweden currently operates
four submarines and plans to operate five in the future after acquiring two and phas-
ing out one. Canada also owns four submarines and intends to invest in more. Iceland,
which has no armed forces, and Finland do not operate submarines.
Military technology in the air and land domains
Finland’s and Sweden’s accessions to NATO have drastically changed geostrategic
conditions on the alliance’s northern flank, for both NATO and Russia. The capabil-
ities these two countries add further tilt the conventional military balance in favour of
NATO. In the north, Russia and NATO now share a land border that is over 1300 kilo-
metres long. Bases on the Kola Peninsula, where Russia concentrates assets, now find
themselves in proximity to much more NATO territory, within range, for example, of
Finnish cruise missiles. This has implications for Russia’s nuclear deterrence since
‘considering the changing geopolitical situation for Russia in the High North, it is no
longer obvious that operating close to home ports offers the greatest chance of survival
for Russian SSBNs. With two additional NATO allies in the Scandinavian Peninsula, it
may not be possible to support wartime SSBN activities in the Barents Sea from ashore
in the same way as before.’40
Conventional long-range precision-strike capabilities
Conventional capabilities can be considered potential disruptors of strategic stability
if they can be used against relevant targets. Examples of such targets would be SSBNs
in port and ICBMs, as well as related installations and C2 infrastructure, or any other
target that constitutes an element of a nuclear (second) strike capability.
The development of conventional long-range precision-strike systems constitutes
major military technological progress since the cold war. With ranges up to an
estimated 2500 km for certain variants, these weapons now allow to hold targets at
risk in missions that used to be reserved for nuclear weapons. Recent research has
concluded that ‘conventional weapons must now be considered to properly analyse the
relative survivability and reliance on specific nuclear forces among nuclear powers that
factor into strategic stability concerns and determine nuclear force requirements’.41
The single-shot kill probability of the two most prominent types of US-built long-range
conventional cruise missiles destroying a hardened missile silo is comparable to that of
a US or Russian nuclear ballistic missile: ‘typically well over 90%’.42 As a consequence,
these weapons blur the lines between deterrence and warfighting. A conventional
cruise missile can both serve a strategic counterforce purpose and be used in a strike
against targets that are not related to an adversary’s nuclear deterrence.
38 Danish Ministry of Defence, ‘Navy plan strengthens maritime capabilities of Danish Armed Forces’, Press
release, 22 Apr. 2025.
39 Danish Ministry of Defence, ‘The second agreement on the Arctic and North Atlantic strengthens the oper-
ational effectiveness of the Danish Armed Fores with new acquisitions totalling DKK 27.4 billion’, Press release, 10
Oct. 2025.
40 Kjellén, J., ‘The Russian Northern Fleet bastion revisited’, ed. N. Wegge, Journal of Advanced Military Studies,
Special issue on Arctic security (2025), pp. 7–27.
41 Snyder, R., ‘Assessing the lethality of conventional weapons against strategic missile silos in the United States,
Russia, and China’, Science & Global Security, vol. 32, nos 1–3 (2024), p. 146.
42 Snyder (note 41).

12 calibrating deterrence
NATO countries and Russia have invested in the development and/or acquisition
of conventional long-range precision-strike capabilities.43 Besides sea-launched
Tomahawks, air-launched Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missiles (JASSMs) are
of particular relevance to the NATO countries located within the geographic area
covered in this paper. These are owned and deployed not only by the USA, but also
by an increasing number of European NATO countries. Finland decided to purchase
JASSMs as early as 2012 and decided to acquire the even longer range JASSM-ER
version in 2024.44 Sweden is considering the acquisition of further conventional
long-range precision-strike capabilities, after earlier making the decision to purchase
German-built Taurus missiles for its Gripen jets.45 Sweden is moreover a partner in the
European Long-Range Strike Approach (ELSA).46 The Swedish Armed Forces stressed
the usefulness of this kind of weapons and discussed the need to further analyse the
various options in their official recommendations to the government in .47 Sweden’s Minister of Defence Pål Jonson has declared acquiring such weapons
‘absolutely necessary’.48 Denmark announced its decision to procure long-range
precision-strike capabilities in but a decision on the exact type is
still to be made.49 Norway announced in that it would acquire South
Korean-built long-range precision artillery.50 Among the non-Arctic European nations
that have acquired or are in the process of acquiring US-built cruise missiles are the
Netherlands, Germany and Poland. Especially in conjunction with other factors, these
weapons have the potential to impact strategic stability. This notably concerns stealthy
fifth generation fighter jets and strategic bombers designed to more easily evade enemy
air defences, such as the F-35 or the B-21. In the specific context of the Arctic, these
factors include geography and the proximity of targets that Russia values, on the Kola
Peninsula and elsewhere, as well as deeper integration in Nordic air force command
structures (see chapter 4).
Unsurprisingly, western long-range precision-strike capabilities have long been a
concern for Russia, as, for example, expressed by Russian President Vladimir Putin in
2014:
Today, many types of high-precision weaponry are already close to mass-destruction weapons in terms
of their capabilities, and in the event of full renunciation of nuclear weapons or radical reduction of
nuclear potential, nations that are leaders in creating and producing high-precision systems will have
a clear military advantage. Strategic parity will be disrupted, and this is likely to bring destabilization.
The use of a so-called first global pre-emptive strike may become tempting. In short, the risks do not
decrease, but intensify.51
Specifically related to the High North, ‘Russia fears that adversaries could use
the Arctic marginal seas to conduct a massive and unanticipated precision-strike
43 See Kaushal, S. with Suess, J., ‘A net assessment of Russian and allied capabilities in a modern strike campaign’,
Royal United Services Institute (RUSI) Occasional Paper, Feb. 2025.
44 Government of Finland, ‘Defence Forces to purchase long-range air-to-surface missiles’, 31 .
45 Gosselin-Malo, E., ‘Sweden hastens Gripen deep strike punch with Taurus missiles’, Defense News, 22 Dec.
2025.
46 Ministry of National Defence of Poland, ‘Joint Communiqué of the Defence Ministries of ELSA Nations’,
12 Feb. 2026.
47 Swedish Armed Forces, ‘Överväganden om det framtida försvarets utformning’ [Reflections on the future
design of defence], Document FM2025-17150:8, 24 Nov. 2025, p. 7.
48 Aftonbladet, ‘Robotar med lång räckvidd helt nödvändigt’ [Long-range missiles are absolutely necessary],
25 Nov. 2025.
49 Danish Ministry of Defence, ‘Regeringen melder klart ud: Danmark skal i fremtiden råde over længere-
rækkende præcisionsvåben’ [The government makes it clear: Denmark will in the future possess longer-range
precision weapons], Press release, 17 Sep. 2025.
50 Ruitenberg, R., ‘Norway picks Hanwa to supply rocket artillery in 2 billion deal’, Defense News, 29 Jan. 2026.
51 President of Russia, ‘Meeting of the Valdai International Discussion Club’, 24 Oct. 2014.

military capabilities as potential disruptors 13
campaign, as NATO’s superior capabilities could potentially cripple Russia, politically
and militarily, without having to resort to nuclear weapons’.52
Russia has also invested in the development of long-range precision-strike
capabilities.53 These include its dual-capable Kalibr sea-launched cruise missiles and
the air-launched conventional KH101 and nuclear KH102. While its range is too short
to reach the USA, the Oreshnik ballistic missile allows Russia to hold targets in large
parts of Europe at risk.54 Russia has also been testing nuclear-powered and nuclear-
capable systems, such as its Burevestnik cruise missile.55
Shorter range weapons, with ranges below the former 1987 Intermediate-range
Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty threshold of 500 km, may also impact strategic stability in
the European Arctic, given that they could potentially be deployed in close proximity to
Russian assets (see chapter 4).
Strategic missile defence
Strategic missile defence is not directly relevant to strategic stability specifically in
the Arctic. Given its wide-ranging implications, however, it must be briefly discussed
in this context. Mutual vulnerability is one of the core elements of strategic stability,
and arms race stability in particular. Any attempt to reduce vulnerability must
therefore be viewed as a disruptor of strategic stability. The argument primarily rests
on a scenario where a first strike would take out most of an adversary’s second-strike
capability, thereby eliminating the fear of retaliation. The idea that mutually accepted
vulnerability is stabilizing was notably behind the origins of the 1972 US–Soviet Treaty
on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems (ABM treaty). The USA unilaterally
withdrew from the treaty in 2002, citing risks from so-called rogue states.
While Russia responded to the USA developing long-range precision-strike
capabilities with its own programmes (see above), its response to the end of the ABM
treaty was more asymmetric. Russia did not make its own strategic missile defence a
priority but sought to develop weapons explicitly designed to overcome US defences.56
When Russian President Vladimir Putin unveiled his country’s new nuclear capabilities
in 2018, he described them as ‘invincible against all existing and prospective missile
defence and counter-air defence systems’.57 The actual performance of these so-called
exotic weapons remains a matter of debate. Nonetheless, they serve as an example of
strategic missile defence driving arms race instability. Against this backdrop, the decision
by the administration of US President Donald J. Trump to announce its ‘Golden Dome’
project—and notably the fact that it is intended to rely on space-based interceptors—is
likely to have further negative effects from a strategic stability perspective.58 Likewise,
the effects of European investments in multi-layered, integrated air defence remain to
be seen.
52 Kjellén (note 40), pp. 7–27.
53 Reach, C., Russia’s Evolution Toward a Unified Strategic Operation. The Influence of Geography and Conv en­
tional Capability, RAND Research Report, Feb. 2023. See also Center for Strategic & International Studies (CSIS)
Missile Defense Project, ‘Missile threat: Russia’, [n.d.].
54 Kaushal, S. and Savill, M., ‘The Oreshnik Ballistic Missile: From Russia with Love?’, Royal United Services
Institute (RUSI) Commentary, Dec. 2024.
55 Lapham, J., ‘Russia says it has tested nuclear-powered Burevestnik missile’, BBC News, 26 Oct. 2025.
56 Mezey, J., ‘Russian and Chinese strategic missile defense: Doctrine, capabilities and development’, Atlantic
Council Issue Brief, Sep. 2024.
57 President of Russia, ‘Presidential address to the Federal Assembly’, official English translation, 1 Mar. 2018.
58 Facini, A. and Stewart, M., ‘We might regret Golden Dome’s greatest ambition’, War on the Rocks, 11 Dec. 2025.

14 calibrating deterrence
Conclusions: Military capabilities as potential disruptors of strategic stability
Military capabilities and technological advancements will first and foremost affect
arms race stability. The dynamics underpinning this observation have clearly been in
play in the wider context of Russia–West security relations and beyond. Debates in
the USA are increasingly driven by perceptions of China as the ‘pacing threat’. These
dynamics also matter on NATO’s northern flank, driving threat perceptions and
decisions on acquisitions. The end of the US–Russian INF treaty, which limited ground-
based missiles and possible deployments of INF-range missiles in Europe, could further
impact arms race stability, including in the northern parts of the continent. Historically,
genuine or perceived vulnerabilities or ‘missile gaps’ have been a non-negligible driver
of arms races. In that sense, vulnerability—including on the adversary’s side—can prove
to be more destabilizing than strength. Notably military capabilities that affect a state’s
perceptions of its own vulnerabilities will likely be a driver in the arms race.
The spread of new weapon systems also has the potential to affect crisis stability.
When deploying conventional long-range precision-strike capabilities, states face a
dilemma: while the intention behind acquiring them is to bolster deterrence, another
effect is increased risk of escalation, especially in a crisis. The potential impact of these
weapons on strategic stability is considerable but at the same time difficult to assess,
given that context is crucial. The proverbial fog of war, a lack of information and a
shortage of time may all contribute to miscalculations and erroneous assessments of
the situation at hand. Managing this deterrence-instability dilemma is complicated by
the fact that these capabilities are arguably not yet sufficiently incorporated into con-
ceptual and doctrinal thinking about strategic stability in all European states who (will)
own them. Moreover, the number of actors that deploy them is already much larger than
the number of nuclear powers, and many of these states lack experience in managing
nuclear security dilemmas.

5. Military activity as a potential disruptor of
strategic stability
Deterrence is not just about the purely material factors of military capabilities and
the ways in which weapon systems work. The effects of military capabilities are often
cumulative, linked to factors such as deployment options and command structures.
Consequently, how and where states choose to use or deploy their capabilities, the way
armed forces are structured and what sort of activities they engage in are also important.
Exercises are a key element of any deterrence posture, and they can have an impact
on strategic stability. The scenarios on which exercises are based provide insight into
states’ assessments of their adversary’s intentions and the kind of operations for which
armed forces are preparing. How states choose to communicate—or not to communi-
cate—around their exercises is another relevant factor in the practice of deterrence.
In particular, the concentration of forces that can occur in exercises tends to heighten
the security concerns of the adversary, especially when intentions are not clearly
communicated or there are good reasons not to trust what is being communicated.
Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in is one salient example of a
military attack that started with an exercise and many, including Ukraine’s President
Volodymyr Zelensky, warn that Russia could repeat a move it had already carried out
before 2022.59
In the context of this category of disruptors—tied to what states do with their
capabilities—the NATO accessions of Finland and Sweden have led to considerable
changes adding relevant military capabilities and strategic depth on the NATO side
while reducing strategic depth for Russia. Seen from NATO’s vantage point, they have
also allowed more holistic approaches to planning—and thus also exercising—for the
defence of the eastern flank, an evolution widely seen as increasing regional security.
At the same time, Finland and Sweden being part of NATO—as well as changes to
Norwegian guidelines—now bring military activity much closer to Russia’s border, in
a context where Russia views NATO enlargement as a threat. Given these perceptions,
allied activity in the region potentially affects strategic stability.
Both Finland and Sweden explicitly chose to join the alliance without restrictions.
This is in contrast to the approach taken by Norway (and to some extent Denmark)
from 1949 and throughout the cold war, which restricted allied activity and prohibited
the presence of nuclear weapons on Norwegian territory in peacetime.60 Over the years,
Norwegian guidelines were adapted to military evolutions since their initial definition.
In particular, some restrictions have been lifted since 2022, partly as a consequence
of NATO’s northern enlargement. While the policy prohibiting nuclear weapons on
Norwegian territory in peacetime remains in place, Norway has changed its approach
to military operations in its Finnmark county, which borders Russia.61 Bilateral DCAs
the USA has concluded with Norway, Denmark, Finland and Sweden give it access to
military infrastructure that is in very close proximity to the Russian border.
59 Zadorozhnyy, T., ‘Zelensky warns Russia is “preparing something” in Belarus under guise of military drills’,
Kyiv Independent, 30 Apr. 2025.
60 On traditional Norwegian policy see Solli, P. E. and Solvang, Ø., ‘Deterrence and (re)assurance in the High
North: Norway and Finland compared’, Norwegian Institute of International Affairs (NUPI) Policy Brief no. 4/2024,
23 Feb. 2024.
61 Government of Norway, ‘Norway is adjusting its guidelines in Finnmark to enable more training with Sweden
and Finland’, Ministry of Defence, 22 .

16 calibrating deterrence
NATO and its member states were already concerned by Russia’s behaviour before
its full-scale invasion of Ukraine.62 Recurring Russian sub-threshold operations had
been observable on NATO’s northern flank (and elsewhere) beyond official exercises
and what may be termed legitimate patrolling.63 So-called buzzing and flying close to
Norwegian military assets are of particular concern but there have also been airspace
incursions, GPS spoofing and jamming, and drone overflights of critical civilian infra-
structure.64 While the direct impact of such dangerous activities on strategic stability is
limited, it is obvious that they—at times significantly—increase the risk for misinterpret-
ations and miscommunication, and consequently of escalation.
The sections below focus on activities and behaviour engaged in by NATO, its member
states and Russia. By themselves and in conjunction with the capabilities discussed
above, these have the potential to affect strategic stability and are thus relevant in the
current context. A first section discusses exercises as a core element of any deterrence
posture. It is followed by a second section dedicated to the explicit nuclear dimen-
sion. Finally, a third section discusses structural change in military organization and
increased cooperation.
Exercises and overflight
The High North and the Arctic have seen an increase in military activity in recent
years. This applies to both NATO and Russian activity, as well as individual countries
or smaller groups of states, which have amplified their presence notably in the form of
exercises and training.65 Besides being useful for training troops and other personnel,
and testing plans and strategies, exercises also serve a deterrent purpose by ‘showing off’
capabilities and how forces are able to use them. They are consequently a key building
block in any deterrence posture. The communication that surrounds such activity—or
the lack of such communication—is also significant in that it conveys messages to both
allies and adversaries, with the aim of being reassuring, deterring or both. Russia no
longer abides by the Vienna Document 2011 on Confidence- and Security-Building
Measures, which among other things requires its participants to provide notification of
major exercises at least 42 days in advance.66
Russia—alone or with partners such as Belarus or China—regularly conducts
military exercises to train its forces and send signals to its adversaries. Among these,
the biannual Zapad (‘West’) iterations are the most important in terms of scale and the
number of troops involved. They are intended to train forces at the level of Russian
military districts. Zapad exercises take place not only in Russia but also in Belarus.67
Scenarios usually ‘depict an attack by foreign states with the support of irregular forces
aimed at destabilising the Union State and pursuing regime change’.68
62 Rumer, E., Sokolsky, R. and Stronski, P., Russia in the Arctic. A Critical Examination (Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace: Washington, DC, Mar. 2021), p. 10.
63 Boulègue, M., ‘Up north: Confronting Arctic insecurity’, CEPA Report (Dec. 2024), p. 19.
64 Graef, A. and Oliker, O., ‘A three body problem: Russia, NATO, and the politics of air incursions’, Deep Cuts
Issue Brief no. 20, 17 Dec. 2025; and see Boulègue (note 63), p. 19.
65 For an overview of military exercises in the High North and the Arctic since Finland’s accession to NATO in
, see appendix A. See also the Center for Strategic and International Studies’ Arctic Military Activity
Tracker.
66 Organization for Security and Co-Operation in Europe, Vienna Document on Confidence- and Security-
building Measures, 2011; and Hernández, G. I. R., ‘Russia reneges on military data sharing commitment’, Arms
Control Today (Apr. 2023).
67 Graef, A., ‘Not so quiet on the western front: Why Russia’s Zapad exercise highlights the need for military
confidence-building measures’, European Leadership Network, Commentary, 9 Sep. 2025.
68 Graef (note 67).

military activity as a potential disruptor 17
Between and , Russian forces conducted at least 23 military
exercises in the High North and in the Arctic.69 A notable trend within the High North
has been the increased issuing of Notices to Air Missions (NOTAMs) for live-fire events,
although several of these events did not take place.70 Observers have characterized
Russia’s communication around its exercises as ‘weaponization of notices to air
missions’, describing how ‘[w]ith very short notice, Russia sends notices for live-fire
air and naval exercises in waters and airspace adjacent to Norwegian territory—and
sometimes even overlapping Norway’s EEZ [Exclusive Economic Zone] by the Barents
and Norwegian Seas. The goal is to disrupt regional NATO and allied exercises with
attempts at sea denial, which conveys the risk of horizontal escalation to and from the
Baltic Sea’.71
Against this backdrop of military activity, Åtland et al. posit that ‘despite its
increasingly harsh anti-NATO rhetoric in the post-invasion period, Russia may have
taken a more careful approach in its dealings with NATO in the High North’.72 They
note that since 2022 Russian military exercises in the High North have moved further
north, away from the Norwegian Sea into the Barents Sea. This move seems to indicate
a renewed emphasis on strengthening nuclear deterrence and the Northern Fleet’s
Bastion Defence, with a decreased focus on coercive signalling attempts towards
NATO.73
However, Russian military activity in the proximity of the Svalbard archipelago
remains a cause of concern. The Northern Fleet has been repeatedly suspected of
simulating attacks and the occupation of the archipelago, and the annual Arctic voyage
of the Northern Fleet has on several occasions turned towards the archipelago under
the stated objective of defending Russian territories and islands.74
NATO has placed strong emphasis on deterrent activities in peacetime since its adop-
tion of the Concept for Deterrence and Defence of the Euro-Atlantic Area (DDA) in
2020. Exercising the implementation of its so-called family of plans is at the heart of
this endeavour. Of NATO’s three classified regional defence plans adopted at its 2023
Vilnius summit, two are of relevance to the High North and the Arctic: the plan on
the High North and the Atlantic led by Joint Force Command Norfolk and the plan
covering Central Europe and thus the Baltic Sea Region, led by Joint Force Com-
mand Brunssum.75 In the absence of significant permanent NATO infrastructure in
the region, exercises are considered essential to demonstrate the alliance’s presence.
NATO’s training and exercises vary considerably in terms of size, scope and duration
(see appendix A). They include article 5 scenarios, such as Steadfast Duel in , which was the first such exercise in which Finland and Sweden participated as
members.76 Given the highly specific operational conditions in the High North, cold
weather training—especially for NATO forces from outside the region—is viewed as a
69 Deployments and tests of new military equipment are not included in this estimate.
70 Friis, K., ‘Arctic spillover? Military signalling in the European Arctic before and after the full-scale invasion of
Ukraine’, Scandinavian Journal of Military Studies, vol. 8, no.1 (), pp. 240–55.
71 Boulègue (note 63), p. 20 (footnotes omitted).
72 Åtland, K., Nilsen, T. and Pedersen, T., ‘Bolstering the bastion: The changing pattern of Russia’s military
exercises in the High North’, Scandinavian Journal of Military Studies, vol. 7, no. 1 (Sep. 2024), p. 155.
73 Åtland, Nilsen and Pedersen (note 72), pp. 145–60. Specifically on coercive signalling see Charap, S. et al.,
Understanding Russian Coercive Signalling (RAND: Santa Monica, CA, 2022).
74 Zysk, K., ‘Svalbard’s deterrence gap’, Survival, vol. 68, no. 1 (Feb. 2026), pp. 91–108; Staalesen, A., ‘Cruise missiles
over Franz Josef Land’, The Barents Observer, 14 Sep. 2025; and Stensrud, C. J. and Østhagen, A., ‘Hybrid warfare at
sea? Russia, Svalbard and the Arctic’, Scandinavian Journal of Military Studies, vol. 7, no.1 (), pp. 111–130.
75 NATO, ‘Media briefing with Chair of the Military Committee, Admiral Rob Bauer, and SHAPE Deputy Chief
of Staff Operations, Major General Mathew Van Wagenen’, as delivered, 3 .
76 NATO Joint Warfare Centre, ‘NATO’s premier deterrence and defence exercise Steadfast Duel 2025 begins’,
22 Oct. 2025.

18 calibrating deterrence
priority. NATO adheres to Vienna Document stipulations and Supreme Headquarters
Allied Powers Europe (SHAPE) publishes NATO’s annual exercise planning on its
website.77
NATO’s biannual Cold Response format (labelled ‘Nordic Response’ in 2024) is the
principal northern flank exercise. Its 2024 edition saw the participation of 20 000 sol-
diers from 13 nations, 10 000 of which trained on land in central Finnmark.78 This
exercise was tied to NATO’s broader exercise activity aimed at preparing for article 5
situations in Steadfast Defender.79 This was NATO’s first large-scale exercise intended
to put into action the regional plans adopted at the alliance’s 2023 Vilnius summit. In
2024, it comprised 14 associated activities across NATO territory.80
More broadly, approximately 44 bilateral and multilateral exercises have taken place
between NATO members in the High North and the Arctic between Finland’s accession
in and the end of 2025. Moreover, sailings and exercises by NATO forces
in the Barents Sea have resumed, although in a very limited manner, with one or two
sail ings by allied ships a year.81 NATO carrier groups have focused their operations
on the sea off the Norwegian coast. Renewed engagement by allies in the High North
is also reflected in the increase in port visits in Norway. Starting in 2023 with the
USS Gerald R. Ford, the USA has deployed its carrier groups for exercises and port
visits in the Norwegian Sea and Norway’s fjords annually.82 Perhaps most noteworthy,
US B-52 bomb ers have participated in exercises with Finland and Sweden in northern
Lapland at very close proximity to Russia’s border on multiple occasions since 2014.83
The US B-52 bomber fleet comprises nuclear capable aircraft, as well as aircraft
converted to carry conventional cruise missiles, which Russia views as impacting
strategic stability.
The nuclear dimension and nuclear signalling
Alongside an uptick in conventional military activity, the nuclear dimension—obviously
the most directly relevant to strategic stability—has come to the fore in the region in
a manner that was difficult to envisage just a few years previously. Nuclear signalling
occurs on both sides, but with different degrees of aggressive rhetoric and practice.
Russia has not refrained from threatening rhetoric, including nuclear threats, for
many years. In 2015, the Russian ambassador to Sweden emphasized that Russia’s
reaction to Sweden’s NATO accession would be ‘to reorient its forces and missiles’
accordingly.84 In 2022, prior to Finland and Sweden joining NATO, former president
of Russia Dmitry Medvedev threatened that there would be ‘no more talk of any
nuclear-free status for the Baltic’, alluding to the storage of nuclear warheads in the
77 See Supreme Headquarters of Allied Powers in Europe (SHAPE).
78 Moregård, E., ‘Nordic Response 2024: NATO returns to the north in large scale’, Swedish Defence Research
Agency (FOI) Memo 8504 (Apr. 2024); and Norwegian Defence Forces, ‘Nordic Response 2024’, 20 Dec. 2024.
79 NATO/SHAPE, ‘NATO wraps up Steadfast Defender 2024’, Press release, 31 .
80 Moregård (note 78), p. 2.
81 Friis (note 70), pp. 240–55.
82 Edvardsen, A., ‘US carrier strike group trained with British and Norwegian forces in the High North’, High
North News, 12 ; Edvardsen, A. and Hansen, B. A., ‘Extensive training activity in the High North with US
carrier strike group’, High North News, 11 Sep. 2025; and Nilsen, T., ‘Two carrier groups on exercise outside Norway’,
Barents Observer, 20 Oct. 2024.
83 See Kristensen, H. et al., ‘Nuclear notebook: The changing nuclear landscape in Europe’, Bulletin of the Atomic
Scientists, 10 Dec. 2025. See also US Air Forces in Europe, ‘Allies integrate for first-ever B-52 simulated weapons
drop in Finland’, 26 Nov. 2024; and Nilsen, T., ‘B-52 on first time mission over northern Finland’, Barents Observer,
21 .
84 Winiarski, M., ‘Rysslands ambassadör: vi har gjort allt för att starta en dialog’ [Russia’s ambassador: We have
done everything to start a dialogue], Dagens Nyheter, 18 .

military activity as a potential disruptor 19
Russian exclave of Kaliningrad.85 Russia has further intensified its nuclear rhetoric and
signalling since 2022.86 Since 2019, Russia has demonstrated unusual openness in its
communication about its annual nuclear exercises (Grom), while also increasing the
scale of its drills.87 Russia’s 2025 Zapad exercise also had a clear nuclear dimension,
involving the use of nuclear weapons and the Oreshnik dual-capable, intermediate-
range ballistic missile system.88 Russia repeatedly simulates nuclear attacks on other
countries in its exercises. In what came to be known as the ‘Russian Easter’ in 2013,
for instance, Russian fighters and bombers practiced a nuclear attack on (then non-
aligned) Sweden on Good Friday.89
To what extent there have been changes to Russian deployments, however, remains
unclear. Russia and Belarus claim that tactical nuclear weapons have been deployed in
Belarus under their 2023 nuclear sharing agreement, but observers doubt the veracity of
these claims.90 Similarly, its nuclear rhetoric notwithstanding, there are no indications
that Russia has removed its non-strategic warheads from storage to deploy them.
Russia’s 2023 decision to withdraw its ratification of the 1996 Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) is of particular importance to the Arctic, given the location of
Russia’s testing facility in Novaya Zemlya.91 There are currently no indications that any
tests have been carried out. However, Putin’s call to make preparations to resume full-
scale testing after Trump suggested that the USA might resume testing suggests that
nuclear testing—or the threat to do so—might become a more prominent instrument in
the nuclear signalling toolbox in the years to come.92
Examples of nuclear signalling on NATO’s side include Steadfast Noon, the alliance’s
annual nuclear deterrence exercise. Both new NATO members Finland and Sweden
participated in the 2025 edition, which took place ‘over the North Sea region’.93
However, in the Arctic context and the High North, western nuclear signalling does
not just pertain to joint NATO activities. Overflight by B-52 bombers (see above) is also
part of the picture. The surfacing of the USS Tennessee, an Ohio-class SSBN, off the
coast of Norway in is the perhaps most salient recent example of a US show
of force—an unprecedented event that was accompanied by photo opportunities and
Facebook posts.94 There were also activities by other nuclear-armed NATO states, such
as an exercise with French nuclear-capable Rafale combat aircraft in , which
received considerable media attention and thus clearly served a signalling purpose.95
This event ought to be seen in the wider context of France’s President Emmanuel
Macron’s offer to discuss the role of nuclear deterrence in European security.96
85 Henley, J. and Borger, J., ‘Russia warns of nuclear weapons in Baltic if Sweden and Finland join NATO’, The
Guardian, 12 Apr. 2022.
86 Sivitsky, A. and Taranov, A., ‘Russia transitions to nuclear intimidation’, Eurasia Daily Monitor, Jamestown
Foundation, 18 Dec. 2025.
87 Ratsiborynska, V., Petraitis, D. and Akimenko, V., ‘Russia’s strategic exercises: Messages and implications’,
NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence, 20 .
88 Graef (note 67).
89 Swedish Radio, ‘Russians practiced attack on Sweden’, 22 Apr. 2013.
90 Kristensen et al. (note 30).
91 Edvardsen, A., ‘All clear for nuclear testing at Novaya Zemlya, says Russian head of test site’, High North News,
23 Sep. 2024.
92 President of Russia, ‘Meeting with permanent members of the Security Council’, Transcript, 5 Nov. 2025.
93 NATO, ‘NATO annual nuclear deterrence exercise, Steadfast Noon’, 20 Oct. 2025.
94 Nilsen, T., ‘Norwegians embark US nuke submarine in a rare flex of force’, Barents Observer, 10 .
95 SvT Nyheter, ‘Fransk militär ökar närvaron: Kärnvapnen skyddar även Sverige’ [French military increases
presence: Nuclear weapons also protect Sweden], 24 Apr. 2025.
96 Chevreuil, A., ‘France’s nuclear offer to Europe’, Center for Strategic & International Studies (CSIS), Com -
mentary, 23 Oct. 2024; and France in the United Kingdom, ‘President delivers speech on France’s nuclear deter -
rence’, 4 Mar. 2026.

20 calibrating deterrence
While NATO refrains from aggressive nuclear rhetoric, and seeks to be more trans-
parent around exercises such as Steadfast Noon, Europe’s ‘nuclear landscape’ is
changing.97 These changes include the return of an air-based leg to the UK under NATO
nuclear sharing arrangements, and the UK purchase of 12 dual-capable F-35A air-
craft.98 The US airbase in Lakenheath seems to have been added to the US/NATO
nuclear infrastructure.99 France also announced the ‘return of nuclear deterrence’ to
the airbase in Luxeuil-Saint-Sauveur, bringing the number of French airbases with a
nuclear mission to four by 2032. The airbase will also be the first to serve as a home to
the F5 version of the Rafale DCA and France’s new ‘hypersonic’ ASN4G nuclear cruise
missile.100 The UK and France have also agreed to cooperate more closely on nuclear
matters in their 2025 Northwood Declaration.101 While these changes are not directly
related to the High North or the Arctic, they are directly relevant to strategic stability in
the grander scheme of things. They are also likely to alter how Russia perceives military
activity by nuclear armed NATO members in the region—even though the French and
British deterrents seem to be a comparatively minor concern for Moscow for the time
being.102
Structural change in organizing armed forces and increased cooperation
The changes in command structures and increased cooperation described in this section
do not necessarily have a direct impact on strategic stability. Rather, they add up with
other factors—especially military capabilities—to create effects that have the potential
to significantly alter the military balance and potentially also strategic stability. Given
that NATO member countries have more partners to work with than Russia, increased
cooperation and integration are primarily observable on the NATO side, and notably
among the Nordic countries. Alongside long-standing formats such as Nordic Defence
Cooperation (NORDEFCO) or the UK-led Joint Expeditionary Forces (JEF), Finland’s
and Sweden’s accessions to NATO have created new avenues for Nordic cooperation at
the bilateral and mini-lateral levels. Especially in a Nordic context, changing structures
and increased cooperation—at times even integration—often go hand in hand.
Since 2012, Russia has increased its permanent presence in the region by building
and modernizing bases. It has also changed its military structures in the Arctic, notably
elevating the status of the Northern Fleet, and created an Arctic joint strategic command
in 2014 with a view to protecting existing and planned military infrastructure along the
Northern Sea Route.103 The overall ambition has been to reinforce its military posture
in light of intensified threat perceptions. However, the war in Ukraine has prevented
Russia from fully achieving its posture goals.104
97 Kristensen et al. (note 83).
98 Government of the UK, ‘UK to purchase F-35As and join NATO nuclear mission as government steps up
national security and delivers defence dividend’, Press release, 24 .
99 Johns, E. and Kristensen, H., Reawakening a Nuclear Legacy: The Potential Return of the US Nuclear Mission to
RAF Lakenheath (Federation of American Scientists: Washington, DC, Feb. 2025).
100 French Ministry of the Armed Forces, ‘Retour de la dissuasion nucléaire à Luxeuil-Saint-Sauveur’ [Return
of nuclear deterrence to Luxeuil-Saint-Sauveur], 19 Mar. 2025. See also Maitre, E., ‘La base aérienne de Luxeuil va
retrouver sa function nucléaire’ [The Luxeuil airbase will return to its nuclear function], Fondation pour la recherche
stratégique, 6 .
101 British Prime Minister’s Office, ‘Northwood Declaration: 10 (UK-France joint nuclear statement)’,
10 .
102 Wolford, Z. et al., Evolving Russian Perceptions of the British and French Nuclear Deterrents (RAND Europe:
Santa Monica, CA and Cambridge, UK, 2025).
103 Grisé (note 13); and Rumer, E., Sokolsky, R. and Stronski, P., Russia in the Arctic: A Critical Examination
(Carnegie Endowment for International Peace: Washington, DC, 2021), p. 9.
104 Grisé (note 13), p. 19.

military activity as a potential disruptor 21
NATO, on the other hand, in reaction to its perception of Russia as a growing threat,
has also made changes to its command structure and adopted its new Force Model.105
Several of these changes are directly relevant to the High North.106 These include the
activation, by the North Atlantic Council, of Joint Force Command (JFC) Norfolk in
2019 under Allied Command Operations (ACO), as well as work led by Allied Command
Transformation (ACT). Since , at their explicit request, all Nordic
countries are under JFC Norfolk.107 NATO also strengthened the cooperation between
Allied Maritime Command (MARCOM) and the Danish Joint Arctic Command in
Greenland in 2020.108
Below the NATO level, there have been qualitative evolutions in the Nordic region,
in particular more integrated command structures and streamlined logistics, relevant
to military mobility and thus part of the deterrence posture. In 2024, Norway, Sweden
and Finland announced the creation of a ‘military transport corridor’.109 One of the
most notable qualitative leaps, however, is the development of the Nordic Airpower
Concept (NAPC), first introduced by a joint declaration of intent in 2023.110 Building on
more than two decades of air force cooperation through NORDEFCO, the framework
seeks to foster the ability of Nordic air forces to operate as ‘one force in full-scale
joint air operations with day-zero readiness’.111 Cooperation under the NAPC has
steadily progressed, resulting in the Nordic Combat Enhanced Training in 
and the creation of a Nordic division at the Norwegian Joint Air Operations Centre
in Bodø tasked with further operationalizing and developing the NAPC.112 Under the
concept, the future joint Nordic fighter fleet would comprise 250 fighter aircraft.113
The recent opening of the new Combined Air Operations Centre (CAOC) in Bodø
(Norway) significantly enhances operational awareness in the High North, as well as
the planning and command-and-control of air operations in the region.114 In addition
to investing in related capabilities, Arctic and non-Arctic countries are also increasing
their cooperation in an attempt to bolster anti-submarine warfare. In ,
for instance, the UK and Norway announced their Lunna House agreement, a naval
alliance intended to ‘hunt Russian submarines’.115
Changes have also occurred on the US side. Perhaps most significantly, and related
to the activation of JFC Norfolk (see above), the USA decided in 2018 to re-establish its
Second Fleet, which was disbanded in 2011.116 This decision was based on the assess-
ment that ‘we’re back in an era of great power competition as the security environment
continues to grow more challenging and complex’, leading the US government to stand
up the Second Fleet ‘to address these changes, particularly in the north Atlantic’.117
105 Hooker, R., ‘A new NATO command structure’, Atlantic Council Issue Brief, 5 ; and NATO, ‘NATO
force model’, Updated 2 Apr. 2025.
106 NATO, ‘The future of the High North’, 12 .
107 NATO/SHAPE, ‘JFC Norfolk formally activated by NAC’, Press release, 30 ; and NATO, ‘NATO JFC
Norfolk welcomes Finland, Sweden and Denmark to its area of responsibility’, Press release, 5 Dec. 2025.
108 NATO, ‘NATO begins cooperation with Danish Joint Arctic Command in Greenland’, Press release, 1 Oct.
2020.
109 Government of Norway, ‘Transport corridor to be established in the north’, Press release, 20 .
110 Finnish Air Force, ‘Four Nordic air forces fighting as one’, 3 Mar. 2025; and Vanttinen, P., ‘Nordics coordinate
air defence without intention to unify forces’, Euractiv, 24 Mar, 2023.
111 Finnish Air Force (note 110), para 3.
112 Finnish Air Force, ‘Nordic air forces in a joint air operation over the Baltic Sea’, 21 ; and Finnish Air
Force (note 110).
113 Jakobsen E. and Solvang, Ø., ‘The future Nordic powerhouse in NATO’, Northern Connections, Jan. 2025.
114 NATO, ‘NATO opens new combined air operations centre in Norway’, Press release, 10 Oct. 2025.
115 Government of the UK, ‘UK and Norway to operate together to counter Russian undersea threat through
major new defence agreement’, Press release, 4 Dec. 2025; and Yeung, T., ‘UK and Norway form naval alliance to
hunt Russian submarines’, BBC News, 4 Dec. 2025.
116 US Navy Office of Information, ‘CNO announces establishment of US 2nd Fleet’, Press release, 4 .
117 US Navy Office of Information (note 116).

22 calibrating deterrence
Recent evolutions also directly impact presence in the region of both NATO and
individual member states. Following enlargement, NATO has been building its
footprint in Finland in Sweden. Officially inaugurated in , NATO’s new
Multi Corps Land Component Command Northwest in Mikkeli (Finland) will be
tasked with the command-and-control and synchronization of national and NATO
land forces in the High North during crises.118 Through its Sweden-led Forward Land
Forces (FLF) Finland, NATO is seeking to directly bolster its ‘posture and deterrence
against Russia’.119 The brigade-level FLF will follow NATO’s post-2022 strategic shift,
which focuses stationed forces on deterrence-by-denial.120
The US government decided to base F-35 fighter jets in Alaska in 2022, where they
play a role in both the Arctic and the Indo-Pacific contexts.121 Since withdrawing
from Iceland and decommissioning its Naval Air Station Keflavík in 2006, the USA has
renewed its—not officially permanent—presence on the strategically important island
in the Atlantic.122 Iceland’s location at a key maritime chokepoint has led the USA to
currently forward deploy its navy Patrol Squadron 1, a multi-mission maritime aircraft
squadron of P-8A Poseidon aircraft, at Keflavík.123 The role of the rotational squadron
is to ‘maintain maritime domain awareness, conduct anti-submarine warfare training
operations, enhance regional stability and promote cooperative maritime safety and
security’ in the North Atlantic and Arctic regions.124
Recent developments have also increased the USA’s footprint in the European Arctic,
or at least opened for increased US presence. Alongside its cold war presence in Iceland
until 2006, the USA has maintained military infrastructure in Greenland based on a
1941 agreement with Denmark, most notably the Pituffik Space Base, formerly known as
Thule Air Base.125 A second agreement between the USA and Denmark on the defence
of Greenland, which dates from 1951, provides the USA with ‘the right of free access
to and movement between the defense areas through Greenland, including territorial
waters, by land, air and sea’.126 Through Greenland, Denmark is today the only Nordic
country with a permanent US military presence.
More recently, the USA has concluded bilateral DCAs with Norway, Finland, Sweden
and Denmark.127 Among other things, these agreements provide the USA with access to
military facilities in the respective countries (for an overview, see table 5.1).
118 Finnish Army, ‘The official inauguration of NATO’s Multi-corps Land Component Command Northwest is
held in Mikkeli’, Press release, 3 Oct. 2025; and Edvardsen, A., ‘NATO’s new Northern Land Command inaugurated
in Finland’, High North News, 8 Oct. 2025.
119 Government Offices of Sweden, ‘Statement regarding NATO’s Forward Land Forces in Finland’, 25 ,
para. 4.
120 Swedish Defence Research Agency, ‘NATO is moving towards a new generation of forward defence’, Press
release, 26 .
121 Ted Stevens Center for Arctic Security Studies, ‘The F35 delivers unmatched global deterrence’, [n.d.].
122 Government of Iceland, ‘Joint declaration between the department of defence of the United States and the
ministry for foreign affairs of Iceland’, 28 .
123 US Naval Forces Europe and Africa, ‘Adm. Stuart B. Munsch visits Keflavík Air Base, reaffirms US commitment
to Arctic security and strong alliance with Iceland’, Press release, 10 .
124 US Naval Forces Europe and Africa (note 123); and Clark, J., ‘Brown visits US Navy rotational squadron in
Iceland, underscores importance of Arctic security’, DOD News, 10 Oct. 2024, para. 6.
125 Denmark allowed the United States to keep and expand this base in the US–Danish Greenland Defense
Agreement of 1951. It came to play an important role in defending the USA, as a base for US bombers and as an
early-warning radar station intended to detect Soviet missiles launched against the USA.
126 Yale Law School, Lillian Goldman Law Library, ‘Defense of Greenland: Agreement Between the United States
and the Kingdom of Denmark’, signed 27 Apr. 1951, entered into force 8 , Art V(3).
127 Supplementary Defense Cooperation Agreement Between the Government of the Kingdom of Norway and
the Government of the United States of America, signed 31 Mar. 2021 and 16 Apr. 2021, entered into force 17 ; Agreement to Amend Annex A of the Supplementary Defense Cooperation Agreement between Norway and
the Government of the United States of America, signed 2 Feb. 2024, entered into force 10 ; Agreement on
Defense Cooperation Between the Government of the Republic of Finland and the Government of the United States
of America, signed 18 Dec. 2023, entered into force 1 Sep. 2024; Agreement on Defense Cooperation Between the

military activity as a potential disruptor 23
While US presence on the basis of these DCAs is not permanent, they open up new
deployment options. Some of the infrastructure the USA now has access to is so close to
strategic Russian assets that they can be reached with systems below INF range, such as
the US PrSM missile. The locations of relevant military facilities and areas are indicated
in the map in figure 5.1.
Analysts consequently warn of a ‘looming missile crisis’ in the Arctic, arguing that a
potential US decision to deploy missiles on Nordic bases close to Russian assets could
‘create a Cuban Missile Crisis situation between NATO and Russia that could lead to
war’.128
Government of the Kingdom of Sweden and the Government of the United States of America, signed 5 Dec. 2023,
entered into force 15 Aug. 2024; and Agreement on Defense Cooperation Between the Government of Denmark
and the Government of the United States of America, signed 21 Dec. 2023, entered into force 1 . See also
Salonius-Pasternak, C., ‘Defense cooperation agreements in Northern Europe’, FIIA Comment no. 6 (Sep. 2024).
128 Marakhonov, V., ‘The looming missile crisis in the Arctic’, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 4 Dec. 2025.

24 calibrating deterrence
NORWAY
Murmansk
Kola Peninsula
ARCTICCIRCLE
SWEDEN
FINLAND
RUSSIA
Åland Helsinki
Stockholm
Baltic Sea
Gotland
N
100 km
Military facility or area
Figure 5.1. Nordic military facilities and areas accessible to the United States under
defence cooperation agreements near the Russian border
Note: The figure excludes military facilities and areas located near Kaliningrad.
Sources: Supplementary Defense Cooperation Agreement Between the Government of the Kingdom
of Norway and the Government of the United States of America, signed 31 Mar. 2021 and 16 Apr.
2021, entered into force 17 ; Agreement to Amend Annex A of the Supplementary Defense
Cooperation Agreement between Norway and the Government of the United States of America,
signed 2 Feb. 2024, entered into force 10 ; Agreement on Defense Cooperation Between
the Government of the Republic of Finland and the Government of the United States of America,
signed 18 Dec. 2023, entered into force 1 Sep. 2024; Agreement on Defense Cooperation Between the
Government of the Kingdom of Sweden and the Government of the United States of America, signed
5 Dec. 2023, entered into force 15 Aug. 2024; and Agreement on Defense Cooperation Between the
Government of Denmark and the Government of the United States of America, signed 21 Dec. 2023,
entered into force 1 . See also Salonius-Pasternak, C., ‘Defense cooperation agreements in
Northern Europe’, FIIA Comment no. 6 (Sep. 2024).

military activity as a potential disruptor 25
Table 5.1. The scope of United States defence cooperation agreements
Number of military facilities or Provisions to ban nuclear
Country (year of signature) areas to which the US gains access weapons
Norway (2021/2024) 12 Yes
Finland (2023) 15 No
Sweden (2023) 17 No
Denmark (2023)a 3 Yes
a The defence cooperation agreement does not cover Greenland and the Faroe Islands.
Sources: Supplementary Defense Cooperation Agreement Between the Government of the Kingdom
of Norway and the Government of the United States of America, signed 31 Mar. 2021 and 16 Apr. 2021,
entered into force 17 ; and Agreement to Amend Annex A of the Supplementary Defense
Cooperation Agreement between Norway and the Government of the United States of America,
signed 2 Feb. 2024, entered into force 10 ; Agreement on Defense Cooperation Between
the Government of the Republic of Finland and the Government of the United States of America,
signed 18 Dec. 2023, entered into force 1 Sep. 2024; Agreement on Defense Cooperation Between the
Government of the Kingdom of Sweden and the Government of the United States of America, signed
5 Dec. 2023, entered into force 15 Aug. 2024; and Agreement on Defense Cooperation Between the
Government of Denmark and the Government of the United States of America, signed 21 Dec. 2023,
entered into force 1 . See also Salonius-Pasternak, C., ‘Defense cooperation agreements in
Northern Europe’, FIIA Comment no. 6 (Sep. 2024).
Conclusions: Military activity as a potential disruptor of strategic stability
Finland’s and Sweden’s accessions to NATO have brought about considerable changes
to the alliance’s northern flank, including from the vantage point of strategic stability.
While they have clearly helped to bolster NATO’s deterrence posture, including its
emerging deterrence posture in the High North, they have also created a number
of potential disruptors of strategic stability. In the Arctic region, including in the
continental European Arctic, potential disruptors of strategic stability are primarily
tied to Russian perceptions. Neither European members of NATO nor the USA have
much military infrastructure in the region that is directly linked to western second-
strike capabilities. If Russia intended to undermine the USA’s confidence in its second-
strike capabilities, its actions would therefore need to be directed elsewhere, beyond
the regional scope of this study.
What makes the developments described in this chapter particularly relevant for
strategic stability is that they alter NATO’s (or an individual NATO member state’s)
options for strikes against Russian strategic targets. The effects of NATO enlargement
and the deepening of cooperation it made possible tend to add up. For instance, from
a Russian vantage point, it seems fair to assume that Nordic conventional long-range
precision-strike capabilities become more threatening in combination with deploy-
ment close to assets it considers essential and with increasingly integrated airpower in
the region. Seen from Russia’s point of view, a potential US presence and deployments
in Lapland are of particular concern. All these developments have the potential to nega-
tively impact stability if there were a crisis.

6. Conclusions: Managing disruptors in the absence
of dialogue
Strategic stability is under strain and disruptors present on NATO’s northern flank are
a contributing factor. The disruptors discussed in this paper affect both arms race and
crisis stability. Structural drivers such as strategic missile defence and technological
advances in weapon systems fuel the arms race and therefore undermine arms
race stability. Increased military activity in the region has the potential to increase
uncertainty about actors’ operations and intentions, resulting in challenges to crisis
stability. Gaining better knowledge of these disruptors is crucial, especially when it
comes to challenges to crisis stability and consequently to situations that could escalate
from a comparatively small incident to a fully blown conflict. This applies to all actors
in the deterrence relationship between NATO, its member states and Russia.
A thorough understanding of the disruptors of strategic stability first and foremost
means understanding the effects of specific systems and actions, and how they are
viewed by the other side. This understanding is crucial to calibrating and fine-tuning
any deterrence posture and helps to determine what the adversary might consider to
have a deterrent effect and what possible reactions might be.
A thorough understanding of disruptors of strategic stability also helps with assessing
specific situations, notably from a crisis stability perspective. This is where communi-
cation and transparency are particularly important, in addition to or instead of situ-
ational awareness and intelligence to avoid surprises. More concretely, the following
measures could help to manage disruptors of strategic stability in the High North and
the Arctic.
Risk reduction
The classic tool for managing disruptors of strategic stability is arms control, and
notably risk reduction when it comes to crisis stability. There is currently no risk reduc-
tion regime that covers the High North and the Arctic. Instruments that would allow
crisis situations to be dealt with in the northern European and Arctic context are not
available for most scenarios.129As a result, managing the potential effects of disruptors
becomes more complicated or even impossible if a crisis were to emerge. This could
adversely affect crisis stability, making miscalculations more likely. Norway is the only
Nordic country with a hotline to the Russian Northern Fleet. No other Nordic country
has an Incidents at Sea (INCSEA) agreement with Russia. Low-key steps forward
might comprise a return to everyday military-to-military contacts, even if on areas
only adjacent to nuclear security such as search and rescue operations. The return
of a high-level US–Russian military-to-military dialogue is consequently a welcome
development.130
However, given the geopolitical context, it seems highly unlikely that NATO, its
member states and Russia will be able to agree on shared frameworks for managing
disruptors in the High North and the Arctic in the foreseeable future. For this reason,
and against the backdrop of the breakdown of cooperative security, unilateral measures
on the NATO side appear more achievable in current circumstances.
129 Erästö, T. and Wan, W., ‘Risk reduction is urgently needed amid rising tensions in Northern Europe’, SIPRI
Commentary, 16 Dec. 2025.
130 US European Command, ‘The US and Russian Federation agreed to reestablish high level military-to-military
dialogue’, Press release, 5 Feb. 2026.

conclusions: managing disruptors in the absence of dialogue 27
Avoid surprises by ensuring situational awareness
The first such unilateral measure concerns ISR capabilities. The better the situational
awareness that NATO and its member states have, the fewer the surprises they need to
fear. ISR capabilities have therefore been identified as a priority area.131 This is reflected,
for example, in Danish investment decisions. From a European vantage point, the fact
that many relevant assets are US assets presents an important challenge. If the USA
were to withdraw them, this would leave Europeans at a disadvantage vis-à-vis Russia.
Acquiring the means to independently ensure ISR must therefore be a priority from
a Nordic and more broadly European vantage point. Beyond capabilities, another key
aspect to ensuring situational awareness is removing obstacles to intelligence sharing
and secure communications in real-time.
Avoid surprises by ensuring predictable behaviour and information
Another way to avoid surprises and escalation risks is to adopt behaviour, at least
unilaterally, that supports these objectives by being predictable. Means of achieving
predictability include communication and transparency about exercises and other
military activity. NATO and its member states should therefore continue to adhere to
the Vienna Document and other notification instruments. Other means of achieving
predictability include avoiding overly aggressive behaviour that could reasonably leave
the other side in doubt over intentions. A historic example of such an approach are
Norway’s guidelines, which have been in place with modifications since 1949, although
changed circumstances make them partially obsolete. Responding to uncertainty
caused by Russia by causing more uncertainty should not be NATO’s strategy.
Carefully monitor the effects of climate change
Climate change will almost certainly exacerbate security challenges in the High North
and the Arctic. While most of the related developments, such as an ice-free Arctic
ocean in the summer, are not imminent, their impact will be considerable once they
materialize. Increased traffic may affect crisis stability. The threat assessments of
both Russia and NATO will evolve with direct maritime access from and to Russia’s
northern coast. On land, climate change could affect factors such as military mobility
and consequently impact deterrence. All these developments need to be monitored
carefully and incorporated into strategic analyses and military planning.
Work towards overcoming implicit divisions among the Nordic states and within
NATO
Obstacles to implementing risk reduction instruments or unilateral restraint are
not only to be found on the Russian side. Within NATO, the idea of engaging in risk
reduction conversations with Russia is highly controversial. These disagreements
are one illustration of a key issue when it comes to alliance cohesion. NATO members
have very different approaches to deterrence and the causal mechanisms that make it
‘work’, as well as divergent views on whether safety valves are a necessity or a way to
undermine effective deterrence. As a result, some, such as Norway, have long pursued
approaches that seek to balance deterrence with reassurance. Others—in particular
on the so-called eastern flank—view risk reduction as compromising deterrence and
131 Vidhammer Berge, J. and Bergman, M., ‘Addressing Arctic vulnerabilities. Lessons from Ukraine’, Center for
Strategic & International Studies (CSIS), Brief, (Dec. 2024).

28 calibrating deterrence
consequently oppose it as a means for managing an adversarial relationship. These
different approaches to deterrence are rarely addressed but pose at times fundamental
problems when it comes to jointly defining a deterrence posture within the alliance.
Working to overcome these differences is therefore an important element in a wider
transatlantic and European context, with concrete ramifications for the High North
and the Arctic. It should consequently constitute a priority in strategic dialogue among
NATO members.
Ultimately: Find a new basis for strategic dialogue—once peace in Ukraine has
been achieved
Beyond risk reduction mechanisms, the High North and the Arctic currently lack
regional governance forums involving all the Arctic states, which would allow security
concerns to be addressed. The Arctic Council—of which Russia still is a member,
although much of the in-person cooperation has been suspended—is not intended to
deal with security issues. The only forum for Arctic defence is the Arctic Security Forces
Roundtable, but Russia no longer participates as a result of sanctions in the wake of its
2014 annexation of Crimea. Similarly, Russia does not participate in the Arctic Chiefs
of Defence Staff meetings. Beyond the region, the NATO–Russia Council does not
serve as a forum for discussions on security and defence among all eight Arctic states.
While re-establishing any kind of dialogue forum before the end of Russia’s war against
Ukraine is unrealistic, a possible peace agreement could constitute a starting point for
resumed strategic dialogue on security and strategic stability in the High North and the
Arctic.
The future of strategic stability on NATO’s new northern flank will very much
depend on the behaviour of all the actors involved: Russia, but also NATO, its Arctic
member states and most notably the USA. The recent—and effectively still unresolved—
transatlantic conflict over the Trump administration’s desire to acquire Greenland has a
clear impact on Arctic and Euro-Atlantic security. While its consequences for strategic
stability in a stricter sense might be limited, it creates a great degree of uncertainty
and hence potential instability. The subsequent decision to increase NATO’s role and
footprint in the High North may also be viewed as a potential disruptor of strategic
stability by Russia. A complete US retreat from the region is in any case highly
unlikely. As the then NORAD commander, General Terrance O’Shaughnessy, argued
in 2020, the High North is of direct relevance to US security as North America is no
longer a ‘sanctuary’. Rather, the USA’s ‘key adversaries watched and learned, invested
in capabilities to offset our strengths while exploiting our weaknesses, and have
demonstrated patterns of behaviour that indicate they currently have the capability,
capacity, and intent to hold our homeland at significant risk below the threshold of
nuclear war’.132 While the USA is expected to reduce its engagement in Euro-Atlantic
security more broadly, as underlined by its decision to hand over JFC Naples and
Norfolk to European commanders, it is likely to continue to consider the High North to
be an area where it needs to be present. That said, (partial) US retreat from European
security more broadly may affect strategic stability in various ways, including in the
Arctic. For instance, if the French and potentially British nuclear deterrent were to
play a more prominent role in European security, this would likely also change Russia’s
perceptions of these countries’ military activities. Needless to say, more European
132 O’Shaughnessy, T. (Gen.), United States Air Force Commander, United States Northern Command and North
American Aerospace Defense Command, Statement before the Senate Armed Services Committee, Subcommittee
on Readiness and Management Support, 3 Mar. 2020.

conclusions: managing disruptors in the absence of dialogue 29
governments deciding to acquire their own nuclear weapons would have even greater
impact.
Actors outside the region, such as China which is at the heart of much of US thinking
about nuclear affairs, can also impact strategic stability. If either side pursues strategies
intended to produce instability or unpredictability, this would be problematic. As of
now, it still seems unlikely that the High North or the Arctic would be where large-
scale conflict between NATO and Russia would start. Many factors are at play: broader
dynamics in European security and the evolution of the transatlantic link, technological
advances and the spread of conventional long-range precision weapons, potentially
climate change and changing operational environments, and evolutions at the domestic
level in Arctic nations and elsewhere. Managing strategic stability will consequently
become even more challenging on NATO’s northern flank and beyond.

Appendix A. Military exercises in the High North and in the Arctic (Apr. 2023–Dec. 2025)
Date Exercise name Location Countries Capabilities Information
26 Nov. 2025– Lapland Finnish FI, SE, UK 1200 personnel, c. 120 from Sweden and The Finnish Jaeger Brigade-led live-fire exercise tested the Finnish
5 Dec. 2025 Steel 25 Lapland c. 100 from the UK Army’s ability to operate under winter conditions in Lapland.1a
17 Nov. 2025– Northern Finnish FI, PL 2200 Finnish soldiers, around 40 soldiers The aim of Northern Strike 25-2 was to test and improve the
25 Nov. 2025 Strike 25-2 Lapland from the 1st Masurian Artillery Brigade; artillery operational chain under low temperature and low
500 military vehicles and systems; visibility conditions.2a
2 Polish Homar-K rocket launchers
11 Nov. 2025– ADEX Mallet Finland FI, SE, UK 1300 personnel from the Finnish Army According to the Finnish Army, ADEX Mallet Strike is the ‘key
20 Nov. 2025 Strike 2/25 and Air Force; Finnish anti-air weapons, annual exercise for Finland’s ground-based air defence units’.
including ITO90M, ITO05 and The main goal of multinational activities during the exercise
ITO05M missile systems; 35ITK88 and was to enhance interoperability of ground-based air defence and
23ITK61/95 anti-aircraft guns and heavy cooperation with NATO members. The exercises took place at
machine guns; UK Starstreak missile the Lohtaja firing range and training area.3a
system
12 Nov. 2025 None Finland FI, SE, USA B-52 bombers; Finnish F/A-18 Hornets Part of Bomber Task Force Europe 26-1. The exercise aimed to
improve joint readiness between partners such as Finland, Sweden
and Lithuania. The exercise carried out simulated weapon strikes
and was coordinated by NATO’s new air operations centre, CAOC
Bodø in Norway.4a
13 Oct. 2025– Steadfast North Sea BE, DK, FI, 70 aircraft including F-35s, Polish F-16s Steadfast Noon is NATO’s annual nuclear exercise. In 2025 it
24 Oct. 2025 Noon 25 Region GER, NL, PL, and Finnish F-18s, JAS-39 Gripen; support focused on the North Sea Region. According to NATO, the main
SE, UK, USA, assets such as the E-3A Sentry and goal of the exercise was to ‘test and refine the Alliance’s procedures
and 6 KC-135 Stratotanker; c. 2000 personnel to ensure the continued credibility, security, and effectiveness of
unspecified NATO’s nuclear deterrent’.5a
member
states

Date Exercise name Location Countries Capabilities Information
22 Oct. 2025 Grom 2025 Barents Sea, RUS 1 RS-24 Yars intercontinental ballistic Grom is the annual Russian strategic military exercise that tests
Russian missile, 1 R-29RMU Sineva ballistic missile; the effectiveness of Russia’s nuclear command chain. Grom 2025
Arctic the nuclear-powered submarine involved the launch of unarmed strategic-range missiles from land,
K-117 Bryansk; Tu-95MS bombers; sea and air platforms.6a
Kh-101 cruise missiles
7 Oct. 2025– None Greenland DK, GL, USA 3 KC-135 Stratotankers from Wisconsin The exercise was coordinated by NORAD in cooperation
11 Oct. 2025 National Air Guard with with Denmark at Pituffik Space Base. The exercise aimed to
2 F-35 Lightning II fighters, demonstrate rapid deployment capabilities to the Arctic. 7a
2 F-16 Fighting Falcons; Royal Danish Air
Force Bombardier Challenger 604 aircraft;
specialized personnel from Denmark
26 Sep. 2025– Arctic Tide Northern NO, UK 350 Royal Marines; landing ship RFA Lyme The 10-day exercise formed part of TARASSIS, which is the JEF’s
7 Oct. 2025 Norway Bay; Royal Navy’s Commando Logistic biggest military exercise to date. The exercise had a logistical focus.
Regiment; unspecified number of British The British Royal Navy practiced the deployment, protection and
fighter aircraft; Norwegian Armoured resupply of special forces to northern Norway. 8a
Battalion of Brigade Nord
22 Sep. 2025– Protective Finland FI, DK, SE 30 Finnish F/A-18 Hornet fighter jets, hawk The exercise was part of the JEF-led TARASSIS exercise and
26 Sep. 2025 Fence 25 jet trainers; transport and liaison aircraft, aimed to improve the defence capability, preparedness and
Finnish Army NH90 helicopters, Finnish interoperability of the Finnish Air Force. Aircraft flew from all of
Border Guard Dornier 228 surveillance Finland’s main operating bases as well as from Kallax Air Base in
aircraft; Swedish JAS 39 Gripen, Swedish Sweden. Flight operations took place in the airspace bordering
and Danish C-130 Hercules transport Rovaniemi, Kajaani, Kuopio, Jyväskylä and Vaasa, as well as over
aircraft the Bay of Bothnia.9a
20 Sep. 2025 None Jan Mayen NO, UK, USA Norwegian Home Guard’s Rapid Reaction During the exercise, NATO forces were deployed to the volcanic
island Force Archery (HV-11); US Marine Corps; island Jan Mayen. The exercise aimed to practice protection of the
British Royal Marines and Royal Air Force; remote but strategically important Arctic island. The seas around
British Airbus A400M; US Marines light Jan Mayen island are an important operational area for defending
utility/combat multi-role vehicle JLTV international shipping lanes and supply lines.10a
appendix

Date Exercise name Location Countries Capabilities Information
9 Sep. 2025– Arctic Light Greenland DK, FR, GER, 550 personnel and troops from Denmark The exercise was led by Denmark and included live-fire drills,
19 Sep. 2025 2025 NO, SE and NATO forces; several NATO naval special operations, sea-rescue exercises and cold-weather training.
vessels; Danish F-16 aircraft as well as The overall aim was to improve interoperability in demanding
helicopter and transport aircraft; French Arctic conditions and improve coordination with the Greenlandic
MRTT aircraft authorities on crisis preparedness.11a
12 Sep. 2025– Zapad-25 Barents Sea BLR, RUS Armoured vehicles; infantry soldiers and As part of Zapad-25, Russian forces simulated battles across the
16 Sep. 2025 drone operators; warships; a helicopter, a Barents Sea and the Arctic. During the exercise, Russian
pair of Su-33 fighter jets, Tu-142 maritime Tu-160 bombers simulated cruise missile launches over the
patrol aircraft, Tu-22M bombers; 1 strategic Barents Sea. Kinzhal missiles with MiG-31K were also launched
Tu-160 bomber, several MiG-31 with over the same area. In addition, one exercise scenario has been
Kinzhal missiles; Onyx, Tsirkon suspected of practicing the occupation of Svalbard.12a
and Kalibr missiles
23 – July Storm Barents Sea, RUS 150 warships and supply vessels; The exercise July Storm is a major naval exercise. During
27 Baltic Sea 120 aircraft; 10 coastal missile systems; the exercise, the use of long-range precision systems and the
15 000 military personnel integration of unmanned systems and advanced weapons
were tested.13a
16 – Atlantic Finland FI, FR, UK, 1 Finnish F/A-18 Hornet; US Air Atlantic Trident is a biannual tactical-level air force training
27 Trident USA Force F-35A Lightning II, F-15E Strike exercise to strengthen integration and improve combat readiness.
Eagle, and KC-135 Stratotanker; French In 2025, Finland was the first NATO country to host the exercise
Rafale, E-3F AWACS, A330 MRTT and apart from France, the UK and the USA.14a
A400M; British Eurofighter Typhoons
2 Kumzha 25 Barents Sea RUS 15 naval vessels (including the cruiser Kumzha is an annual exercise of the Russian Northern Fleet.
Marshal Ustinov), nuclear submarines During the exercise, Northern Fleet units trained on air defence,
Knyaz Vladimir (Borei-A) anti-submarine, anti-sabotage and anti-mine defence,
Verkhoturye (K-51) and Gepard (K-335); as well as the rescue of sailors lost at sea.15a
MiG-29 fighter jets, II-28 maritime patrol
aircraft, 1 K-27 helicopter

calibrating
deterrence

Date Exercise name Location Countries Capabilities Information
19 None Barents Sea RUS Destroyers (Severomorsk; Vice Admiral The Russian Northern Fleet practiced anti-submarine warfare.16a
Kulakov), 1 submarine; aircraft and
helicopters
17 – Northern Finnish FI, SE, UK 1 Swedish brigade-level combat group The Northern Strike exercise focused on indirect fire with live-fire
1 Strike and Lapland and helicopter flotilla; the Finnish Kainuu at the Rovajärvi firing range, as well as manoeuvre combat against
Northern Star Brigade; 6500 troops, including 900 from a trained opponent. The main goal of the combined exercises was
2025 Sweden and 350 from the UK to enhance interoperability between Finland and Sweden. UK
forces were also involved in the exercise. This combined exercise
was previously conducted under the name Northern Forest.17a
11 – Swift Finland, FI, IT, LV, LT, Around 6000 US and European Swift Response is part of the Defender 25 exercise, which is the
31 Response 25 Sweden, NO, PL, SE, NATO forces largest annual US army deployment in Europe. According to
Norway, SI, UK, USA the US Army, Swift Response 25 demonstrated ‘multinational
Latvia, power projection and the expansion of critical capabilities on
Lithuania the battlefield in the High North and Baltics through airborne
jumps and integration of technology in support of the Army
Modernization Strategy and DOD Arctic Strategy’.18a
1 – Formidable UK, Norway BE, CA, DK, c. 2500 soldiers; Norwegian F-35s; UK According to NATO, the exercise was the ‘largest live-fire naval
31 Shield 2025 FR, IT, NL, Eurofighters; NATO maritime patrol exercise in Europe’. Scenarios included in the exercise focused
NO, UK, USA aircraft, KC-135 Stratotanker aircraft on BMD and AD missions.19a
12 Dynamic GIUK-N CA, DK, GER, Standing NATO Maritime Group 1; Dynamic Mongoose is NATO’s annual live-fire exercise
Mongoose 25 gap, North IS, NL, NO, submarines, frigates, coastguard vessels; on advanced anti-submarine and anti-surface warfare in
Atlantic PL, UK, USA helicopters, maritime patrol aircraft the High North.20a
25 Apr. 2025– None Barents Sea, RUS Russian warship strike group consisting of The Northern Fleet conducted combat training and training
30 Apr. 2025 Fishermen frigates, submarines and 3 anti-submarine on submarine hunting in continuation of previous live artillery
Peninsula, ships; frigates Admiral Gorshkov and shooting around the Fishermen Peninsula.21a
Kola Admiral Kasatonov
Peninsula
appendix

Date Exercise name Location Countries Capabilities Information
14 Apr. 2025 None Barents Sea, RUS Cruiser Marshal Ustinov, nuclear The Russian Northern Fleet conducted exercises in and around
Rybachii submarines, anti-submarine vessels, the Rybachii Peninsula over multiple days. The exercises included
Peninsula 1 frigate artillery shooting, anti-submarine training, anti-aircraft
and anti-drone drills.22a
8 Apr. 2025– Arctic Northern CA, DK, FI, NATO coastguard vessels Arctic Guardian is a live exercise on maritime SAR and
9 Apr. 2025 Guardian 2025 Norway IS, NO, SE, MER operations. The previous iteration took place in 2021.23a
USA
3 Mar. 2025– Joint Viking Northern BE, CA, FI, 10 000 Norwegian soldiers as well as Joint Viking is a biannual Norwegian winter exercise. According
14 Mar. 2025 2025 Norway FR, GER, NL, NATO soldiers; NATO aircraft and ships to the Norwegian Armed Forces, the exercise aims to improve
UK, USA ‘interoperability, train on protecting NATO’s flank and to test
Norway’s ability to receive allied reinforcements’.24a
11 Mar. 2025 None Sweden SE, USA 2 B-52 bombers; several Swedish The exercise included a live weapons drop by B-52s. The aircraft
JAS 39 Gripen dropped GBU-38 JDAM bombs on targets in the Vidsel test
range.25a
6 Mar. 2025 None Finnish FI, USA 2 B-52 bombers; Finnish F/A-18 Hornet 2 US B-52 bombers conducted a live weapons drop of guided
Lapland fighters JDAM bombs over the Rovajärvi firing range in Lapland.26a
23 Feb. 2025 Lapland Stone Finnish and FI, SE Swedish Home Guard Patrol Battalion; The aim of the exercise was to develop cooperation between
Swedish Finnish Ranger Brigade; other Finnish the Swedish Home Guard and Finnish troops. The exercise also
Lapland and Swedish units aimed to strengthen the ability to collaborate between different
authorities and—on the Finnish side—the business community.27a
28 Jan. 2025– Noble Greenland, CA, DK, USA 125 personnel from Canada and the USA; According to NORAD, Operation Noble Defender aimed to
11 Feb. 2025 Defender Pituffik NORAD F-16 fighter jets, KC-135s, E-3s, enhance its ability to ‘defend the approaches of North America
CF-18s, C-150s and CH-149s; Royal Danish from current and future threats, maintain mission readiness in
Air Force standby SAR support diverse and challenging environments, and to preserve capacity
for follow-on operations’.28a

calibrating
deterrence

Date Exercise name Location Countries Capabilities Information
3 Dec. 2024 None Norway NO, UK, USA 1 U-2, 2 B-52s; British Eurofighter The exercise was based on a training scenario in which NATO
Typhoons; Norwegian and British forces simulated attacks on enemy occupied territories within
F-35 fighter jets, P-8 Poseidon maritime Norway.29a
surveillance aircraft, RC-135 Rivet Joint
reconnaissance plane
12 Nov. 2024– ADEX Mallet Finland FI, NO, SE, 1300 defence soldiers from the USA, ADEX Mallet Strike 2/24 is an international air defence exercise.
21 Nov. 2024 Strike 2/24 USA Sweden and Norway The aim of the exercise was to strengthen collaboration and
refine tactics in order to respond to air defence challenges in
a multinational environment.30a
5 Nov. 2024– None Northern FI, NO, SE, Several long-range, nuclear-capable Several B-52 strategic bombers were deployed to northern Europe
7 Nov. 2024 Europe USA B-52 strategic bombers; F/A-18 Hornet for training missions. The training included overflight of Finnish
Fighter; 1 US RC-135 signal airspace, joint flights of Finnish and Swedish fighter aircraft and
intelligence aircraft sorties of Swedish and US signal intelligence aircraft.31a
4 Nov. 2024– Lightning Finland CZ, EE, FI, 3600 soldiers, including international Lightning Strike 24 was part of the US-led Dynamic Front exercise
28 Nov. 2024 Strike 24 FR, SE, UK, troops series. The aim of the exercise was to demonstrate defence
USA capability and to practice operational C2 and cooperation with
the Allied Rapid Reaction Corps. The exercise coincided with
ADEX 2/24 Mallet Strike.32a
14 Oct. 2024– Strike Warrior Norwegian NO, UK, USA 2 NATO carrier groups (USS Harry S. Strike Warrior 2024 focused on ‘anti-submarine warfare,
25 Oct. 2024 2024 Sea Truman and UK HMS Prince of Wales); countering attacks from uncrewed systems, air defence exercises,
Norwegian KNM Maud, warships, pilot rescues and practising sailing through narrow straits while
including frigates and submarines; under threat’. The exercise was part of Steadfast Noon 2024.33a
P-8 aircraft for anti-submarine operations;
NATO land forces
10 Sep. 2024– Ocean-2024 Rybachii RUS Tu-95 strategic bomber, cruisers; As part of the Ocean-2024 exercise, the Russian military deployed
16 Sep. 2024 Peninsula, Bastion-P missile complex; 2 Buyan-M class warships in its inner waterways (Lake Ladoga) that lie east of
Barents Sea; corvettes armed with Kalibr cruise missiles; Finland in a strategic exercise. The military launched Oniks
Norwegian Oniks and Vulkan missiles and Vulkan missiles from the Rybachii Peninsula as part of the
Sea; Baltic naval exercise. It also conducted multi-domain bastion defence
Sea manoeuvres and anti-submarine hunting in the Barents Sea.34a
appendix

Date Exercise name Location Countries Capabilities Information
5 Sep. 2024 None Barents Sea RUS Anti-submarine ship Admiral Lavchenko; The primary focus was anti-submarine warfare and multi-domain
Il-38 maritime patrol aircraft, Ka-27M bastion defence of the Northern Fleet’s strategically important
helicopters SSBNs.35a
31 Aug. 2024– Baana 24 Finland FI, GER, USA Finnish F/A-18 fighter jets, Hawk jet Baana is Finland’s annual road-based exercise that practices
6 Sep. 2024 trainers, transport and liaison aircraft; the landing of fighter jets on historic landings and highways.
German Eurofighters; 2 US F-35As This iteration was conducted on highways located in Finnish
Lapland.36a
26 Aug. Northern Iceland, DK, FR, IS, Multiple ships; NATO’s Maritime The US-led exercise has been conducted periodically since 1982
2024– Viking GIUK gap NO, PL, PRT, Group One; NATO aircraft based on the 1951 bilateral defence agreement between Iceland
3 Sep. 2024 SNMG1, USA and the USA. It was last organized in the spring of 2022. Northern
Viking 2024 focused on the defence of national infrastructure and
sea routes, and control of sea communication lines in the GIUK
gap. Specific exercise activities included a landing operation,
anti-submarine warfare with maritime patrol aircraft and frigates
with anti-submarine helicopters, as well as search and rescue
operations and humanitarian crisis response to a simulated
volcanic eruption.37a
5 Aug. 2024 None Arctic Ocean RUS A detachment of Northern Fleet ships Annual 2-month-long operation of the Russian Northern Fleet
in the Arctic. The operation includes ‘combat exercises with
rocket artillery and landing of marine forces on coasts without
infrastructure’. Tactical exercises with long-range anti-submarine
aircraft and coastal-based missile forces were also planned as part
of the operation. The defence of Russian state communications
and economic activities in the maritime domain were named as
the main focus.38a
22 – RYSKE Finland FI, NO 250 personnel and 25 vehicles from the The RYSKE military exercise is held biannually. It aims to measure
26 military Finnish Jaeger Brigade; Norwegian the skills and readiness of conscripts and service personnel.39a
exercise Armed Forces
19 None Barents Sea, RUS Russian submarines Severodvinsk and Orel; As part of the exercise, submarines fired cruise missiles on an
Rybachii Kalibr and Granit cruise missiles imagined fleet of enemy landing ships.40a
Peninsula

calibrating
deterrence

Date Exercise name Location Countries Capabilities Information
21 Apr. 2024– Immediate Norway, FI, NO, SE, No information found The exercise focused on Sweden receiving military support, in
31 Response 2024 Sweden, USA this case from US units, and facilitating their movement through
(part of Nordic Finland Norrbotten to Finland where they participated in the Northern
Response) Forest exercise, together with soldiers from Finland and Norway.
This exercise should not be confused with Immediate Response 25
conducted under the auspices of Defender 25.41a
28 Kumzha-24 Barents Sea, RUS At least 11 vessels and several aircraft Kumzha-24 had 5 training scenarios, including ‘counteraction
Motovskiy against fast-sailing enemy motor boats, search and attack of
Bay enemy submarines and air defence drills’.42a
28 Northern Finnish FI, NO, USA 2000 US troops, 300 Norwegian troops and The main objective of the exercise was to enhance the
Forest 24 Lapland 4500 Finnish troops interoperability of the participating nations’ ground forces in
northern Finland. Northern Forest constituted the northern
component of Immediate Response 24.43a
24 None Barents Sea, RUS Marine Rescue Service of Murmansk The annual Barents SAR exercise, which was previously conducted
Motovskiy by Russia and Norway. In 2024, the exercise was conducted
Bay without Norwegian participation.44a
29 Apr. 2024– Dynamic GIUK gap, CA, DK, ESP, Maritime Patrol Aircraft (2 CP-140s; Dynamic Mongoose is NATO’s annual live-fire exercise on
10 Mongoose 24 North FO, GER, IS, 1 P-3C; 5 P-8As); Standing NATO Maritime advanced anti-submarine and anti-surface warfare in the
Atlantic NL, NO, SE, Group 1; 6 additional NATO vessels; Dutch, High North; 2024 was the first time Sweden participated
UK, USA Swedish, Norwegian and US submarines as a NATO member.45a
20 Mar. 2024 Arctic Shock Northern NO, USA 130 US Army paratroopers; C-17 transport A rapid deployment operation was carried out by the Alaska-based
Norway aircraft 11th Airborne Division. Arctic Shock also involved winter training
and field training exercises for US and Norwegian soldiers.
The exercise was part of Nordic Response, which itself was
part of NATO’s Steadfast Defender exercise.46a
19 Mar. 2024 None Severo morsk RUS Military engineers, medics and Russian forces drilled the scenario of a drone attack on its
representatives of radiation, chemical Northern Fleet headquarters.47a
and biological protection forces
appendix

Date Exercise name Location Countries Capabilities Information
4 Mar. 2024– Nordic Norway, BE, CA, ESP, 20 000 NATO troops; more than Nordic Response is part of the Steadfast Defender exercise.
14 Mar. 2024 Response 2024 Sweden and FI, FR, GER, 50 submarines, frigates, corvettes, aircraft The exercise was previously named Cold Response and had
Finland IT, NL, NO, carriers and amphibious vessels at sea; over been traditionally held in northern Norway. The exercise
SE, UK, USA 100 combat, maritime surveillance and involved the land, sea and air domains. It exercised cross-border
transport aircraft, ground artillery systems, operations in the Arctic Circle.48a
tanks and tracked vehicles
1 Mar. 2024 None Barents Sea RUS Submarines and 2 Russian frigates (Admiral Russian frigates conducted training on anti-submarine operations
Gorshkov and Admiral Kasatonov) ahead of the NATO Nordic Response exercise.49a
24 Oct. 2023– Grom 2023 Barents Sea, RUS Delta-IV class Tula submarine; As part of its annual nuclear exercise, Grom, Russia launched
27 Oct. 2023 Arkhangelsk Tu-95MS strategic bombers; 1 Yars missile; missiles in the Russian Arctic close to Europe.50a
region 1 Sineva missile; 1 cruise missile
21 Sep. 2023 None Finland FI, NO 2 Norwegian F-35A fighter jets; Joint training of Norwegian and Finnish fighter jets, followed
Finnish F-18 fighter jets by highway landing practice and hotpit refuelling.51a
21 Sep. 2023 None Northern BE, FI, FR, UK Navy vessel HMS Queen Elizabeth; Unknown combat scenario, date and details not published for
Norway GER, NO, SE, Norwegian frigate KNM Otto Sverdrup and security reasons. The second time during 2023 that a carrier
UK, USA logistic supply vessel KNM Maud; warships group sailed north along the Norwegian coast. The exercise
from other participating countries; was accompanied by port calls by the USS Florida and a French
F-35s and helicopters aboard HMS Queen nuclear-powered attack submarine of the Rubis-class.52a
Elizabeth; Rubis-class submarine;
USS Florida
19 Sep. 2023 Finval-2023 Barents Sea RUS 15 warships, submarines, support vessels, The Northern Fleet joined Russia’s Pacific Fleet in a trans-Arctic
aircraft and coastal units military exercise that included operations in the Barents Sea.53a
21 Aug. 2023– Arctic Fighter Norway FI, NO, SE Royal Norwegian Air Force with The aim of the exercise was to increase international compatibility
25 Aug. 2023 Meet 23 F-35 multirole fighters; 5 Finnish between the Nordic air forces. Arctic Fighter Meet is part of
F/A-18 Hornet multirole fighter jets; NORDEFCO. This iteration took place at Ørland Air Base.54a
Swedish JAS-39 Gripens

calibrating
deterrence

Date Exercise name Location Countries Capabilities Information
23 Aug. 2023 None Arctic Ocean RUS 8000 soldiers; 20 marine vessels (including The Northern Fleet conducted its annual 2-month voyage ‘to
submarines); 5 aircraft; around 50 units ensure safe maritime navigation and economic activity as well
of military equipment (including special as protect Russian territory’.55a
equipment)
23 Aug. 2023 Astral Knight Finnish FI, USA US F-16 fighters, a KC-135 tanker and The main aim of Astral Knight was to enhance the ability of
Lapland C-130 transport aircraft; the Finnish Air Force to ‘offer and execute host nation support,
Finnish F/A-18 Hornet Fighters develop cooperation and interoperability’.56a
11 Aug. 2023– None Barents Sea RUS 20 warships; submarines, support ships; General command and staff exercise of the Northern Fleet’s
15 Aug. 2023 coastal missile systems; fighter jets; forces. 57a
8000 service personnel
5 None Eastern RUS Russian strategic bombers Strategic aviation exercise for Russian bombers during which the
Barents Sea bombers conducted tactical missile launches against on-ground
training targets. The exercise occurred in advance of the 2023
NATO Summit. The flight area stretched from the Barents Sea
to the Ural Mountains.58a
1 – None Norway NO, UK, USA Gerald R. Ford Carrier Strike Group and The exercise was training for the US Carrier Strike Group with
12 composite air wing; 1 Norwegian frigate and Norwegian and British Forces. It included exercises of the carrier
corvette; 1 UK destroyer, tanker and frigate; groups’ composite air wing with the US Air Force B-1B strategic
UK Wildcat maritime attack helicopters; bomber and Norwegian F-35 fighters within the framework of the
B-1B strategic bombers and Arctic Challenge Exercise. US, Norwegian and British forces also
Norwegian F-35 fighters took part in the Viking Trident air defence exercise.59a
1 – None Barents Sea RUS Russian warships (Vice Admiral Kulakov, NOTAMs were issued by the Northern Fleet for live-fire training
2 Admiral Levchenko) close to the Varanger fjord. Anti-submarine warfare was also
exercised.60a
29 – Arctic Finland, BE, CA, CZ, 150 aircraft; nearly 3000 personnel Arctic Challenge is a biannual cross-border training exercise
9 Challenge Sweden, DK, FI, FR, that includes intensive combat training of fighter aircraft.61a
Norway GER, IT, NL,
NO, SE, CH,
UK, USA
appendix

Date Exercise name Location Countries Capabilities Information
27 – Northern Finnish FI, NO, SE, 1000 NATO forces, 6500 Finnish troops; Northern Forest 2023 constituted Finland’s first joint NATO
2 Forest 23 Lapland UK, USA 1000 vehicles; Multiple Launch Rocket exercise since becoming the 31st NATO member in Apr. 2023.
Systems; Leopard 2A6 tanks; Northern Forest is a land-force drill conducted above the
CV90 infantry fighting vehicles Arctic Circle.62a
8 – Formidable Northern DK, ESP, FR, 4000 allied and partner country troops; Formidable Shield is a biannual exercise that is led by the
12 Shield 2023 Norway GER, NL, NO, more than 20 ships; 35 aircraft; US Sixth Fleet in cooperation with NATO. NATO’s Maritime
PL, PRT, USA ground units Group 1 participated in the exercise. The exercise was led by
Norway in 2 phases. The purpose of the exercise was to ‘strengthen
the allied ability to cooperate within an integrated air and missile
defense concept’.63a
2 – None Barents RUS Anti-submarine ships (Onega, Naryan­ Russia’s Northern Fleet conducted a cluster of 11 small-scale
18 Sea, Kola Mar, Brest, landing ship Ivan Gren, exercises in the Arctic, presumably in response to NATO’s
Peninsula, minesweepers (Yadrin, Solovetsky Yunga), Formidable Shield exercise. These exercises included submarine
White Sea destroyer Admiral Ushakov; Illjusjin II-38 hunting and attacking, practice flights by attack aircraft, air
maritime patrol and anti-submarine combat manoeuvre practice, air defence, live-fire training,
aircraft, Su-24 bombers, Su-33, Su-30 and and mine detection and destruction.64a
Su-25UTG fighter aircraft
24 Apr. 2023 Dynamic Iceland, DK, ESP, FO, Submarines from 4 NATO countries, Dynamic Mongoose is NATO’s annual live exercise of advanced
Mongoose 23 Faroe FR, GER, IS, 15 surface ships; unknown number of anti-submarine and anti-surface warfare in the High North.65a
Islands, NL, NO, PL, maritime patrol aircraft
Norway PRT, UK,
USA
10 Apr. 2023 None Arctic RUS 1800 soldiers; 40 aircraft; around 15 ships Command and staff exercise of the Northern Fleet that aimed to
Ocean, improve protection of economic activity and communications in
Barents Sea the Arctic. The exercise also focused on submarine hunting.66a
21 Sep. 2023 None Finland FI, NO 2 Norwegian F-35A fighter jets; Joint training of Norwegian and Finnish fighter jets, followed
Finnish F-18 fighter jets by highway landing practice and hotpit refuelling.67a

calibrating
deterrence

AD = Air Defence; BE = Belgium; BLR = Belarus; BMD = Ballistic Missile Defence; C2 = Command and control; CA = Canada; CAOC = Combined Air Operations Centre; CH= Switzer-
land; CZ = Czechia; DK = Denmark; DOD = Department of Defense; EE = Estonia; ESP = Spain; FI= Finland; FO = Faroe Islands; FR = France; GER = Germany; GIUK = Greenland–
Iceland–UK; GL = Greenland; IS = Iceland; IT = Italy; JEF = Joint Expeditionary Force; LT = Lithuania; LV = Latvia; MER = Marine environmental response; MRTT = Multi-role tanker
transport; NATO = North Atlantic Treaty Organization; NL = Netherlands; NO = Norway; NORAD = North American Aerospace Defence Command; NORDEFCO = Nordic Defence
Cooperation; NOTAM = Notice to Air Mission; PL = Poland; PRT = Portugal; RUS = Russia; SAR = search and rescue; SE = Sweden; SI = Slovenia; SNMG1 = Standing NATO Maritime
Group One; SSBN = Nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine; UK = United Kingdom; USA = United States.
Notes: A military exercise is included in the table if it meets the following criteria: (a) took place close to or in the European Arctic and High North; (b) took place after Finland’s NATO
accession in Apr. 2023; and (c) involved more than 1 NATO country or was a Russian military exercises. Deployments, overflights and tests of new military equipment are not included.
1a Finnish Army, ‘Lapland Steel 25 to validate the capability of conscripts to muster out into the reserve in December and to strengthen coordinated joint operating of allies’, Press
release, 21 Nov. 2025.
2a NATO, ‘Northern Strike 25-2: Joint artillery exercise in northern Finland’, 21 Nov. 2025.
3a Defence Industry Europe, ‘Finland leads major NATO air defence drill as ADEX Mallet Strike 2/25 begins in Lohtaja’, 11 Nov. 2025.
4a Defence Industry Europe, ‘US Air Force B-52 bombers train with Finland and Sweden in NATO-led exercises across Europe and Nordic region’, 13 Nov. 2025.
5a NATO, ‘NATO Annual Nuclear Exercise, Steadfast Noon’, 20 Oct. 2025.
6a Defence Industry Europe, ‘Russia tests full nuclear triad during Thunder strategic drills including submarine missile launch’, 24 Oct. 2025.
7a Defence Industry Europe, ‘NORAD and Danish forces complete rapid deployment Arctic exercise at Pituffik Space Base’, 29 Oct. 2025.
8a High North News, ‘Arctic Tide: British Royal Marines practiced amphibious operations in the High North’, 15 Oct. 2025.
9ai Finnish Air Force, ‘Protective Fence 25 to strengthen the Finnish Air Force’s defence capability and readiness’, 11 Sep. 2025.
10a Norwegian Armed Forces, ‘Norske styrker ledet alliert aktivitet på Jan Mayen’ [Norwegian forces lead ally activity on Jan Mayen], 19 Sep. 2025.
11a NATO, ‘Danish-led Arctic Light 2025 strengthens Allied readiness in High North’, 18 Sep. 2025.
12a Barents Observer, ‘Russia trains coastal attack scenario 30 km from border with Norway’, 16 Sep. 2025.
13a Barents Observer, ‘Russia locates major naval exercise in previous disputed area of the Barents Sea’, 23 .
14a US Air forces in Europe - Air Forces in Africa, ‘US, UK, French and Finnish Air Forces participate in Atlantic Trident 25 in Finland’, 10 .
15a Barents Observer, ‘Warships and submarines staged show in Barents Sea for General Staff’, 2 .
16a Barents Observer, ‘Upgraded destroyer hunts submarine in Barents Sea’, 19 .
17a Swedish Armed Forces, ‘Northern Strike och Northern Star 2025’, 28 Apr. 2025; and Finnish Army, ‘Commander of the Finnish Army Inspected Exercise Northern Strike 125,’
22 .
18a US Army in Europe and Africa, ‘Swift Response’, 31 .
19a NATO, ‘Joint Integrated air and missile defence exercise Formidable Shield 25 underway’, 7 .
20a NATO, ‘NATO wraps up Dynamic Mongoose 2025: Allies join forces in high-intensity anti-submarine warfare training’, 12 .
21a Barents Observer, ‘Northern Fleet continues with exercises close to Norwegian waters’, 25 Apr. 2025.
22a Barents Observer, ‘Russian cruiser fires artillery few kilometres from border to Norway’, 15 Apr. 2025.
appendix

23a High North News, ‘Arctic Guardian 2025: Multilateral exercise on maritime emergency response off northern Norway’, 8 Apr. 2025.
24a Norwegian Armed Forces, ‘Joint Viking 2025’, 15 Mar. 2025.
25a Barents Observer, ‘US shows strength on the one-year anniversary of Sweden’s accession to NATO’, 12 Mar. 2025.
26a Barents Observer, ‘While Trump casts doubt on NATO policy, B-52s make first ever bomb drops over Lapland’, 7 Mar. 2025.
27a Swedish Armed Forces, ‘Lapland Stone 25 – Försvarsmakten övar i gränsområdet’ [Lapland Stone 25—Armed Forces exercise in border area], 11 Feb. 2025.
28a NORAD, ‘NORAD conducts Operation NOBLE DEFENDER in Pituffik, Greenland’, 25 Feb. 2025.
29a Barents Observer, ‘The secretive U-2 spy plane on mission up north as Norway steps up deterrence against Russia’, 5 Dec. 2024.
30a NATO, ‘ADEX Mallet Strike 2/24: Advancing Multinational Air Defence Preparedness in Finland’, 22 Nov. 2024.
31a Barents Observer, ‘On Trump’s election day, a nuclear-capable B-52 bomber flew over northern Norway into Finland for training’, 7 Nov. 2024.
32a Finnish Defence Forces, ‘The Army’s EX Lightning Strike 24 as a part of NATO’s largest ever artillery exercise series conducted in Europe’, 15 Oct. 2024.
33a Barents Observer, ‘Two carrier groups on exercise outside Norway’, 20 Oct. 2024.
34a Barents Observer, ‘Russian forces launch supersonic missiles in short range from Norway’s Vardø radars’, 13 Sep. 2024.
35a Barents Observer, ‘Northern Fleet kicks off “special military exercise”’, 5 Sep. 2024.
36a NATO, ‘NATO Allies refine Agile Combat Employment on Finnish highways’, 6 Sep. 2024.
37a High North News, ‘Northern Viking: Practicing the defense of Iceland and sea routes in the north Atlantic’, 28 Aug. 2024.
38a High North News, ‘The Russian northern fleet on this year’s Arctic voyage’, 7 Aug, 2024.
39a Barents Observer, ‘Norwegian and Finnish soldiers train together in Lapland this week’, 23 .
40a Barents Observer, ‘Two nuclear submarines shot missiles in Barents Sea’, 20 .
41a Swedish Armed Forces, ‘Immediate Response 24’, 28 Mar. 2024.
42a Barents Observer, ‘Northern Fleet shows off along Kola coast’, 28 .
43a Barents Observer, ‘Key allies US and Norway on move in Lapland as thousands of soldiers train rapid reinforcement’, 28 .
44a Barents Observer, ‘Russia conducts Barents SAR exercise without Norwegian participants’, 24 .
45a NATO, ‘Dynamic Mongoose 24 strengthens NATO’s anti-submarine warfare capability, including new ally Sweden’, 10 .
46a High North News, ‘US Arctic paratroopers practiced rapid deployment in northern Norway’, 20 Mar. 2024.
47a Barents Observer, ‘In Northern Fleet’s latest training scenario, naval base Severomorsk is attacked by enemy drones’, 19 Mar. 2024.
48a The Guardian, ‘Norway, Sweden and Finland host Nato military exercises’, 4 Mar. 2024.
49a Barents Observer, ‘Northern Fleet sails out two frigates, one landing ship as NATO forces move north for exercise’, 1 Mar. 2024.
50a Barents Observer, ‘Lonely Putin presided over strategic drill same day as parliament revokes ratification of nuclear test ban treaty’, 25 Oct. 2023.
51a Norwegian Armed Forces, ‘Norwegian F-35s landed on a highway in Finland’, 21 Sep. 2023.
52a Barents Observer, ‘HMS Queen Elizabeth carrier group sails north for NATO training’, 21 Sep. 2023.
53a Barents Observer, ‘Russia kicks off trans-Arctic navy exercise’, 19 Sep. 2023.
54a Finnish Air Force, ‘Finnish Air Force to participate in Arctic Fighter Meet 23 in Norway’, 16 Aug. 2023.

calibrating
deterrence

55a High North News, ‘The Russian Northern Fleet on long-term voyage in the Arctic’, 23 Aug. 2023.
56a High North News, ‘American and Finnish Air Forces train together in the High North’, 23 Aug. 2023.
57a Barents Observer, ‘Northern Fleet kicks off major Barents Sea command and staff exercise’, 11 Aug. 2023.
58a Barents Observer, ‘Russia kicks off strategic aviation exercise over the Barents Sea ahead of next week’s NATO Summit’, 5 .
59a High North News, ‘US carrier strike group trained with British and Norwegian Forces in the High North’, 12 .
60a Barents Observer, ‘Russia warns of artillery shooting 5 NM from Norway’s Grense Jakobselv’, 29 .
61a Barents Observer, ‘With 150 fighter jets and support planes, 14 nations ready for massive Nordic air force drills’, 9 .
62a Arctic Today, ‘NATO launches Arctic manoeuvres, vowing to protect newest member Finland’, 30 .
63a High North News, ‘American-led maritime live-fire exercise in the works off Andøya, Northern Norway’, 28 Apr. 2023.
64a Barents Observer, ‘The Russian northern fleet with frequent exercises in the Barents Sea and the White Sea’, 19 .
65a High North News, ‘Snart startskudd for Natos store øving på ubåtjakt i nordområdene’, [NATO’s major submarine hunting exercise in the high north is about to start], 21 Apr. 2023.
66a High North News, ‘The Russian northern fleet in major training activity’, 14 Apr. 2023.
67a Norwegian Armed Forces, ‘Norwegian F-35s landed on a highway in Finland’, 21 Sep. 2023.
Source: This list has been compiled taking the Center for Strategic and International Studies Arctic Military Activity Tracker as a starting point. Any errors or omissions are the sole
responsibility of the authors.
appendix

About the authors
Dr Barbara Kunz is a Senior Researcher and Director of the SIPRI European Security
Programme. Her work focuses on transatlantic, European and Nordic security.
Aino Esser is a Research Assistant in the SIPRI European Security Programme. Her
research focuses on European security in a Nordic context.

Signalistgatan 9
SE-169 72 Solna, Sweden
Telephone: +46 8 655 97 00
Email: sipri@sipri.org
Internet: © SIPRI 2026