Issue Brief
Beyond

Targeting
The Untapped Role of AI in
Military Decision-Making
Authors

Igor Mikolic-Torreira

Emelia S. Probasco

Executive Summary
Humans will always make final decisions on what to shoot and what not to shoot and
when to shoot. But advanced AI tools can turn processes that used to take hours and
sometimes even days into seconds.
– Admiral Brad Cooper, on X (formerly Twitter), March 11, 20261
Several years ago, the U.S. Army’s XVIII Airborne Corps demonstrated the power of
Maven Smart System (MSS) to accelerate targeting processes, accomplishing with a
20-person team what in 2003 had required a team of 2,000.2 Since then, the U.S.
military has embraced AI-enabled decision support systems (AI-DSS) such as MSS at
Combatant Command headquarters around the globe. Media reports indicate that MSS
is a key enabler of the sustained high-tempo targeting process displayed in Operation
Epic Fury.3
The military applications of AI-DSS—software systems that use a variety of AI tools to
ingest, generate, share, and act upon information—can help with much more than just
targeting processes. Nearly any problem that deals with large volumes of disparate
kinds of data as part of a decision process that requires interpreting that data,
assessing the situation, making decisions, and implementing those decisions (and often
repeats those steps in a regular cycle) can benefit from AI-DSS tools.
Public discussions of AI-DSS have relied on mostly vague notions of how these
systems might be applied in military processes. We address this gap here with two
case studies of operational-level military processes where the application of an
appropriate AI-DSS tool could bring improvements on par with what XVIII Airborne
Corps achieved for the fires process. One case study examines applying AI-DSS to the
resupply of ammunition to Army fires units; the other focuses on applying AI-DSS to
the processes that drive the Joint Air Tasking Cycle (JATC). In both cases, AI-DSS could
enable these processes to be performed faster, more flexibly, and with less manpower
while maintaining quality and human judgement. In the case of the JATC, AI-DSS offers
the opportunity to revisit the decades-old 72-hour timeline for deliberate planning of
daily air sorties. Both potential applications come with new risks that must be
addressed, even as old risks are retired.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 1

These case studies reveal that the primary obstacle to implementing suitable AI-DSS
capabilities in these cases is not software development, but rather accessing the data
needed by such tools. Much of the required data is only available at individual units,
often in unstructured formats such as PowerPoint slides or unit-unique spreadsheets.
Overcoming the bureaucratic hurdles to make such data digitally available to AI-DSS
needs to be the first priority in any scaling plan.
Recommendations from these case studies are:
1. Make needed data digitally available to AI-DSS. The top-level departmental
support for efforts to break through any bureaucratic or cultural barriers has
never been stronger—now is the time to act. The Chief Digital and Artificial
Intelligence Office (CDAO) has been given authority and tasking on this issue by
Secretary Hegseth’s artificial intelligence memorandum of January 9, 2026.4
2. Examine the best practices that the XVIII Airborne Corps and others are using—
including their DevSecOps-style development approach combining operators
and software engineers and—adopt/adapt them. There is no need to reinvent
this wheel. CDAO should collect and promulgate these lessons. CDAO should
also resource data and evaluation support teams at the Combatant Commands
to augment their AI-DSS development and deployment efforts at the edge.
These teams should be staffed with personnel who have the necessary expertise
and/or experience to bring to bear the lessons learned and best practices
acquired across industry, academia, and the joint force.
3. Deploy these capabilities to command centers during real-world operations to
develop warfighting best practices, accelerate the growth of a community of
experienced users, and provide operational feedback to software engineers.
As the case studies presented here suggest, these steps would improve some of our
most important Army and joint fires-related processes and could responsibly accelerate
the development and adoption of AI-enabled capabilities across the U.S. military.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2

Table of Contents
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ 1
Overview and Introduction ................................................................................................................... 4
The Drive for Military AI-Enabled Decision Support Systems (AI-DSS) ................................ 6
Military Need ........................................................................................................................................ 6
Evidence of AI-DSS Adoption ......................................................................................................... 7
Scaling AI-DSS .................................................................................................................................... 7
Understanding AI-DSS .......................................................................................................................... 9
Operational-Level Tasks Ripe for AI-DSS .................................................................................... 15
An AI-DSS for Keeping Army Fires Units Supplied with Ammunition ................................ 16
Applying an AI-DSS to the Joint Air Tasking Cycle ................................................................... 19
Stage 2: Target Development & Nomination ........................................................................... 26
Stage 3: Weaponeering & Allocation ......................................................................................... 27
Sub-Stage 3A: Weaponeering ................................................................................................ 27
Sub-Stage 3B: Allocation .......................................................................................................... 28
Stage 4: ATO Production & Dissemination .............................................................................. 28
Expected Operational Benefits of AI-DSS .................................................................................... 31
Benefits of AI-DSS Support to Army Fires Resupply ........................................................... 31
Benefits of AI-DSS Support for JATC ........................................................................................ 32
Manpower Efficiencies ............................................................................................................... 32
Process Speed-up ....................................................................................................................... 33
Improved Process Flexibility ..................................................................................................... 33
Expected Operational Risks .............................................................................................................. 34
Implementation Challenges ............................................................................................................... 37
Software Development .................................................................................................................. 37
Data Access ....................................................................................................................................... 38
Integration .......................................................................................................................................... 40
Potential Next Steps ............................................................................................................................ 42
Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................. 45
Appendix A: Joint and Air Force Depictions of the Air Tasking Cycle .................................. 48
Appendix B: Air Force Digital Tools Supporting the Air Tasking Cycle ............................... 52
Appendix C: Commercial Sector Delivery Scheduling .............................................................. 54
Appendix D: Acronyms ....................................................................................................................... 55
Authors .................................................................................................................................................... 59
Acknowledgments ............................................................................................................................... 59
Endnotes ................................................................................................................................................. 60
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3

Overview and Introduction
When the XVIII Airborne Corps deployed Maven Smart System (MSS), an AI-enabled
decision support system, it marked an inflection point for the U.S. military: 20
warfighters in 2022 accomplished targeting work that had required 2,000 personnel
during Operation Iraqi Freedom in 2003.5 Since then, the military leadership has made
clear that it intends to accelerate adoption of AI-DSS tools, and the actual employment
of MSS across the force has expanded dramatically. News stories6 and CENTCOM’s
own public statements7 suggest the high-tempo targeting observed in Operation Epic
Fury was made possible with the help of AI tools.
What exactly is an AI-DSS? A fuller explanation is provided later in this paper, but a
simple answer is that an AI-DSS is a software system incorporating a variety of AI tools
that support warfighter decision-making by performing six key functions:
● Ingest data of all kinds and organize it into a knowledge base.
● Generate insights and information tailored to support individual users.
● Enable users to easily create outputs tailored to their needs.
● Automate certain steps required to implement and execute a decision.
● Share a knowledge base with others to enable a common understanding.
● Interface directly with existing systems, eliminating re-entry of information.
AI-DSS has proven its value in the XVIII Airborne’s targeting processes, but “20 do the
work of 2,000” improvements are available in other operational processes too. We
present two illustrative case studies of operational-level military tasks where the
development and deployment of tailored AI-DSS tools could yield significant process
improvements:
● Applying AI-DSS tools to support the resupply of ammunition to Army fires
units. What the XVIII Airborne Corps has done to make Army artillery fires
processes more rapid and responsive is a game changer. But it also means
artillery units will run out of ammunition quickly unless we also streamline the
resupply process. A huge amount of information and coordination is required to
develop and execute an ammunition resupply plan, presenting an opportunity for
AI-DSS tools to deliver significant operational planning efficiencies.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4

● Applying AI-DSS tools to the Joint Air Tasking Cycle. The Joint Air Tasking Cycle
(JATC), focused on delivery of weapons by aircraft, is significantly more complex
than the Army Targeting Cycle, which is focused on artillery and missile fires.
The JATC requires 72 hours of lead time to plan and coordinate the aircraft and
aircrews. There is opportunity for AI-DSS tools to achieve manpower efficiencies
and greatly shorten the air tasking cycle to make airpower more responsive to
emergent operational needs.
These case studies show that AI-DSS offer significant potential improvements. The
most significant challenge in both cases is not software development, but rather
gaining access to data that today is often locked in non-standardized documents (such
as spreadsheets) held by individual small units. We conclude with suggested next steps
for responsible development and deployment of AI-DSS tools for the two example
operational problems.
What follows establishes the overarching case for military AI-DSS by explaining what
an AI-DSS is, what kinds of problems it can address beyond targeting, and why the full
power of AI-DSS will be realized only when these systems are deployed at scale across
a spectrum of operational problems. While we focus here on operational tasks, we will
address other potential AI-DSS applications for up-echelon or coalition decision-
making in separate forthcoming papers.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5

The Drive for Military AI-Enabled Decision Support Systems (AI-DSS)
Military Need
Military leaders are required to make high-risk decisions with sweeping national
security implications under conditions of uncertainty. The mistakes commanders have
made range from the highest level—such as Bonaparte’s invasion of Russia and
Churchill’s Gallipoli disaster—to the tactical—such as the mistaken NATO bombing of
the Chinese embassy in Belgrade (1999) or the U.S. airstrike on the Kunduz Hospital in
Afghanistan (2015). Over centuries, militaries have developed complex, robust
processes to try to manage battlefield decisions, seize tactical and strategic advantage,
maintain complex logistics, and strike the highest priority targets. The results, especially
for the United States military, are impressive but hard won, and despite large staffs and
rigorous processes, mistakes and missed opportunities persist.
In searching for new opportunities to address the challenges of military operations and
decision-making, it should be little wonder that the U.S. and other nations are turning to
AI decision support systems (AI-DSS). While the U.S. and other militaries have a long
history with earlier forms of artificial intelligence,* the scale and scope of the current
interest in AI is unprecedented.
The promise of AI is that it can recognize patterns and anomalies in data that might
otherwise be missed by humans. Moreover, unlike human commanders, AI can process
more information more quickly without requiring sleep or succumbing to human
stressors. When paired with modern data management and software, the presumption
is that by using AI, militaries are poised to both accelerate and improve what Air Force
Colonel John Boyd famously termed the OODA loop: the ability to “observe, orient,
decide, and act” on a battlefield.
Advances in AI techniques over the past decade make this promise seem more realistic.
With so much new potential, leaders are challenged now to choose where to devote
time and resources for change, and determine which AI applications might yield the
* In the 1980s the U.S. military deployed air defense systems such as Patriot and Aegis, which
incorporated expert systems that enabled them (when so activated by operators) to engage incoming
enemy missiles and aircraft automatically. Also, early (pre-GPS) versions of Tomahawk missiles navigated
autonomously to their targets using algorithms that matched terrain maps stored in its computer to the
terrain patterns “observed” by the missile as it flew.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6

largest benefits. This paper examines two case studies where “20 do the work of
2,000”–level improvements are possible.
Evidence of AI-DSS Adoption
Military AI-DSS are still new, but case studies of adoption are beginning to emerge.
Internationally, journalists and researchers have detailed Ukraine’s adoption of the Delta
system, Israel’s adoption of the Gospel and Lavender systems, and China’s
experimentation with strategic and tactical AI-DSS.8 While each system has substantial
differences, at their core these examples leverage data, software, and AI to gather,
parse, and use intelligence from a broad variety of sources to support military (usually
targeting) decisions.
For the U.S. military, the most well-known example of AI-DSS adoption is Maven Smart
System (MSS), which has spread throughout the operating forces at an unprecedented
pace. In , the XVIII Airborne Corps launched its first experiment with MSS,
a test Colonel Joe O’Callaghan described as showing “the art of the possible”—the test
itself did not go especially well.9 By 2022, however, it had transformed to become a
central part of the XVIII Airborne Corps’ targeting processes. By 2024, the Johns
Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory and CSET working in partnership analyzed MSS,
showcasing its ability to enable the XVIII Airborne Corps in a way that reduced the
personnel necessary to conduct the targeting cycle to 20 from 2,000.10 By 2025, Vice
Admiral Frank Whitworth, director of the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
(NGA), declared that Maven had achieved 20,000 active users.11 By early 2026, every
combatant command had MSS licenses.
Scaling AI-DSS
The Administration’s AI Action Plan,12 Secretary Hegseth’s pronouncements both
during confirmation13 and during his meeting with senior generals,14
and other formal guidance15 and public statements16 make clear the Pentagon’s goal to
rapidly and effectively adopt AI to maintain and grow the U.S.’s warfighting advantage.
These statements make clear that success is not one operational system in one unit,
such as the use of MSS by XVIII Airborne Corps, but rather the expansion of AI-DSS to
serve both more users and address more military needs. Based on these declarations
and evidence from MSS, AI-DSS would seem to have unbounded potential for military
operations, and yet militaries do not have unbounded resources. With so many
problems that AI-DSS could address, how do decision-makers decide where to apply
AI-DSS next?
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7

Currently, this question is being answered organically within the U.S. military, as
numerous units are acquiring and experimenting with AI-DSS to solve various military
challenges. That approach has advantages for rapid innovation and poses challenges
for coordination and control. This series of studies does not aim to judge the efforts
currently underway but instead seeks to explore the opportunities and challenges for
scaling AI-DSS across multiple applications. To do this we:
● First, explore realistic AI decision support applications in areas of known military
need based on an analysis of military processes and AI techniques.
● Second, highlight the challenges and tradeoffs specific to those applications.
● Third, identify scaling and adoption challenges common across any AI-DSS
application for the Pentagon and offer recommendations on how to navigate
those challenges.
In pursuit of exploring high-value AI-DSS applications and identifying the risks and
challenges to their adoption, we began with what we know of MSS, which we studied
in our previous paper and continue to examine in depth.17 From that baseline, we asked
three questions:
● What if an AI-DSS was applied to a non-targeting operations task? (This paper)
● What if an AI-DSS was used to address less tactical and more operational needs
(in other words, used for upper-echelon decisions)?
● What if AI-DSS was used to improve partner and allied operations?
While MSS was our baseline case because we had the most direct access to it, our
analysis seeks to transcend any one AI-DSS and provide a framework and approach for
considering the utility, as well as the potential hurdles and risks to the adoption of, AI-
DSS. We are not trying to detail what MSS or any AI-DSS is doing in totality today but
rather to describe the key components and future directions. While the solutions we
propose for our case studies do not exist, some of the specific capabilities within the
case studies may be in development. We incorporated information on solutions where
we had the information, though we know our analysis of current systems in use is
limited, in part because of classification and because of the rapid proliferation of new
AI-DSS.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8

Understanding AI-DSS
Identifying which military needs can benefit from AI-DSS requires understanding the
functions where these systems have already demonstrated real-world effectiveness, or
where the nature of the task suggests they are likely to do so. The literature on AI-
DSS18 offers no single, clean definition, but AI-DSS can be described as performing all
the following six key functions shown in Table 1:
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9

Table 1: Functions that define an AI-DSS
AI-DSS Function Description Examples
Ingesting, connecting, correlating, and ● Traditional military information such as sensor reports
managing structured and unstructured and locational tracking information, imagery of various
information streams of a kinds, intelligence reports, own-force reports and
heterogeneous nature in (near) real position tracking, weather/environmental information
time to maintain a continuously and reports, logistics and readiness data, orders,
updated knowledge base. briefings, and planning documents.
Ingest ● Non-traditional information such as social media feeds
and other information pulled directly from the internet
and/or commercially procured information feeds or
military chat circuits.
● Rapidly and easily ingest novel data streams that may
become available during operations; connect and
correlate these with existing information.
Generating insights and information ● For a tactical air defender: Report airborne objects that
from that knowledge base that is might pose a threat together with own-force units
tailored to support individual users available to intercept.
and the role they play in decision-
Generate ● For a Corps-level fires officer: Report likely threats,
making.
relay priority for engagement, and suggest own-force
units best able to engage.
● For a logistics planner: Report the own-force units
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10

most likely to run short of ammunition or other supplies
and options to re-supply them.
● For a combatant commander: Highlight unusual
adversary patterns or behaviors, assess the potential
risks, and offer suggestions to mitigate or deter.
Enabling users to easily create ● Users create displays that enable them to rapidly
individualized dashboards, reports, understand novel situations, develop options, and then
charts, and control panels tailored assess them.
specifically to their needs to enable
● Users design (or redesign) workflows to reflect the
decision-making.
needs of the commander and the situation; for
Enable
example, implementing a workflow in which various
steps occur in parallel, or one that is highly sequential.
● Allow watch standers to easily customize information
displays to facilitate execution of their specific assigned
tasks.
Automating many of the steps ● At tactical levels, automate the creation and
required to implement and execute a transmission of appropriately formatted target
decision. assignment messages or execution orders to relevant
Automate units. For example, MSS (upon human approval)
automates the transfer of target information and fires
orders to appropriate artillery units.
● At operational and strategic levels, automate the
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11

generation of reports such as situation updates,
mission reports, fragmentary orders (FRAGOs), and
similar documents necessary for implementing and
executing a decision.
Sharing its knowledge base (in whole ● Smart filtering, redacting, and/or editing of information
or part) with other authorized users to to be shared based on classification, need-to-know of
enable a common understanding of the recipient, and/or official release guidance.
the operational environment.
Share ● Smart prioritization of information to share with users
that suffer bandwidth limitations.
● Sharing smart automated summaries of essential
information elements with all relevant parties.
Interfacing and interacting directly ● As an illustration of such capability, Army MSS can
with existing information systems and interface directly with Advanced Field Artillery Tactical
combat systems to allow direct Data System (AFATDS, the system used by Army and
transfer and exchange of relevant Marine Corps to command and control artillery fires) to
data, eliminating the need for slow obtain information about various fires units and send
and error-prone manual re-entry of target assignments and fire orders.
Interface
information.
● A COCOM-level AI-DSS could directly interface with
the Tactical Tomahawk Weapons Control System
(TTWCS) to trigger the creation of needed Tomahawk
mission planning packages, or with the Theater Battle
Management Core Systems (TBMCS) or related
systems to inject a commander’s guidance, strategic
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12

intent, and priorities directly into the Air Tasking Order
development processes. Or interface with logistics
systems such as Military Logistics Network Planning
System (MLNPS) to automatically provide updates that
trigger planning/replanning of logistics operations.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 13

AI-DSS are rapidly becoming increasingly capable because of a self-reinforcing
technical cycle:
● Technology advancements are rapidly increasing our ability to incorporate more
data—and more complex data—into the AI-DSS’s knowledge base.
● The growing richness and size of the knowledge base in turn powers the
effective use of increasingly sophisticated AI tools.
● These more sophisticated AI tools in turn make it easier for warfighters to
interact with the knowledge base, explore it, understand it, and obtain the
information they need to make complex decisions in a timely manner. Even as
the size and complexity of the knowledge base is growing, it is becoming easier
to understand and work with.
● This creates a warfighter desire to incorporate additional data sources. AI tools
facilitate and accelerate the incorporation of these additional data sources into
the knowledge base. The even bigger, richer knowledge base, in turn, enhances
the capabilities of the various tools (whether AI-enabled or not), providing
additional value to warfighters.
Figure A: Self-Reinforcement Cycle of AI-DSS
Source: CSET.
The combined effect of having a large integrated knowledge base, a tailored application
of enabling AI-tools, and a flexible, adaptable way of presenting information changed
the way XVIII Airborne Corps warfighters operated.19
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 14

Operational-Level Tasks Ripe for AI-DSS
As already highlighted, the use of MSS for deliberate targeting was successful in the
case of the XVIII Airborne Corps, but there are myriad tasks in military operations that
are comparable in the sense that there are workflows involving multiple people making
decisions based upon information that must be collected, analyzed, and managed
appropriately. The key is to identify tasks with the potential for significant improvement
in effectiveness, namely those where current processes are data-, coordination-, and
manpower-intensive. Among these, the highest impact comes from those processes
time-consuming enough to be “the pacing* process” in some military operations; if AI-
DSS can transform these, the improvements may not only be operationally significant,
but perhaps operationally transformative. Given these criteria, two processes come to
the fore as exemplars for case studies:
● An AI-DSS for keeping Army fires units supplied with ammunition. MSS has
enabled the Army to significantly speed up the land fires process—but what if
the flow of ammunition can’t keep up? Planning and executing ammunition
distribution effectively requires aggregating and interpreting a wide variety of
dispersed information about inventories at many sites, transportation availability,
and projections of future ammunition demands. It also requires cross-
coordination and information exchange between units and planners—something
currently done manually via voice, email, and/or chats. And the amount of
coordination required to develop an ammunition resupply plan is mind-boggling,
presenting a promising opportunity for a “20 doing the work of 2,000” value-
add.
● AI-DSS for the Joint Air Tasking Cycle. At its core the Joint Air Tasking Cycle is
conceptually similar to the Army fires process, but significantly more complex,
requiring coordination of aircraft, aircrews and weapons, as well as supporting
and enabling elements (electronic support, communications, aerial refueling,
etc.). Because the current JATC is a 72-hour cycle, the potential to “do with 20
what required 2,000” could offer a path to greatly shortening the cycle and
making airpower more operationally responsive.
The following sections discuss each of these case studies.
* “Pacing” in the sense of most time-consuming—the proverbial “long pole in the tent”.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 15

An AI-DSS for Keeping Army Fires Units Supplied with Ammunition
MSS has demonstrated the ability for the Army to significantly speed up the land fires
process20—but it immediately raises the question of maintaining ammunition flow to
keep pace. Delivering a steady stream of ammunition to fires units requires pulling and
integrating lots of information that is currently distributed across the battlespace and
beyond (e.g., current inventories at fires units, caches, and depots; ordered, planned,
and forecast fire missions; available transportation units and resources; current state of
delivery routes and threats to these; available transport crews, etc.). It also requires
coordination among those who are processing current firing orders and plans and those
engaged in preparing the next set of orders. It is particularly important that all players
are working from the same and most current information. An AI-DSS that simply
aggregated, validated and cross-connected all this information in real time and made it
available to all parties would reduce the time (and risks) of warfighters doing this
manually. Implementing this could be a separate AI-DSS, but probably makes most
sense as a direct extension of current MSS tools already being used for Army fires.
The major steps in the process of keeping Army fires units supplied with ammunition
are summarized in Table 2.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 16

Table 2: Army Fires Unit Ammunition Supply Process21
Step Description
Forecasting requirements based on the operational tempo, planned

targets, and enemy situation.
Obtaining the current status of on-hand and expended ammunition from
all fires units. Currently, fires units provide this information together with
projected ammunition needs out to 72 hours22 via what are called
LOGSTAT reports that detail a unit’s key commodities, including fuel

(Class III), ammunition (Class V), and maintenance (Class VII), providing
on-hand stock, consumption rates, and project requirements for the next
24–72 hours. LOGSTAT reporting has a reputation for being incomplete
and inaccurate.23
Developing and submitting the ammunition order. This is currently a
manual process that involves validation of incoming data from
3 subordinate units, coordination to understand availability at various
points in the supply chain, and creation of the actual order for
ammunition (Class V).24
Creating and executing a distribution plan to move ammunition from
supply points to the firing units. This requires information on
available/viable transport options, awareness of battlespace, and
4 coordination with all parties involved, from ammunition supply point
personnel to logistics personnel to the units receiving ammunition, as
well as lower-level commanders whose battlespace may be transited by
ammunition movements.25
Source: Department of the Army, “Fire Support and Field Artillery Operations” (U.S. Army Field Manual
FM 3-09, 12 ).
Today, MSS already contains the key information for step 1: the targets that are already
developed and are in the process of being developed. And this information is
available—in real time—to all units that can access MSS. For step 2, the Army is already
attempting to address LOGSTAT deficiencies through the Army Software Factory’s LOG
TAK project,26 which is working to provide faster, less error-prone, and more accurate
LOGSTAT reporting via digital means. As MSS is already available to many Army fires
units, incorporating LOGSTAT/LOG TAK capability into MSS would make LOGSTAT
information immediately accessible across MSS, would make it updateable in near-real
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 17

time, and would enable cross-connecting ammunition status information to current and
futures fires plans.
Step 3 would require incorporating into MSS information on the location, status,
availability, and readiness of logistics assets and ammunition supplies—basically
maintaining the same types of information for logistics units and facilities that MSS
already maintains in near-real time for fires units. With this information, including every
update to the future fires plan and/or real-time updates on the executed fires and
ammunition supplies, MSS could automatically maintain an up-to-the-minute draft
ammunition order, ready for review and transmission whenever the appropriate
commander decides.
Step 4 would require incorporating into MSS a live “route map” that would include
relevant survivability, mobility, and countermobility data. Tools along these lines are
already in development at the U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center
(ERDC)27 and at the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Army Geospatial Center28.
Incorporating and integrating this information into MSS would enable the creation of
near-real-time, at-scale planning and routing tools for the delivery of ammunition,
analogous to those used by FedEx, UPS, and Amazon to manage package deliveries.*
In combination, these extensions to MSS have the potential to greatly simplify and
accelerate the planning of ammunition resupply. By continuously integrating and
correlating information that is currently painfully managed by warfighters in Excel
spreadsheets and PowerPoint slides and creating tools to automate the information-
intensive aspects of the logistics planning processes—and making all this information
available to operators at all levels—this has the potential to yield important
improvements in the quality and speed of decision-making.
* See Appendix C for an overview of commercial sector delivery scheduling.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 18

Applying an AI-DSS to the Joint Air Tasking Cycle
Bringing an AI-DSS to the process used for the deliberate planning of air power to
strike targets is a much more ambitious effort but also has the potential to deliver major
value-add to the entire Joint Force. The JATC (Figure 1) is conceptually similar to the
Army’s fires process, but the JATC operates on a larger scale and is significantly more
complex. The JATC routinely manages hundreds of targets per cycle, with the planning
for each target requiring coordination across aircraft, weapons loadouts, aircrew
assignments, communications frequencies and callsigns, and airborne tanking support.
This also requires the creation of complex documents providing the tasking and
supporting information for the many elements involved—primarily the “Air Tasking
Order” and associated “Special Instructions.” The Air Tasking Order (ATO) is a directive
that specifies the air missions to be flown over a 24-hour period, while the Special
Instructions (SPINS) provide detailed supplemental guidance on specific procedures,
airspace rules, communication protocols, etc.*
Figure 1: Joint Air Tasking Cycle (JATC)
Source: Joint Publication 3-30, Joint Air Operations, Fig. C-1, p. C-4. (See following text and Appendix D
for explanation of the acronyms).
* Other important documents in the process include the Air Operations Directive (AOD), the Master Air
Attack Plan (MAAP), and the Airspace Control Order (ACO).
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 19

Developing the ATO is manpower-intensive and time-consuming. The process must
first match targets to weapons best suited to achieve the desired effects on that target.*
The weapons must then be matched to the aircraft best suited to successfully deliver
them, in view of the air defenses and the environment the aircraft must fly through. The
aircraft must then be matched with appropriate aircrew and supporting aircraft (as
needed) to provide escort, electronic warfare effects, real-time surveillance, and/or on-
call Combat Search and Rescue (CSAR). All these aircraft need corresponding airborne
tankers (and tanking plans) for refueling, as well as plans for communications,
command, and control. Often, optimal matchings are not possible for all targets,
requiring iteration to achieve a suitable and executable plan. Figure 2 lays out the air
tasking cycle timeline and shows where ATO creation and dissemination fall in the
process.
Because of this complexity, the timeline for executing a Joint Air Tasking Cycle is 72
hours. This means that, even when the system works perfectly, it will take three or four
days from the time higher headquarters guidance is received until the air component
strikes a target. This delay has been the cause of frustration for senior commanders:
One of the authors personally observed the repeated frustration this caused General
Tommy Franks during Operation Iraqi Freedom in the March– timeframe.
These timelines were first established during the Vietnam War and reaffirmed in recent
U.S. Joint Doctrine on Targeting (2018)29 and an Air Force manual for the operation of
the Air Operations Center (2024).30 The long timeline has remained entrenched
because of the complexity of the planning and the limitations of existing tools.
Experienced practitioners may note that the JATC process is only for deliberate
targeting—in other words, only those targets that are ready “in sufficient time”31 for the
JATC process—whereas there is a separate process for dynamic targeting, which
applies to unanticipated targets outside of the preplanned list.32 While it is true that the
dynamic targeting process can accommodate targets in under 72 hours, the number
that may be accommodated is quite limited. Only a small number of “on-call” or alert
aircraft are reserved for such emergent tasks. In actual operations, many deliberate
targets identified and planned long in advance may suddenly rise in priority (e.g.,
planned to attack a number of targets on a future date, but the combatant commander
*The appropriate weapon depends on both the kind of target and the desired level of destruction. A tank,
a radar, a building, or a reinforced bunker each require different types and/or numbers of weapons. If, for
example, the target is a building, the selected weapon(s) will depend on whether the intent is to make
the building temporarily unusable, permanently unusable, or to destroy the internal contents of the
building.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 20

now desires those targets to be hit in the next 24–48 hours). While the current JATC
processes will accommodate some late re-shuffling of targets, it will struggle to
accommodate the re-shuffling of dozens of targets with only 24–48 hours advanced
notice; these are usually inappropriate (and too many) to handle as dynamic targets,
and it’s too late in the deliberate planning process to swap out dozens of targets.*
For this reason, accelerating the JATC process and making it more flexible would bring
clear operational advantages to warfighters and the opportunity to revisit the doctrinal
72-hour timeline.
To better understand the opportunities and challenges for AI-DSS in this case study,
we examine more closely the 72-hour cycle period from the delivery of the guidance to
the start of Air Tasking Order (ATO) execution in Figure 2. Note that while Figure 2
comes from a Joint document, the corresponding Air Force documents reflect the same
timeline and key events (see Appendix A for a comparison of Joint and Air Force
descriptions). The ATO is the document that formally tasks all the aviation sorties for a
24-hour period, and it is often seen as the culminating product of the JATC.33
The Theater Battle Management Core System (TBMCS) has been the Air Force’s ATO-
building program of record for decades. The Air Force has been developing and
deploying modern digital tools to enhance, extend, and or complement TBMCS
capabilities. Appendix B highlights the various Air Force efforts we have identified in
open reporting. Some of these are AI-enabled, but none of them appear to provide an
overarching AI-DSS capability to manage the Air Tasking Cycle processes.
*Having to wait three or four days to hit a couple dozen existing targets that had newly become priorities
instead of inserting them in place of now-lower-priority targets in tomorrow’s or the day after’s ATO was
a significant source of frustration to General Tommy Franks during OIF, as observed at the time by one of
the authors.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 21

Figure 2. The Notional Joint Air Tasking Cycle Timeline
Source: Joint Publication 3-60, Joint Targeting, Fig. C-2, p. C-5. (See following text and Appendix D for
explanation of the acronyms.)
Focusing specifically on the process to generate the ATO, creating an AI-DSS to
support ATO generation is in principle not fundamentally different from what must be
done to expand MSS to incorporate Army ammunition resupply, but it is a much larger
undertaking. As shown in Figure 2, the process consists of five sequential but
overlapping stages (1–5) and one continuously ongoing stage (6), summarized in Table
3 below. In this table, we have split Stage 3 (Weaponeering & Allocation) into two sub-
stages, 3A (Weaponeering) and 3B (Allocation) to facilitate discussion of each of these
aspects separately (recognizing that in practice these two are integrated). The
subsections following the table go into greater detail on how AI-DSS is relevant for
Stages 2, 3A, 3B, and 4.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 22

Table 3: Stages of the Joint Air Tasking Cycle process
Countdown
Stage to Execution Purpose Key Output(s) AI-DSS Opportunity
(Duration)
Strategic
planning that
1. Objectives & 72–60 hrs Air Operations Not a focus of this paper (primarily strategic
translates
Guidance (12 hrs) Directive (AOD). planning).*
guidance into
refined direction.
Develop, High value: Replace Excel/PowerPoint workflow
2. Target nominate, and Joint Integrated with a single data management platform; auto-
60–36 hrs
Development & prioritize targets Prioritized Target sync data across commands; generate exports and
(24 hrs)
Nomination aligned with List (JIPTL). slides on demand; eliminate version-control errors
priorities. that risk collateral damage or fratricide.
3. Weaponeering & 48–18 hrs See 3A and 3B See 3A and 3B
See 3A and 3B below.
Allocation (30 hrs) below. below.
*As indicated earlier, a forthcoming paper focused on how AI-DSS may contribute to the strategic level of warfighting and/or facilitate
coordination and collaboration between the operational and strategic levels may offer perspectives relevant to Stage 1.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 23

Determine
weapons needed AI-DSS cannot replace warfighter mission
for each target; planning judgment, but AI-DSS can assemble
Inputs to the
match targets information on the availability of weapons, aircraft,
3A. Weaponeering See 3 above Air Battle Plan
and weapons to aircrew, refueling, etc., in one system accessible to
(ABP).
available aircraft all. This will speed AOC–unit coordination and
units; coordinate planning, and facilitate more dynamic scheduling.
loadouts.
Allocate and
sequence Master Air Attack
High value: Ideally suited for AI-DSS—analogous
available assets Plan (MAAP)
3B. Allocation See 3 above to the routing/scheduling algorithms used by
across all (issued 24-hrs prior
FedEx, UPS, and Amazon for large-scale delivery.
planned to execution).
missions.
Translate MAAP Air Tasking Order
High value: AI-DSS can auto-generate complex
into detailed, (ATO)
documents containing tedious details and rigid
executable
4. ATO Production & 18–12 hrs Special Instructions formats (ATO and ACO) as well as more human-
orders (refueling,
Dissemination (6 hrs) (SPINS) readable documents (SPINS). AI-DSS can auto-
callsigns,
apply foreign release rules to produce tailored
frequencies, Airspace Control
versions of these suitable for partner nations.
ACMs, etc.) Order (ACO).
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 24

Execute
0 hrs Actual sorties flown Not a focus of this paper. Common Operating
missions,
(24 hr and real-time Picture and information correlation and
5. Execution monitor
execution command and management are already supported by existing
situation, adapt
day) control. tools.
to events.
Correlate
MISREPs feeding
During intelligence, ISR, Not a focus of this paper. Already supported by
the next JIPTL cycle
6. Assessment execution and open-source tools like MSS; LLMs/AI agents have the potential
Battle Damage
and after data to assess to further accelerate BDA and MISREP processing.
Assessment (BDA).
mission effects.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 25

Stage 2: Target Development & Nomination
In Stage 2, targets are developed, nominated, and prioritized to support the objectives
and priorities established in the Air Operations Directive (AOD). The product of Stage 2
is the Joint Integrated Prioritized Target List (JIPTL).
Stage 2 consumes about 24 hours of the notional 72-hour Joint Air Tasking Cycle. It
overlaps with Stages 1 and 3, notionally starting 60 hours prior to execution and
ending 36 hours prior.
In recent implementations of the JATC process, most of the coordination and planning
that creates the JIPTL has been done using Excel spreadsheets and PowerPoint slides.
These have historically proven time-consuming to create, notoriously difficult to keep
synchronized (both between the Excel and PowerPoint products, and between the
versions of each held at different commands), and almost impossible to keep up to date
with the most current data. While the use of “shared drives” in theory allows everyone
to revise the same master copy, in practice classification, compartmentation, and
communications limitations often force operators to revise distinct copies of the
documents, causing a burden and delay to synchronize changes. These version control
issues can lead to costly mistakes; for example, if new information results in a target
being removed from the JIPTL and placed on the No-Strike List (NSL), working from an
obsolete version of the JIPTL and/or NSL can lead to collateral damage, civilian harm, or
even fratricide.
In Stage 2, AI-DSS offers the opportunity to manage all the information relevant to
targeting (intelligence reports, government and commercial imagery, ELINT, battle
damage assessments, field reporting, mission reporting, etc.) in a single system,
allowing all commanders to have the most current information on all targets at their
fingertips, and to manipulate and visualize it as they see fit. Like MSS does for the
Army fires process, an AOC-focused AI-DSS can generate data exports as needed to
either transfer information to other non-connected systems or to make the information
available as local spreadsheets. And if PowerPoint slides are desired to support
briefings, senior officer discussions, and/or decision meetings, AI-enabled tools can be
used to generate PowerPoint slides at the click of a mouse from the common
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 26

knowledge base using whatever template is desired, or to support briefing directly from
AI-DSS visualizations, as opposed to transferring data to PowerPoint slides.*
Stage 3: Weaponeering & Allocation
Stage 3 determines the weapons that should be used to achieve the JIPTL’s objectives
and then determines how to allocate available aviation resources to deliver those
weapons. These two sub-stages—weaponeering and allocation—provide very
different opportunities for AI-DSS tools, so these are discussed separately below.
Note that Stage 3 consumes about 30 hours of the notional 72-hour Joint Air Tasking
Cycle. It overlaps with Stages 2 and 4, notionally starting at 48 hours prior to execution
and ending at 18 hours prior to execution.
Sub-Stage 3A: Weaponeering
In conducting the weaponeering and detailed mission planning for each JIPTL target,
planners require inputs such as available weapons, aircraft available to deliver weapons
to targets, aircrews available to pilot aircraft, aircraft available to perform supporting
missions, airborne tankers, fuel available, etc., as well as guidance and parameters for
collateral damage assessment. Knowing exactly what will be available on day-of ATO
execution is in practice impractical, so commonly aviation units instead preplan with the
Air Operations Center (AOC) to provide daily a set number of sorties of specific aircraft
type(s), each configured to carry a preplanned “general purpose” weapon load. AOC
planners make an initial determination of the weapons each JIPTL target requires and
use the “preplanned sorties” to match targets to specific units and delegate detailed
mission planning to those units. If either AOC or unit planners determine a target
requires a unique weapons loadout, this triggers human interactions between AOC
planners and the unit(s) involved to obtain information and coordinate/iterate as needed
to finalize mission planning for that target (or, if needed, reassign the target to another
unit). With this coordination complete, AOC planners can consolidate the
weaponeering and mission planning for all the JIPTL targets and establish the overall
Air Battle Plan (ABP) for the current cycle.
AI-DSS tools are unlikely to reliably perform weaponeering and associated tactical
mission planning (these still require experienced warfighters), but an AI-DSS can
* Several four- and three-star military headquarters already report and brief using MSS to directly
visualize and present information during briefings instead of generating PowerPoint slides.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 27

support Stage 3A by assembling and integrating information and making it immediately
available to both warfighters at the AOC and the individual aviation units, saving the
time and manpower currently spent maintaining and accessing this information.
Sub-Stage 3B: Allocation
In developing the allocation, planners review the totality of available resources (aircraft,
aircrews, weapons, etc.) and the resources required by the totality of missions planned
in Stage 3A, then they figure out how to allocate and sequence the available assets
across the missions that need to be flown. The product of this stage is the Master Air
Attack Plan (MAAP). The MAAP is in effect a master delivery plan detailing the targets,
the set of aircraft and weapons assigned in direct and/or supporting roles to the mission
against each target, and the appropriate sequencing and scheduling.
AI-DSS tools are ideally suited to creating plans such as the MAAP. The problem of
delivering packages (weapons) from warehouses (bases) to delivery locations (targets)
using a fleet of delivery platforms (aviation resources) is one that has proven
algorithmic solutions. Every day, companies such as FedEx, UPS, and Amazon use
algorithms to schedule and manage daily deliveries on a massive scale (see appendix
C). The JATC needs similar tools to be brought to bear.
Stage 4: ATO Production & Dissemination
Stage 4 generates and disseminates the three key documents that execute the MAAP:
● the Air Tasking Order (ATO), the detailed, executable daily order that translates
the MAAP into a concrete schedule of specific missions, assigning aircraft, call
signs, times, and routes to execute specific tasks;
● the Special Instructions (SPINS), providing detailed, mission-specific instructions,
procedures, and directives needed by units to execute their assigned missions
safely and effectively; and
● the Airspace Control Order (ACO), providing airspace control measures (ACMs)
such as corridors, altitudes, and restricted areas, as part of the coordination and
deconfliction for all airspace users.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 28

Examples of what an Air Tasking Order contains:
• Mission data: Mission numbers, specific aircraft types, and the number of
aircraft assigned to each mission/task.
• Operational identifiers: Individual call signs for aircraft and units, as well as
identification friend or foe (IFF/SIF) modes and codes.
• Targeting information: Precise target locations, target types, and times
on/off target.
• Mission types: The specific nature of the flight, such as close air support, air
refueling, air-to-air combat, or reconnaissance.
• Control and coordination: Frequencies for communication, the controlling
agencies responsible for oversight, and report-in points.
• Logistical support: Specifics for airborne refueling, including airborne tanker
call signs, air refueling control points, and the various fuel off-loads for each
aircraft refueled.
The transition from the MAAP (which is a plan) to the ATO (which provides specific
execution instructions) involves a myriad of details. The ATO not only schedules the
when and where for all the aircraft that will fly, it specifies when each aircraft will refuel
and from which tanker aircraft; and when and where supporting aircraft will provide
specific services (such as ISR, EW, C2, etc.) and to whom. The ATO also specifies
numerous other details such as callsigns for all aircraft and the specific communication
frequencies to be used. Generating these details is a methodical but tedious and error-
prone task—precisely the kind of task that is challenging and time-consuming for
humans but easy and quick for computers.
All these details then need to be translated into the three key output documents. These
are complex, inter-related documents following the United States Message Text
Formatting (USMTF) program standard and distributed in both legacy formats and
XML-based representations (XML-MTF).34 These three documents are currently
generated from the MAAP by the TBMCS system.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 29

A future AI-DSS that addresses the allocation-and-schedule problem and generates
the MAAP can also auto-generate all the implementation details as well as these
output documents, either by leveraging existing tools for this purpose* or by developing
new and improved versions that tap directly into the underlying knowledge base of the
AI-DSS tool. The ATO and ACO are rigidly structured with limited room for freeform
information (they are designed to be “read” by machines rather than by humans), so
existing generation tools are likely to suffice.35 The SPINS, however, is often written for
human reading,36 and may benefit from tailormade natural-language processing (NLP)
or generative AI tools that comprehend the specialized English of aviators and generate
appropriately tailored English language output. Furthermore, AI-DSS can use AI tools to
apply foreign release guidance rules automatically to generate versions of these three
documents appropriately tailored to each foreign partner, or (if preferred) a single
version releasable to all partner nations.37
* For example, by leveraging tools in TBMCS that currently generate the ATO, SPINS, and ACO.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 30

Expected Operational Benefits of AI-DSS
Applying AI-DSS to our case studies would bring a series of operational benefits which
fall into four broad categories:
1. Reduction of errors due to re-entry of data or loss of version control
2. Manpower efficiencies
3. Net process speed-up
4. Increased process flexibility
In both case studies, moving the entire process into an AI-DSS digitizes it and creates a
single shared data source that is continuously correlated and cross-checked,
eliminating the synchronization and version control problems that arise from notes and
ad-hoc spreadsheets, and reducing errors, wasted staff time, and frustration for action
officers and senior leaders alike.
The following subsections summarize the latter three benefits for each case study.
Benefits of AI-DSS Support to Army Fires Resupply
As described earlier, an AI-DSS supporting ammunition resupply to Army fires would
free many of the warfighters currently involved in the tedious process of collecting,
aggregating, and cross-checking information. Warfighters working countless hours to
develop (and redevelop) delivery plans would be supported by an AI-DSS that can
generate an overall delivery plan in minutes. This allows warfighters to focus on
reviewing the products and iterating/refining the plan. Manpower no longer required for
review and coordination can be repurposed to other warfighter roles.
Automation support to the delivery planning process is the primary source of both the
significant process speed-up and increased flexibility. An AI-DSS incorporating the
kinds of tools used by commercial delivery services can generate delivery plans in
minutes. Depending on operational circumstances, the time saved can be used to
respond more rapidly to battlefield circumstances, or to spend more time reviewing
plans and exploring alternative options than current processes allow.
Because delivery planning with AI-DSS takes minutes, it also becomes more flexible:
New plans are easier to generate when faced with late-breaking changes (computers
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 31

are great at working through cascading changes), implications can be rapidly assessed,
and decisions are disseminated nearly instantly.
Benefits of AI-DSS Support for JATC
The bottom line is that an AI-DSS would reduce manning, accelerate steps that
currently consume 60 hours of the notional 72-hour JATC timeline, and add a level of
flexibility to the existing rigid 72-hour timeline of the JATC cycle. We address each of
these in turn.
Manpower Efficiencies
A dissertation published by the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) documents the
significant manpower requirements of JATC processes and makes clear that manpower
is a limiting factor in the process.38 An AI-DSS tool would free warfighters from
performing most of the tedious, mechanical aspects of the process, specifically:
● Stage 2 (JIPTL generation). This stage is analogous to what MSS has already
achieved in developing and prioritizing targets for ground fires. Using AI-DSS to
support Stage 2 of the JATC process would be expected to result in
corresponding manpower savings.
● Stage 3A (Weaponeering). The task of assembling necessary information is
currently performed largely by warfighters conducting direct reach-back and
coordination with individual units. An AI-DSS that puts this information at the
warfighter’s fingertips would largely eliminate this tedious task, reducing overall
manpower requirements.
● Stage 3B (Allocation). The allocation and scheduling stage of the JATC process
would be largely automated, as is done in the commercial sector. Freed from the
mechanics of allocation and scheduling, warfighters could focus on oversight
and review, and overall manpower would be reduced.
● Stage 4: (ATO generation and dissemination). ATO, ACO, and SPINS generation
would become close to a push-button operation. Yet again, this would allow
warfighters to focus on oversight and reduce overall manpower requirements.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 32

Process Speed-up
AI-DSS also brings potentially significant process acceleration. While all the stages in
question would be speedier, the most significant improvements would be in Stage 2,
Stage 3B, and Stage 4, specifically:
● Stage 2 (JIPTL generation). The experience we saw with the XVIII Airborne using
MSS showed significant speed-up in the process. We would expect the same
here.
● Stage 3B (Allocation). The allocation and scheduling process would be largely
automated, making it possible to generate an allocation and schedule in minutes,
not hours. This would require review and iteration, but the process might only
take a few hours instead of the current 12 to 18 hours as implied by the AFIT
study.
● Stage 4 (ATO generation and dissemination). ATO, ACO, and SPINS generation
(as well as generation of corresponding briefing products) would become a
push-button operation, reducing the time required only to that needed to review
and approve the products.
Improved Process Flexibility
Applying AI-DSS tools would address a longstanding frustration with the existing JATC
process: the difficulty of making additions to the target set after the JIPTL has been
“locked” at 36 hours prior to execution. The biggest challenge to incorporating
additional targets late in the JATC cycle is the allocation and scheduling process (Stage
3B).
Currently, introducing a corresponding new mission into the existing allocation and
schedule requires a complex set of changes that cascade throughout the entire plan.
Aircraft must be pulled from their original target/missions to this new one. It is
impractical in all but the simplest cases for warfighters to work through the many
cascading changes to implement such a change in the time available. An AI-DSS can
help clear this obstacle by conducting the change analysis quickly and reliably and
presenting options for the necessary changes in an understandable way to the
warfighter. This is exactly what commercial sector package delivery providers such as
FedEx, Amazon, and UPS do on a continuous basis as new packages, especially higher-
priority packages, enter their system (see Appendix C).
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 33

Expected Operational Risks
Our discussion up to this point has focused on expected operational advantages of AI-
DSS, but it is critical to consider the risks that come with these advantages. Current
military technologies and processes are not perfect, but their flaws are relatively well
understood, even if imperfectly addressed. By contrast, the flaws inherent to AI-DSS
and the processes they will reshape are new and not yet well understood or
characterized. Uncertainty notwithstanding, leaders considering AI-DSS adoption must
weigh known and theorized risks against known or perceived advantages.
A brief inventory of risks with deploying AI-DSS generally, and more specifically with
AI-DSS to support fires resupply or the JATC, includes:
● Diminished warfighter critical thinking and cognitive offloading. Cognitive
offloading is an everyday process whereby individuals take actions to reduce
demands on their cognitive processing—everything from counting on fingers to
creating automatic meeting reminders to relying on social networks or staffs for
information.39 While such offloading is expected and commonplace, especially in
complex military decision-making, academic studies are showing that high
cognitive offloading through the use of AI tools correlates to lower critical
thinking scores.40
● Automation bias and unjustified confidence. Related to critical thinking,
automation bias is the tendency for humans to over-rely on computer-generated
solutions, a phenomenon well-documented in academic literature and
operational studies.41
● Pressure to further reduce the time and people in decision cycles. People and
time are still necessary for complex judgement calls, but capable AI-DSS that
demonstrate the ability to move and synthesize information may cause
leadership to underestimate the number of people involved and the expectations
of time for making judgement calls. While AI accelerates and eases parts of the
decision process, it does not necessarily do so to all steps equally. This could not
only erode human agency over AI-DSS but render militaries less resilient in the
face of an AI-DSS failure.42
● Less time spent cross-checking information. Generations of military officers
learned (sometimes painfully) to double-check information they receive. But the
flood of information they are presented with today, combined with time pressure
and multitude of demands on their attention, makes it increasingly difficult for
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 34

them to do so. An AI-DSS in theory makes it easier to do such double-checking,
but in a variant of automation bias, the idea that the AI-DSS “already cross-
checks everything” may result in under-emphasizing human efforts to cross-
check and validate information.
● Data failures (in either biased or incomplete training data or the operational data
(e.g. sensors) available for decision-making). AI systems will not perform as
intended if the data they trained on is not representative of the situation they are
used in. Classic examples include using an AI image classifier trained on data
from winter or European environments to find tanks in a desert environment.
Similarly, AI systems will not perform well if the incoming sensor data during
operations is insufficient, poisoned, or significantly different from what the AI
was trained with. For example, an AI image classifier trained using high-
resolution images may not perform well if, in combat, the only imagery available
is low resolution.
● AI failures (of which there are many, including narrow operational
windows/fragility outside training data, state decay, context drift, hallucinations,
and many more).43 While many of these AI failure mechanisms are known and
documented, we generally do not have the tools yet to automatically detect such
failures or warn the operators when AI outputs are more likely to be erroneous.
Confidence estimates are available for AI tools such as AI classifiers, but even
these are often dubious: They can report wrong classifications with high
confidence.44 Moreover, AI failures, especially for large language models (LLMs)
and AI agents, continue to rapidly evolve as new techniques are implemented.
These risks are a source of substantial concern within the military45 and civil society.46
This list is not all inclusive but should serve as a caution that while AI-DSS do pose
advantages, their risks must be thoroughly considered and addressed. Moreover, some
of these risks are still ill-defined or simply unknown, as AI is rapidly evolving and safety
researchers race to keep up with new risks.
The task of designing the engineering technologies, processes, and training regimes to
mitigate or avoid these risks is both imperative and likely to be an ongoing challenge
that requires attention. The proposed applications of AI-DSS in this paper, for example,
seek to avoid some of these risks though narrowly constrained roles for LLMs, where
hallucination can be minimized (e.g., to generate sanitized versions of documents for
release to partner nations). In other cases, automation bias could be at least partially
addressed through well-designed user interfaces, and training and certification
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 35

programs.47 Even with narrow LLM applications, trained and certified operators, and
continuous evaluation and testing, retraining (of algorithms and people) will be
essential to maintaining acceptable operations.
Finally, it bears mention that there are special concerns about the impact of AI on
civilian populations and the potential for collateral damage. Studies have examined the
root causes of civilian harm during U.S. military operations48 and identified how AI tools
can actually help mitigate such harms.49 It is also true that AI tools could potentially
increase the risk of civilian harm due to the issues we listed above. The net effect of AI-
DSS on civilian harm will largely come down to how military and political leaders ensure
the quality of implementation and the quality of human oversight.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 36

Implementation Challenges
AI-DSS potential in our two cases is real, and so are the implementation risks and
challenges. The hardest challenges are not technical, but rather the systemic
institutional obstacles that frustrate any digital transformation: culture change, securing
budgets, the requirements and procurement cycle, competition with existing programs
of record and established prime contractors, and bureaucracy that can at times be
insurmountable for software companies outside of defense industrial networks.
Specific to our proposed case studies, two broad categories of implementation
challenges need discussion: software development and data access. Regarding
software development, both case studies require quite a bit of software to be
implemented (especially for an AI-DSS supporting JATC). But neither of these present
novel challenges: Software systems with such capabilities (at equivalent scale and
scope) already exist. However, regarding accessing data, there are significant
challenges. The following sections expand on these statements.
Software Development
Our case studies depend on three core software-enabled capabilities:
1. Common to both case studies is the capability for a fully digital process that
automates the correlation and fusing of information to identify targets, builds
and shares target folders, and facilitates development of a prioritized target list
(note that for the first case study, MSS already provides this).
2. The Army fires ammunition resupply case study envisions an AI-DSS capability
to track actual and projected artillery and missile munition expenditures by the
various Army fires units, automate munitions ordering, track resources available
to deliver those munitions, and generate delivery plans ready to be executed by
the relevant units. In short, it automates the planning and scheduling for
ordnance resupply of Army fires units using available logistical resources.
3. The JATC case study envisions an AI-DSS capability that takes as inputs a
prioritized target list, the mission packages designed for each target, and the
aviation resources available (including weapons, aircraft, and aircrews), and
automatically perform the allocation and scheduling, generating the necessary
MAAP, ATO, ACO, and SPINS documents. In short, it automates the planning
and scheduling for delivery of weapons to targets using available aviation
resources.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 37

The latter two capabilities both involve automating delivery schedule planning:
generating a plan that uses available delivery resources to deliver packages to various
locations on schedule. The two capabilities differ in what is being delivered and the
kinds of resources that make the deliveries, as well as their scale and complexity, but
from a mathematical/algorithmic perspective, these are the same.
None of these three capabilities are novel. In fact, software systems performing all three
of these are capabilities being used in the real world today. The XVIII Airborne Corps’s
MSS already does #1 for land fires. The private sector (e.g., UPS Ground Delivery)
solves #2-type problems daily. UPS, of course, doesn’t deliver in contested
environments or off-road, but the Army is already making investments to figure out the
off-road and contested environment “routing” problem.50 As for #3, companies such as
Amazon and FedEx already rely on software systems to allocate package deliveries to
available resources, schedule them, and manage the execution of deliveries in near-real
time and on a global scale.*
Proven examples of such tools exist, but we also acknowledge that significant
development work is required to adapt and/or reimplement them for use by the U.S.
military. Because warfighters who execute these processes day-in and day-out
understand them best, they must work alongside developers (ideally using something
like the DevSecOps process that the XVIII Airborne used to develop MSS) to adapt
proven private sector “exemplars” to address the specific military needs. There is
software development work to be done here, but the path has clear precedents and
working examples in the private sector. The services are already taking initial steps in
this direction (see Appendix B for Air Force examples).
Data Access
The big challenge lies not in the development of these AI and/or software tools, but
rather in the collection and integration of data—specifically data about friendly forces—
that these tools need to work properly. As highlighted previously, using AI-DSS to
address the resupply of Army fires units requires a near-real-time knowledge base that
includes:
* See Appendix C for an overview of commercial sector delivery scheduling.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 38

● Forecasted Army ordnance requirements based on the operational tempo,
planned targets, and enemy situation (these could be generated by MSS based
on current fire plans and projections).
● The current status of on-hand and expended ammunition from all fires units, as
well as munition depots and/or supply points.
● The current inventory of ammunition from all munition depots and/or supply
points up and down the supply chain, as well as in-transit inventories.
● Information on available/viable transport resources; the route network; its status,
condition, and security; and the status of logistics personnel and escort forces
available.
The AI-DSS that enables the Joint Air Tasking Cycle by generating the MAAP, ATO, etc.,
would need a knowledge base that includes near-real-time information on:
● Aircraft availability, readiness and weapon capabilities and compatibilities (or lift
capacity or other relevant measures) at the airframe level.
● Aircrew availability, readiness, qualifications/certifications, etc., at the individual
level.
● Weapons inventory/availability by location, type, series, variant, etc.
● Aviation fuel inventory/availability by location and fuel type, and tanker aircraft
inventory/availability to deliver it via airborne refueling.
All the information above exists somewhere in the U.S. force—but it currently does not
exist in one single organized, correlated, cross-reference knowledge base that is
available to all relevant operators. It exists in individual Army transport companies,
depots, or fires units. It exists at the Air Force squadron level, or in the files of the
ground crews that service the aircraft. And at these levels, this data is often considered
locally held administrative data. In today’s warfighting environment, it is not
administrative information—it is warfighting information.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 39

Illustrative Example: Why crew-level information needs to be treated as warfighting
information
An AI-DSS tool designed to allocate and schedule the ATO needs to service target
XYZ. Target XYZ requires delivery of four AGM-158B JASSM-ERs, a weapon
requiring specific aircrew qualification. The AI-DSS finds Squadron ABC has two
available F-35s that can each carry two AGM-158B, and there are two available
pilots to fly those aircraft. But unless the information on their specific pilot
qualifications is in the AI-DSS’s knowledge base, the AI-DSS doesn’t know
whether those two pilots are currently qualified to employ the AGM-158B unless
someone reaches out to the squadron and asks them.
Companies such as DHL, Amazon, UPS, and FedEx are able to implement and operate
their sophisticated scheduling tools because they have something that the Air Force
currently lacks: a modern data infrastructure that collects and collates all the relevant
information about the organization’s resources and infrastructure in real time and
integrates it all in a consolidated knowledge base.*
Centralizing all such information in a knowledge base is the essential prerequisite to
implementing and deploying effective and successful AI-DSS to address the big
operational planning tasks.
Integration
Any AI-DSS will need to be integrated into existing operational command-and-control
ecosystems. This includes not only integration into operational architectures and data
environments, but also into command workflows. An AI-DSS supporting Army
ordinance resupply to fire units will need to interface with existing MSS efforts as well
as Army programs such as Global Combat Support System-Army (GCSS-Army), C2
Fix, and Next Generation Command and Control (NGC2). Similarly, an AI-DSS
supporting the JATC will need to interface with and/or leverage existing Air Force
programs such as TBMCS and the other programs and systems described in
Appendix B. TBMCS in particular is a longstanding program of record; whether an AI-
* See Appendix B for a summary of the various Air Force efforts to bring cutting-edge digital
technologies to the Air Operations Center.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 40

DSS such as described here should eventually integrate into, complement, or at some
point replace TBMCS is an important issue beyond the scope of this paper. It highlights
the institutional challenges to adoption that are more likely than technical issues to
constrain adoption at scale.
Integration with command workflows is particularly important. An AI-DSS will have
little chance of successful adoption unless it directly supports existing doctrinal
workflows and procedures and can be easily tailored to unit- or operation-specific
workflows. However, the real benefit of AI-DSS lies in enabling new and improved staff
workflows, changes in decision authorities, and enhanced human-machine integration.
Process acceleration rarely yields significant operational improvement unless decision
roles, validation responsibilities, and human oversight structures are adapted
accordingly.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 41

Potential Next Steps
The biggest obstacle unique to implementing the case studies described in this paper is
centrally and continuously collecting, correlating, organizing, and distributing the
military’s own data in near-real time.* Today the U.S. military has globally distributed
“common operating picture” information on units and their locations. But, as discussed
in the previous section, the more detailed information (e.g., capabilities, logistics,
maintenance, and personnel information) is not continuously collected nor readily
available. Effective AI-DSS tools for our case studies require information that today may
often exist in disparate reports. Thus, a prerequisite to applying AI-DSS to these
problems is to digitize these reports (if not already digital), translate them to
standardized formats, put the information in an accessible place, and convert it into
real-time data feeds to be ingested by an AI-DSS that cross-checks and correlates all
this information. This is exactly what the major commercial package delivery companies
do regarding information on their vehicles, warehouses, and workers.
With AI-DSS supporting the JATC process, warfighters would be able to focus on
detailed planning of specific missions as well as larger strategic and operational issues
rather than the tedious, mechanical aspects of the current processes. The net result
would free warfighters to focus on tasks requiring human judgement as opposed to
data-intensive work better suited to machines.
* The problem of institutional and cultural obstacles is unfortunately common to any new technology.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 42

What might mission planners need to know?
These are simplified examples of “last-minute questions” based on real-world
experiences of the authors.
• Are the aircraft available for this mission certified to employ this weapon?
• A ship just reported half of its VLS cells are not operational; which TLAM
variants remain available in the operational cells?
• Are there fuel drop tanks available to put on these aircraft to extend their
range?
• If we substitute weapon ABC for XYZ, are the aircrew qualified to employ
it?
The obstacle to integrating more data regarding our own forces, whether it is detailed
logistical information or personnel information at the level of individual qualifications, is
primarily bureaucratic. It is not uncommon for the data owners to be reluctant in
sharing data they have curated and managed. Will others misunderstand it and
perhaps use it incorrectly; will they find errors in it; do they understand its limitations?
These are reasonable concerns, but the solution is not to restrict access to the data but
rather to participate actively in the process of figuring out how to ingest the data so
that the AI-DSS platforms are designed to employ it responsibly.
Given the current urgency to accelerate AI-DSS adoption, it is more important than ever
to move quickly to demolish these bureaucratic barriers, and Secretary Hegseth’s
Memorandum of January 9, 2026, provides explicit direction to do this:51
I direct the CDAO to enforce, and all DoW Components to comply with,
the ‘DoD Data Decrees’ to further unlock our data for AI exploitation and
mission advantage. Military Departments and Components will establish,
maintain, and update federated data catalogs, exposing their system
interfaces, data assets, and access mechanisms across all classification
levels.
This has been a longstanding challenge because the Department’s data lives in stove
pipes that often go down to individual units and are controlled by owners that zealously
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 43

guard that data. Twenty years ago, the Quadrennial Defense Review highlighted this
problem and the obstacle it presented to achieving the Global Information Grid (GIG).52
One of the “QDR Decisions” was to:
Strengthen its data strategy — including the development of common
data lexicons, standards, organization, and categorization — to improve
information sharing and information assurance, and extend it across a
multitude of domains, ranging from intelligence to personnel systems.53
Since then, there has been continued emphasis on data sharing and other relevant DoD
directives and instructions have been issued to promote, facilitate, and/or direct data
sharing.54 Most recently, the emphasis included 2021 guidance from a Deputy
Secretary memorandum on “Creating Data Advantage” and 2026 guidance from the
Secretary embedded within the department’s artificial intelligence strategy.55 As a
result, there has been significant progress made in the past two decades with regards
to near-real-time sharing of intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance information
in digital form, as well as near-real-time sharing of “friendly” digital location data.
However, there has been relatively little progress in the near-real-time sharing of the
more mundane information such as the current locations and inventories of
ammunitions (both forward and in various depots), the availability of trucks and drivers
to deliver that ammunition, the status of aircraft and pilots and their ability (e.g.,
qualifications) to fly various missions, or the availability of repair parts across the
battlespace.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 44

Conclusion
The XVIII Airborne Corps’ use of MSS has demonstrated that a well-tailored AI-DSS
tool in the hands of capable warfighters enables a team of 20 to do what in 2003
required 2,000. A natural question is, are there other applications where AI-DSS can
help us achieve such gains? In this paper we explored the potential in two case studies,
detailing how AI-DSS might support Army ammunition resupply tasks, or a much more
ambitious effort to address elements of the Joint Air Targeting Cycle.
In both instances there are AI-DSS strengths that would bring specific operational
benefits, but alongside those advantages, military and civilian leaders must also
account for operational risks. These are highlighted in Table 4.
Table 4: Benefits and Risks of AI-DSS in Two Case Studies
Expected Benefits Potential Risks
Improved situational awareness of Diminished warfighter critical thinking
friendly, enemy, and civilian objects (cognitive offloading)
Automation bias and the potential to
Increased quality and completeness of a incorrectly trust computer or AI
shared COP suggestions over human intuition and
experience
Increased decision speed and greater Pressure to reduce the time needed or
planning flexibility and responsiveness people required for complex judgements
Increased speed of information sharing, Less time spent cross-checking
exchange, and analysis information
Data failures in either biased or
Reduction in human errors in manual
incomplete training data or the data (i.e.
data transfer or re-entry
sensors) available for decision-making
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 45

AI failures (of which there are many,
including narrow operational
Decreased potential for loss of version
windows/fragility outside training data,
control
state decay, context drift, hallucinations,
and many more)
Applying AI-DSS to the JATC offers a real opportunity to revisit the existing doctrinal
72-hour timeline by addressing specific and known shortfalls in the current process.
And while the risks to such an AI-DSS application are real, they can be limited and
mitigated through careful engineering and human processes and oversight, and they
must be weighed against the current risks inherent to the process as it exists today.
In examining these two case studies, we found several points in common with the XVIII
Airborne Corps’ experience applying MSS to land fires:
● The same foundational challenge: a voluminous amount of information that must
be correlated, organized, and distilled before warfighters can effectively apply
their expertise, experience, and judgment.
● Existing processes that rely primarily on humans to correlate, organize, and distill
data using slow and error-prone processes built around Excel spreadsheets and
PowerPoint slides.*
● Problems solvable by data science, data management, software, and scoped AI
applications—not the creation of some massive, likely-to-hallucinate agentic LLM
that “does it all”.
● Challenge not in the creation of new AI capabilities, but rather in centrally
collecting, correlating, and organizing the military’s own data that is currently
scattered across many units and maintained locally in spreadsheets, notebooks,
technical manuals, or individual’s minds—and doing so continuously in near-real
time.
*At practically every military command we visited or spoke with, invariably one or more warfighters
would allude in jest that “Microsoft Office is the primary weapon system powering our targeting and
decision-making process.”
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 46

The immediate challenge is digitizing this data and integrating it into the knowledge
bases of the AI-DSS tools described in this paper. Top-level departmental support for
data-sharing initiatives has never been stronger, and all parts of the department, under
the leadership of CDAO, should exploit the Secretary and Deputy Secretary’s support
to break through bureaucratic, organizational, or cultural barriers.
The next step is to examine the best practices from the XVIII Airborne Corps and others
pursuing similar AI-DSS initiatives and adopt or adapt them. In particular, the
DevSecOps-style development approach combining operators, software engineers, and
evaluators that the XVIII Airborne Corps used was key to rapid development and
fielding of incrementally improving MSS-capabilities. It provides a template for other
situations and contexts.
Drawing on the ongoing experience from MSS, the resulting AI-DSS tools and
capabilities should be incrementally deployed to command centers during exercises and
real-world operations. These provide opportunities to iteratively develop best practices
and evolve military tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs). Commands will require
resources to deploy AI-DSS responsibly and capture lessons learned, but the
investment will accelerate the growth of experienced users that can effectively employ
AI-DSS, as well as mentor and train others. Furthermore, establishing a development-
deployment-feedback loop will help to refine existing AI-DSS tools and develop new
ones in service of the warfighters.56
To facilitate this learning process, CDAO should lead the collection and promulgation of
these lessons. CDAO should also resource support teams at the Combatant Commands
to augment their AI-DSS efforts at the edge with personnel who have the necessary
expertise and/or experience to bring to bear best practices acquired across the joint
force.
These steps would position the military to employ AI-DSS in ways that would improve
some of our most important Army and Joint fires-related processes and accelerate the
responsible development and adoption of AI-enabled capabilities across the military.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 47

Appendix A: Joint and Air Force Depictions of the Air Tasking Cycle
In describing the Joint Air Tasking Cycle (JATC), this paper follows the description and
terminology that appears in Joint Publication (JP) 3-60 “Joint Targeting”.57 These Joint
processes for the JATC, however, are based on processes developed by the Air Force,
executed by the responsible Joint Force Air Component Commander (JFACC), and
implemented in a corresponding Air Operations Center (AOC).
For this reason, and because Joint Publication 3-60 dates from 2018, we also examined
the Air Force documents relevant to the Air Tasking Cycle. Two served as primary
sources. The first is a dissertation, Analyzing the Air Operations Center (AOC) Air
Tasking Order (ATO) Process using Theory of Constraints, written by three Air Force
officers at the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT).58 It contains a detailed analysis
of how the AOC executes its processes and explores the choke points in those
processes in a way that we have not found elsewhere. However, it is somewhat dated
(2005) and is not an official Air Force document. So our second primary source is the
official Air Force Manual on operating an AOC: AFMAN 13-1AOC.59 Review of AFMAN
13-1AOC confirms that major elements described in the AFIT dissertation are still
present and that the processes and timelines for the air task cycle execution from that
dissertation remain about the same today. In addition to these documents, we also
consulted a variety of other documents to supplement and/or confirm information.60
As expected, AFMAN 13-1AOC provides a more complete explanation of the JATC
processes that sheds light on its many complexities and the details of how it is
implemented. Nevertheless, AFMAN 13-1AOC reflects the same timeline and key
events as JP 3-60. This can be illustrated by comparing the timeline charts from the
two publications.
Figure A-1 below is the Notional Joint Air Tasking Cycle Timeline that appears in JP 3-
60. It starts 72 hours prior to the execution of that cycle’s Air Tasking Order (ATO),
beginning with the issuing of the relevant Joint Force Commander’s guidance. It
identifies five sequential (but overlapping) stages in the process, and one continuous
stage (Assessment). It identifies when in the cycle key documents are finalized:
● AOD at 60 hours prior to execution
● JIPTL at 36 hours prior to execution
● MAAP at about 24 hours prior to execution
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 48

● ATO at 12 hours prior to execution
Figure A-1. The Notional Joint Air Tasking Cycle Timeline
Source: Joint Publication 3-60, Joint Targeting, Fig. C-2, p. C-5.
Figure A-2 below is the corresponding diagram from AFMAN 13-1AOC, the Air
Tasking Cycle Representative Timeline. Figure A-2 begins earlier than Figure A-1,
starting 108 hours prior to the execution of that cycle’s Air Tasking Order (ATO), but
unlike Figure A-1, does not depict the 24-hour period of ATO execution. Figure A-2
does not identify “stages” that appear in Figure A-1, but instead identifies the AOC
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 49

functional teams (highlighted with blue horizontal bars) that have lead responsibility for
parts of the process:
● The Strategy Plans Team (SPT) and the Strategy Guidance Team (SGT) are part
of the AOC’s Strategy Division.
● The Target/Tactical Assessment Team is part of the AOC’s Intelligence,
Surveillance, and Reconnaissance Division.
● The Targeting Effects Team (TET), Master Air Attack Plan (MAAP) Team, and
ATO Production Team are part of the AOC’s Combat Plans Division.
Figure A-2. Air Tasking Cycle Representative Timeline
Source: Air Force Manual AFMAN 13-1AOC, Operational Procedures—Air Operations Center (AOC),
Figure 2-4, p20.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 50

Note that the “stages” shown in Figure A-1 do not appear in Figure A-2, and they are
not formal Air Force terminology regarding the Air Tasking Cycle. However, the text of
AFMAN 13-1AOC does informally refer to various “phases” of the Air Tasking Cycle
without explicitly identifying them as JP 3-60 does.
The period from 108 hours to 72 hours before ATO execution is not present in
Figure A-1. Figure A-2 shows this period beginning with the SPT’s review of relevant
long-term plans (beyond 72 hours) and SGT’s preparation of strategic guidance. At
72 hours prior to execution, the SGT issues the apportionment recommendations, at
which point Figures A-1 and A-2 now overlap. The 72-hour point is the traditional
“start” for the JATC.
From this point on until the beginning of ATO execution, the two figures align. Of note,
Figure A-2 shows the key JATC documents finalized at the following times:
● AOD at 60 hours prior to execution
● JIPTL at 36 hours prior to execution
● MAAP at 24 hours prior to execution
● ATO at 12 hours prior to execution
These correspond to the same timeline depicted in Figure A-1.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 51

Appendix B: Air Force Digital Tools Supporting the Air Tasking Cycle
The Air Force currently uses the Theater Battle Management Core System (TBMCS) to
support the AOC personnel in executing the JATC and generate the MAAP, ATO,
SPINS, ACO, etc. TBMCS was developed by Lockheed Martin in the late 1990s to
replace an earlier system, the Contingency Theater Automated Planning System
(CTAPS). TBMCS was initially fielded at the USCENTAF Coalition Air Operations Center
(CAOC) in 2000–2001.
The Air Force has been exploring ways to evolve the TBMCS toolkit in several of the
directions discussed in this paper.61 While not an exhaustive list, the efforts we’ve
identified in public literature include:
● Air Force Command and Control Air Operations Suite (ATOMS),62 a set of tools
developed and deployed in the early 2010s by Lockheed Martin to modernize
several older TBMCS applications (e.g., the Theater Air Planner and the Master
Air Attack Planning Toolkit) used to support Air Tasking Cycle processes.
● Kessel Run All Domain Operations Suite (KRADOS),63 a modern, cloud-based
software suite being developed by the U.S. Air Force’s Kessel Run team to
replace TBMCS and ATOMS and deployed at selected AOCs.
● Air Tasking Order Planning System (ATOPS),64 a BAE Systems product that
provides the capability to create daily air tasking orders (ATO) and associated
airspace control orders (ACO), enabling military commanders and staff to better
build an air attack plan.
● AOC-Anywhere,65 a digital environment for the AOC that enables rapid
integration of developmental models and applications with live data and
operational applications.
● ARTIV,66 an AI tool intended to speed up complex airlift planning for Air Mobility
Command.
● Puckboard,67 a tool used for crew scheduling.
● Intelligent Pairing Assistant (IPA) software,68 a tool for pairing intelligence
collection requests with intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR)
capabilities to support schedule planning.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 52

To the best of our knowledge, KRADOS is integrated into actual Air Force AOCs with
real-time/near-real-time data inputs and outputs, but the others it seems are not.
These digital tools the Air Force is pursuing for the AOC of tomorrow are broadly
aligned with the kinds of capabilities discussed in this paper and could well serve as
stepping stones towards an AI-DSS to support the JATC process and AOC operations.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 53

Appendix C: Commercial Sector Delivery Scheduling
In the last 30 years, companies such as FedEx, UPS, DHL, and Amazon revolutionized
delivery through the use of advanced software, data management, and algorithms.
Together, these tools enabled the real-time scheduling, delivery, monitoring, and
replanning of packages worldwide. They execute delivery of a myriad of packages
(ranging in size from individual nuts and bolts to industrial machinery and heavy
freight) to many hundreds of thousands of customers located across the globe, using
various combinations of delivery means (including long- and short-haul aircraft, trucks
of all sizes, and even mopeds and drones).69
They accomplish this by employing two closely coupled tools. The first is the use of
advanced software tools to collect and integrate all the relevant information about their
operations in real time into a consolidated knowledge base. The second is the
deployment of modern algorithms (including selected AI algorithms) that allocate
package deliveries to available and suitable resources, schedule them, monitor
execution continuously, and manage changes in near-real time.
The integrated knowledge base these companies maintain includes the status of all the
packages they need to deliver, of all the warehouses and their contents, of all the
delivery vehicles (whether operational or in maintenance), and even of all the human
involved in the operation (vehicle operators, vehicle maintainers, warehouse staff,
package handlers, etc.).
In our daily lives, we have all experienced the overall effectiveness and agility—and
occasional hiccups—of their delivery processes. How exactly they operationalize the
information, including the details of their algorithms, are closely held proprietary
secrets. But we get a broad sense of these tools not only from private discussion with
individuals who work or have worked in this sector, but also from academic research on
delivery scheduling algorithms,70 trade journal articles,71 and documents released by
the companies themselves, or companies that have partnered with them to develop
these tools.72
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 54

Appendix D: Acronyms
This paper includes many acronyms due to its detailed discussion of certain military
processes. All the acronyms essential to understand the discussion are defined at initial
use. However, readers may find it hard to locate the first use of an acronym.
Furthermore, the various figures copied from military documents introduce many other
acronyms that are neither mentioned nor directly relevant to this paper. For ease of
reference and completeness, all these acronyms are spelled out here.
ABP Air Battle Plan
ACO Airspace Control Order
AFATDS Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System
AFIT Air Force Institute of Technology
AFMAN Air Force Manual
AI-DSS AI-Enabled Decision Support System
ALLOREQ Allocation Request
AOC Air Operations Center
AOD Air Operations Directive
ASR Air Support Request
ATO Air Tasking Order
ATOMS Air Tasking Order Management System
ATOPS Air Tasking Order Planning System
BDA Battle Damage Assessment
C2 Command and Control
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 55

CAOC Coalition Air Operations Center
CDAO Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Office
CDE Collateral Damage Estimation
CSAR Combat Search and Rescue
CTAPS Contingency Theater Automated Planning System
DEVSECOPS Development, Security, and Operations
DIU Defense Innovation Unit
ELINT Electronic Intelligence
EW Electronic Warfare
FRAGO Fragmentary Order
GIG Global Information Grid
GPS Global Positioning System
ISR Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance
JAOP Joint Air Operations Plan
JATC Joint Air Tasking Cycle
JFACC Joint Force Air Component Commander
JFC Joint Force Commander
JIPTL Joint Integrated Prioritized Target List
JTCB Joint Targeting Coordination Board
KRADOS Kessel Run All Domain Operations Suite
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 56

LLM Large Language Model
LOGREQ Logistics Requisition
LOGSTAT Logistics Statistics (report)
MAAP Master Air Attack Plan
MISREP Mission Report
MLNPS Military Logistics Network Planning System
MSS Maven Smart System (an AI-DSS)
NGA National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
NSL No-Strike List
OAT Operational and Tactical Assessments
OIF Operation Iraqi Freedom
QDR Quadrennial Defense Review
ROE Rules Of Engagement
SGT Strategy Guidance Team
SORTIEALOT Sortie Allotment
SPINS Special Instructions
SPT Strategy Plans Team
SRD Strategy Division
TBMCS Theater Battle Management Core System
TET Target Effects Team
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 57

TLAM Tomahawk Land Attack Missile
TTWCS Tactical Tomahawk Weapons Control System
USMTF United States Message Text Formatting
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 58

Authors
Igor Mikolic-Torreira is a non-resident senior scholar at CSET.
Emelia Probasco is a senior fellow at CSET.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Alan Brown, Christine Fox, Julie George, Lauren Kahn,
and Toni Matheny for their input during the drafting of this paper; Dr. Joseph Chapa,
Jack Shanahan, Nolan Sweeney, and an anonymous reviewer for their feedback on this
report; and Matt Mahoney for fact-checking. They also thank Shelton Fitch for editorial
support and Jason Ly for help with graphic design.
© 2026 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit 
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20250012
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 59

Endnotes
1 U.S. Central Command (@CENTCOM), “Update from CENTCOM Commander on
Operation Epic Fury,” X (formerly Twitter), March 11, 2026,

2 Emelia Probasco, “Building the Tech Coalition” (Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, ), 
coalition/.
3 Admiral Brad Cooper, “US Strikes 5,500 Targets in Iran | Operation Epic Fury Update,”
Defense Now, YouTube, March 11, 2026, 
05hAtkWM.
4 Secretary Pete Hegseth, “Accelerating America’s Military AI Dominance,” (Secretary of
War, January 9, 2026), 
1/0/ARTIFICIAL-INTELLIGENCE-STRATEGY-FOR-THE-DEPARTMENT-OF-WAR.PDF.
5 Emelia Probasco, “Building the Tech Coalition” (Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, ), 
coalition.
6 Michael Klare, “AI Plays Major Role in the War on Iran” (Arms Control Association, ), 
Bilawal Sidhu, “Inside Palantir’s Maven Smart System: How Al Picks 1,000+ Targets a
Day — The OODA Loop Compressed to Real Time,” Map the World Substack, Apr 30,
2026, Tal
Pinkasovich, “The Paradox Machine: How the AI That Was Banned Won the War,” The
Jerusalem Post, March 22, 2026, 
890738.
7 U.S. Central Command (@CENTCOM), “Update from CENTCOM Commander on
Operation Epic Fury,” X (formerly Twitter), March 11, 2026,

8 Kateryna Bondar, “Does Ukraine Already Have Functional CJADC2 Technology?”
(Center for Strategic and International Studies, ): 10. 
website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/2024-
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 60

12/241211_Bondar_Ukraine%20CJADC2.pdf?VersionId=bxzcRKK.lmDJVz6xMtzeWws
mE2jkhcH5; Israel Defense Forces, “The IDF’s Use of Data Technologies in Intelligence
Processing,” June 18, 2024, Yuval Abraham, “‘Lavender’: The AI
Machine Directing Israel’s Bombing Spree in Gaza,” +972 Magazine, April 3, 2024,
 “Questions and Answers: Israeli
Military’s Use of Digital Tools in Gaza,” Human Rights Watch, September 10, 2024,

of-digital-tools-in-gaza; Elizabeth Dwoskin, “Israel Built an ‘AI Factory’ for War. It
Unleashed It in Gaza,” The Washington Post, December 29, 2024,

Emelia Probasco, Sam Bresnick, and Cole McFaul, “China’s Military AI Wish List:
Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Cyber, Intelligence, Surveillance,
Reconnaissance, and Targeting (C5ISRT)” (Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, ), 
wish-list/.
9 Katrina Manson, Project Maven: A Marine Colonel, His Team, and the Dawn of AI
Warfare (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2026), 229; George I. Seffers,
“Afghanistan Evacuation Data Affects JADC2 Future” (The Cyber Edge, AFCEA, Jan. 1,
2022), 
affects-jadc2-future.
10 Emelia Probasco, “Building the Tech Coalition” (Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, ), 
coalition.
11 “VADM Whitworth Delivers Keynote at 2025 GEOINT Symposium,” National
Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, May 21, 2025,

m.html.
12 The White House, Winning the Race: America’s AI Action Plan (Washington, DC:
Executive Office of the President, ), 
content/uploads/2025/07/Americas-AI-Action-Plan.pdf.
13 Secretary Pete Hegseth, “Responses to Senate Armed Services Committee Advance
Policy Questions for Peter “Pete” B. Hegseth Nominee to Serve As Secretary of
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 61

Defense,” Senate Armed Services Committee, January 6, 2025, 
services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/hegseth_apq_responses.pdf.
14 Secretary Pete Hegseth, “Secretary of War Pete Hegseth Addresses General and
Flag Officers at Quantico, Virginia,” U.S. Department of War, September 30, 2025,

pete-hegseth-addresses-general-and-flag-officers-at-quantico-v/.
15 Secretary Pete Hegseth, “Accelerating America’s Military AI Dominance,” (Secretary
of War Memorandum, January 9, 2026),

INTELLIGENCE-STRATEGY-FOR-THE-DEPARTMENT-OF-WAR.PDF.
16 Major Wes Shinego, “Defense Officials Outline AI’s Strategic Role in National
Security,” DOD News, April 24, 2025, 
Stories/Article/article/4165279/defense-officials-outline-ais-strategic-role-in-national-
security/.
17 Emelia Probasco, “Building the Tech Coalition” (Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, ), 
coalition.
18 Mohsen Soori, Fooad Karimi Ghaleh Jough, Roza Dastres et al., “AI-Based Decision
Support Systems in Industry 4.0, a Review,” Journal of Economy and Technology,
Volume 4 (2026): 206–225, Amine
Abdelmouttalib and Yassin Tabaa, “Artificial Intelligence in Decision Support Systems:
Applications in Strategic Business Planning,” Journal of Innovative Research and
Business Studies 1, 1 (2025),
 Ebrahim Aly, Emiliya
Suprun, Hasan Hüseyin Turan et al., “MBSE for Robust Decision Support Systems: A
Resilient, Mission-Centric Reference Model,” Digital Engineering, Volume 6 (): 100044, Attila Kovari, “AI for
Decision Support: Balancing Accuracy, Transparency, and Trust Across Sectors,”
Information 15, 11 (2024): 725. plus numerous
commercial “advertisements” of AI-DSS describe them performing these six functions
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 62

(usually explicitly, sometimes implicitly) or non-military equivalents (e.g., in the case of
financial-sector AI-DSS tools).
19 Emelia Probasco, “Building the Tech Coalition” (Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, ), 
coalition.
20 Emelia Probasco, “Building the Tech Coalition.”
21 Department of the Army, “Fire Support and Field Artillery Operations” (U.S. Army
Field Manual FM 3-09, August 12, 2024),

Department of the Army, “Field Artillery Cannon Battalion” (U.S. Army Techniques
Publication ATP 3-09.23, September 24, 2015),

Department of the Army, “Field Artillery Cannon Brigade” (U.S. Army Techniques
Publication ATP 3-09.24, March 30, 2022),

Department of the Army, “The Field Artillery Cannon Battery” (U.S. Army Techniques
Publication ATP 3-09.50, May 4, 2016),

22 Department of the Army, “Sustainment Operations” (U.S. Army Field Manual FM 4-0,
Sustainment Operations, August 14, 2024), Appendix E,

23 Major Sarah A. Barron, “The Trouble with LOGSTATs,” ARMOR (Fall 2024),

24 Department of the Army, “Brigade Support Battalion” (U.S. Army Techniques
Publication ATP 4-90, June 18, 2020),

25 Department of the Army, “Division Sustainment Operations” (U.S. Army Techniques
Publication ATP 4-91, November 8, 2022),

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 63

Department of the Army, “Theater Sustainment Operations” (U.S. Army Techniques
Publication ATP 4-93, May 1, 2023),

26 Department of the Army, Soldier Solutions, n.d.,

27 Ernest S. Berney, Andrew B. Ward, and Dustin T. Brown, “Enhanced Route
Reconnaissance—Generation 1” (Engineer Research & Development Center (U.S.), ), 
d9d75587edb6.
28 Army Geospatial Center, Engineering Route Study (ERS), U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, October 15, 2025, 
Article-View/Article/480908/engineering-route-study-ers/.
29 Joint Force Development, “Joint Targeting,” (Joint Publication JP 3-60, September 28,
2018), page C-5,

1-F-0520_JP_3-60_9-28-2018.pdf.
30 Department of the Air Force, “Operational Procedures-Air Operations Center (AOC),”
(Air Force Manual AFMAN 13-1AOC, Volume 3, June 25, 2024), p. 20, 
publishing.af.mil/production/1/af_a3/publication/afman13-1aocv3/afman13-
1aocv3_.pdf.
31 Department of the Air Force, “Targeting,” (Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-60,
November 12, 2021), p. 19,

TARGETING.pdf.
32 Department of the Air Force, “Targeting,” (Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-60,
November 12, 2021), p. 23,

TARGETING.pdf.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 64

33 A very readable public affairs description of what the ATO is appears in this Air Force
article: Master Sgt. Kimberly Spinner, “ATO 101: What Every Airman Should Know
About an Air Tasking Order,” Pacific Air Forces, August 25, 2011,

airman-should-know-about-an-air-tasking-order/.
34 Department of Defense, Policy and Procedures for Management and Use of United
States Message Text Formatting, (Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction CJCSI
6241.04E, January 7, 2023),

; note that MIL-STD-6040 documentation (providing the standardized set of USMTF
messages and protocol for DoD use) is unclassified but distribution is restricted to the
federal government and its contractors: see

35 The following links provide a general sense of what the ATO and ACO contain: for the
ATO see and for the
ACO see Contrast these
with the equivalent high-level view of the SPINS: 
aco-spins-guide/page/spins.
36 See the following two public examples for a general sense of what is contained in a
SPINS:
NATO, “Libyan Airspace Special Instructions — SPINS — Edition 4,” (Joint Force
Commander, Naples, June 23, 2011),

space%20SPecial%20INStructions%20-%20SPINS%20-%20Edition%204%20-
%2023%20June%202011.pdf; NATO, “Regulations for Aircraft Operating as General
Air Traffic (GAT) in the Balkans, Version 3.0”, (Commander Combiner Air Operations
Center — Torrejon (CAOC TJ, November 14, 2014),

ns%20ver%203_0.pdf.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 65

37 Based on author interviews. Palantir’s AIP also advertises such capabilities; see
 and 
in-reimagining-the-classification-system-2d7878c71217.
38 Major Kevin Conner, Major Paul Lambertson, and Major Matthew Roberson,
“Analyzing the Air Operations Center (AOC) Air Tasking Order (ATO) Process Using
Theory of Constraints (TOC)” (Air Force Institute of Technology, June 13, 2005), 20-23,

39 Evan F. Risko and Sam J. Gilbert. “Cognitive Offloading,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences
20, 9 (): 676–688, 
40 Michael Gerlich, “AI Tools in Society: Impacts on Cognitive Offloading and the Future
of Critical Thinking,” Societies 15, 1 (2025): 6, 
41 Kate Goddard, Abdul Roudsari, and Jeremy C. Wyatt, “Automation Bias: A Systematic
Review of Frequency, Effect Mediators, and Mitigators,” Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association: JAMIA 19, 1 (): 121–127,
 Lauren Kahn, Emelia Probasco, and
Ronnie Kinoshita, "AI Safety and Automation Bias" (Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, ), 
automation-bias/.
42 Alvin Moon and Benjamin Boudreaux, “A Formal Model of How Artificial Intelligence
Erodes Human Agency” (RAND, April 20, 2026),

43 Vaishali Vinay, “Failure Modes in LLM Systems: A System-Level Taxonomy for
Reliable AI Applications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.19933 (2025),

44 Alexander Meinke, “Catastrophically Confident Classifiers,” November 3, 2022,

45 Ariel S. Kapusta, David Jin, Peter M. Teague et al., “A Framework for the Assurance of
AI-Enabled Systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv: 2504.16937 (2025),

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 66

46 “Problems with Autonomous Weapons,” Stop Killer Robots, accessed May 6, 2026,

47 Lauren Kahn, Emelia Probasco, and Ronnie Kinoshita, “AI Safety and Automation
Bias” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, ),

48 Larry Lewis, Sabrina Verleysen, Samuel Plapinger et al., “Preparing for Civilian Harm
Mitigation and Response in Large-Scale Combat Operations” (CNA, ),

Response-in-Large-Scale-Combat-Operations_REV.pdf (in particular, see Figure 2.
Pathways to civilian harm, p. 10).
49 Larry Lewis and Andrew Ilachinski, “Leveraging AI to Mitigate Civilian Harm” (CNA,
), 
Civilian-Harm.pdf.
50 Army Geospatial Center, “Engineering Route Study (ERS)”, U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, October 15, 2025, 
Article-View/Article/480908/engineering-route-study-ers/; Ernest S. Berney, Andrew B.
Ward, and Dustin T. Brown, “Enhanced Route Reconnaissance—Generation 1”
(Engineer Research & Development Center (U.S.), ), 
library.erdc.dren.mil/items/19270488-cb34-4405-bd67-d9d75587edb6.
51 Secretary Pete Hegseth, “Artificial Intelligence Strategy for the Department of War,”
(Memorandum from the Secretary of War, January 9, 2026).

INTELLIGENCE-STRATEGY-FOR-THE-DEPARTMENT-OF-WAR.PDF.
52 Daniel H. Rumsfeld, “Quadrennial Defense Review Report,” (Department of Defense,
Feb 6, 2006),

-06-25-111017-15.
53 Daniel H. Rumsfeld “Quadrennial Defense Review Report”, p. 59.
54 For example: Chief Information Officer, “DoD Information Sharing Strategy,”
(Department of Defense, May 4, 2007), p. 3,
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 67

 DoD Chief
Information Officer, “Sharing Data, Information, and Information Technology (IT)
Services in the Department of Defense,” DODI 8320.02, August 5, 2013,
 DoD
Chief Information Officer, “Implementing the Sharing of Data, Information, and
Information Technology (IT) Services in the Department of Defense,” DODI 8320.07,
August 5, 2015,

Chief Information Officer, “DoD Standard Operating Procedures for Adjudicating Data
Sharing or Restricted Access Disputes,” (Department of Defense, May 5, 2021),

0Operating%20Procedures%20for%20Adjudicating%20Data%20Sharing%20or%20
Restricted%20Access%20Disputes.pdf.
55 Kathleen H. Hicks, “Creating Data Advantage,” (Deputy Secretary of Defense
Memorandum, May 5, 2021), 
1/0/DEPUTY-SECRETARY-OF-DEFENSE-MEMORANDUM.PDF; Secretary Pete
Hegseth, “Artificial Intelligence Strategy for the Department of War,” (Secretary of War
Memorandum, January 9, 2026),

INTELLIGENCE-STRATEGY-FOR-THE-DEPARTMENT-OF-WAR.PDF.
56 The importance of the development-deployment-feedback loop is argued in Jeffrey
Ding, “Machine Failing: How Systems Acquisition and Software Development Flaws
Contribute to Military Accidents,” Texas National Security Review 8, 1 (Winter
2024/2025): 9–29, 
57 Joint Force Development, “Joint Targeting”. (Joint Publication JP 3-60, September 28,
2018), Appendix C, Section 4,

1-F-0520_JP_3-60_9-28-2018.pdf.
58 Major Kevin Conner, Major Paul Lambertson, and Major Matthew Roberson,
“Analyzing the Air Operations Center (AOC) Air Tasking Order (ATO) Process using
Theory of Constraints (TOC)” (Air Force Institute of Technology, June 13, 2005), 20–23,

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 68

59 Department of the Air Force, “Operational Procedures—Air Operations Center
(AOC)”, (Air Force Manual AFMAN 13-1AOC, Volume 3, June 25, 2024), 
publishing.af.mil/production/1/af_a3/publication/afman13-1aocv3/afman13-
1aocv3_.pdf.
60 Secondary sources include: Department of the Air Force, “Operations,” (Air Force
Doctrine Publication 3-0, January 22, 2025),

Department of the Air Force, “Command and Control,” (Air Force Doctrine Publication
3-0.1, January 22, 2025), 
0_1/AFDP3-0.1CommandandControl.pdf; Department of the Air Force, “Targeting,” (Air
Force Doctrine Publication 3-60, May 1, 2026),

TARGETING.pdf; Department of the Air Force, “Operations,” (Air Force Doctrine
Publication 3-0, January 22, 2025),

Department of the Air Force, “Planning,” (Air Force Doctrine Publication 5-0, January
22, 2025),

Department of Defense, “Command and Control for Joint Air Operations,” (Joint
Publication JP-3-56.1, November 14, 1994),
 Department
of the Army, “Army Operations and the Air Tasking Cycle (ATC),” (Center for Army
Lessons Learned, NO. 24-811, ),

and-the-air-tasking-cycle-nov-23-public.pdf; Major Robert P. Winkler, “The Evolution
of the Joint ATO Cycle” (Joint Forces Staff College, Joint Advanced Warfighting School,
May 15, 2006), 
61 Colonel Frederick Coleman, “Beyond the AOC — Building the Next Generation of
Operational Command and Control” (Air University (AU), Wild Blue Yonder Online
Journal, October 28, 2021), 
Yonder/Articles/Article-Display/Article/2825500/beyond-the-aoc-building-the-next-
generation-of-operational-command-and-control/.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 69

62 Juliet Van Wagenen, “Lockheed Martin Upgrades U.S. Air Force ATOMS,” Aviation
Tech Today, October 19, 2015, 
martin-upgrades-us-air-force-atoms/.
63 Captain Carrie Volpe, “609th AOC Optimizes ATO Production, First to Use KRADOS
Operationally,” U.S. Air Force Central Public Affairs, May 7, 2021,

production-first-to-use-krados-operationally/; Brian W. Everstine, “AFCENT Can Now
Generate Air Tasking Orders in the Cloud,” Air & Space Forces Magazine, May 14,
2021, 
orders-in-the-cloud/; Kessel Run and Ninth Air Force (Air Forces Central), “AFCENT’s
609th AOC Shifts to User-Focused Software Suite,” U.S. Air Force Central Public
Affairs, November 20, 2022, 
Display/Article/3239503/afcents-609th-aoc-shifts-to-user-focused-software-suite/;
Staff Sargeant Cassandra Johnson, “ACC, Kessel Run C2 Leaders Discuss Evolution of
Air Operation Centers,” Air Combat Command Public Affairs, March 20, 2023,

leaders-discuss-evolution-of-air-operation-centers/.
64 “Air Tasking Order Planning System (ATOPS),” BAE Systems, accessed February 8,
2026, 
-atops-.
65 “Raft Awarded Contract by Pacific Air Forces to Build ‘AOC Anywhere’,” Raft,
October 22, 2024,

build-aoc-anywhere/.
66 Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “Air Mobility Command Tries AI to Speed Up Airlift Planning,”
Breaking Defense, August 2, 2024, 
command-tries-ai-to-speed-up-airlift-planning/.
67 Senior Airman Ashley Thrash, “Beyond the Board: New AI Innovations in Digital
Scheduling,” Department of the Air Force AI Accelerator, October 24, 2022,
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 70

innovations-in-digital-scheduling/.
68 Jeremy Ludwig, Bart Presnell, Les Loomis et al., “Deploying an Intelligent Pairing
Assistant for Air Operation Centers” (Air Force Research Laboratory, January 25, 2013),

69 See for example this report on Amazon’s Logistics Statistics: “Amazon Logistics
Statistics,” Capital One Shopping Research, January 7, 2026,

70 Examples of research publications: Verbytskyi Yaroslav, “Delivery Routes
Optimization Using Machine Learning Algorithms” (European University, 2023),

Chuck Holland, Jack Levis, Ranganath Nuggehalli et. al., “UPS Optimizes Delivery
Routes,” INFORMS Journal on Applied Analytics 47, 1 (2017),
 Nicholas G. Hall and Chris N. Potts, “Supply
Chain Scheduling: Batching and Delivery,” INFORMS Operations Research 51, 4 (2003):
566–584, Setareh Boshrouei Shargh,
Mostafa Zandieh, Ashkan Ayough, Farbod Farhadi, “Scheduling in Services: A Review
and Bibliometric Analysis,” Operations Management Research 17 (): 754–
783, Alessandro Agnetis, Jean-Charles
Billaut, Michael Pinedo et. al., “Fifty Years of Research in Scheduling—Theory and
Applications,” European Journal of Operational Research 327, 2 ():
367–393, 
71 Examples of trade articles: Obi Tabansi, “How UPS’ ORION Algorithm Transformed
Its Route Optimization,” Supply Chain Nuggets, July 26, 2025,

optimization/; Nicholas Shields, “UPS Is Turning to Predictive Analytics,” Business
Insider, July 20, 2018, 
algorithm-2018-7; Atit Shah, “AI Route Optimization Saves Money, Cuts Fuel
Consumption and Provides Faster Delivery Times,” Manufacturing Tomorrow, January
8, 2025, 
optimization-saves-money-cuts-fuel-consumption-and-provides-faster-delivery-
times/24059/; Carsten Krause, “UPS and Agentic AI: A Case Study in Logistics
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 71

Innovation,” The CDO Times, January 6, 2025, 
and-agentic-ai-a-case-study-in-logistics-innovation/.
72 Examples of documents released by the delivery companies or associated companies:
“Maximizing the Efficiency of Amazon’s Own Delivery Networks,” Amazon Science,
October 14, 2022, 
amazons-own-delivery-networks;
“The History of Amazon’s Forecasting Algorithm”, Amazon Science, August 9, 2021,

algorithm; “Route-Optimization 101: Algorithms Behind Faster Delivery,” Singdata,
June 6, 2025, 
delivery/; Arnav Parihar, “Real-World Examples of AI Route Optimization in Logistics?”
Debales.ai (blog), March 16, 2026, 
route-optimization-in-logistics.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 72