Data Brief
The U.S. Aerial
Drone Market
Authors

Kyle Miller

Sam Bresnick

Jacob Feldgoise

Christian Schoeberl

Executive Summary
The importance of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), or drones, is growing rapidly in
national defense and security efforts. While the United States has historically led in
military drone development, the global commercial market is now dominated by
lower-cost, dual-use platforms, many produced by Chinese companies. In response to
concerns over supply chain dependencies and Chinese export controls, the U.S.
government is prioritizing the growth of a self-sufficient domestic drone industry,
exemplified by the Trump administration’s executive order “Unleashing American
Drone Dominance” and the Department of Defense’s Replicator initiative.
This report assesses the current state of the U.S. drone industry, focusing on the types
of platforms marketed in the United States and the financial health of U.S.-
headquartered UAV companies. Using data from the Association for Uncrewed Vehicle
Systems International’s (AUVSI) Uncrewed Systems & Robotics Database (USRD) and
PitchBook, the analysis finds that most U.S. drone companies focus on small UAVs
(Groups 1-3), and only a handful of larger defense firms develop more complex
military systems (Groups 4-5).
Most U.S. drone companies are privately held, venture-backed companies, many of
which were founded after 2010. Investment activity is concentrated in companies that
produce smaller, commercial drones, while venture interest is limited in developers of
larger military systems. However, significant gaps remain in publicly available data,
particularly regarding manufacturing capacity and supply chain resilience, both of
which are critical factors for determining the broader health of the U.S. UAV
ecosystem.
This report provides a snapshot of the U.S. drone industry, but a deeper analysis of
component supply chains and manufacturing capabilities would allow for a fuller
assessment of the industry’s ability to meet future national security needs. Greater
data sharing between government and industry will be essential to identify supply
chain vulnerabilities and guide future policy.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 1

Table of Contents
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... 3
Methodology ............................................................................................................................................ 5
Platform-Level Analysis ................................................................................................................... 5
U.S. Company-Level Analysis ........................................................................................................ 5
U.S.-Marketed UAVs by Market Type and Application .............................................................. 7
U.S.-Headquartered Companies in the U.S. UAV Market ....................................................... 10
Ownership Status of U.S. UAV Companies ............................................................................ 12
Investment in U.S. UAV Companies .......................................................................................... 14
Future Work........................................................................................................................................... 17
Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................. 19
Appendix A: Methodology ................................................................................................................ 20
Endnotes ................................................................................................................................................. 21
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2

Introduction
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) of all sizes are playing an increasingly important role
in defense and national security. While the United States has long been one of the
leading developers of military-grade drones, cheaper, multi-use commercial platforms
developed in other countries have in recent years become more useful across a range
of applications.1 The mass production and deployment of small UAVs for military
operations in the Russia-Ukraine war exemplifies this trend.2
Despite the United States’ historical predominance in military drones, China has
emerged as a leading producer of cheaper multi-use drones. One of the most
prominent companies, Shenzhen-based DJI, reportedly controls around 90% of the
global commercial market for small UAVs, and has been accused of flooding the
market with government-subsidized drones to undermine American companies’
competitiveness.3
Due to concerns about overreliance on Chinese companies for commercial UAVs and
components, as well as recent Chinese export controls on various Chinese-origin drone
parts, the U.S. government has signaled its interest in working more closely with
domestic drone manufacturers.4 This is exemplified by the recent executive order
“Unleashing American Drone Dominance” and the Department of Defense’s (DOD)
Replicator initiative. The White House effort seeks to accelerate the integration of
UAVs into the National Airspace System, scale U.S. drone commercialization, and
strengthen the domestic industrial base.5 The DOD initiative, overseen by the Defense
Innovation Unit (DIU), aimed to field “multiple thousands” of cheaper, attritable drones
by .6 The DOD invested more than $500 million in fiscal year 2024 to
begin procuring these systems at scale, and the Trump administration has indicated
that it will continue to support further investments in the initiative.7 Whether Replicator
met these goals is unclear.
There are concerns, however, that the U.S. drone industry will be unable to provide the
DOD with the platforms it will need in a future conflict. It is also unclear how many of
these systems will be needed, as the U.S. military’s procurement requirements will
ultimately depend on several factors, including where, and for what purpose, the
systems are intended to be deployed. On the one hand, Replicator has primarily
catered to Indo-Pacific Command’s needs, providing thousands of larger, longer-range,
and higher-capacity drones for the Pacific theater.8 On the other hand, if one considers
the Russia-Ukraine war an appropriate benchmark (it was, after all, what spurred
Replicator), the DOD would need to acquire hundreds of thousands or potentially
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3

millions of smaller, shorter-range, and less sophisticated first-person-view (FPV)
drones.9
Regardless of the types of platforms that will be acquired and the theaters to which
they will be deployed, there is a clear demand signal for drone acquisition—but is the
U.S. drone industry robust enough to provide the Pentagon with the systems it will
need in future conflicts? This question is difficult to answer, largely due to the limited
amount of relevant publicly available data on U.S. drone companies. Most, if not all,
U.S. drone companies do not publicize their manufacturing capacity, and the majority of
the firms are private and thus not required to disclose information on their finances and
investments.
However, using the data that is available, this report provides: (1) a snapshot of the
platforms marketed in the United States; (2) a high-level examination of the U.S.-
based drone developers’ finances. To do this, the U.S. drone industry is first divided
into subcategories; given the diversity of drone types and unique manufacturing
challenges, the industry is examined through unmanned aerial system (UAS)
classification levels and applications. The DOD categorizes drones into five “UAS
groups” based on weight, operating altitude, and speed.* This taxonomy is used here,
allowing for a better categorization of drones that various companies manufacture.
Second, the financial data of U.S. UAV companies is analyzed, including information on
ownership status and financial backers.†
This approach provides insights into a significant portion of the U.S. drone industry. But
more granular elements of the industry such as drone manufacturing capacity or
supply chains of drone components are not investigated here. Bottlenecks in supply
chains for components such as batteries, motors, and sensors can significantly
influence industry’s ability to scale manufacturing as well as the DOD’s ability to boost
acquisition. A more comprehensive assessment would include analysis of drone
components and the companies that develop them, as well as the upstream supply
chains of the components themselves. This is discussed further in the section of this
report titled “Future Work.”
* Note this report’s focus on weight and operating altitude to designate platforms with UAS groups.
Speed is omitted because USRD lacks that data for many platforms.
† This classification scheme allows for breaking the drone industry down into more coherent segments
that can be assessed individually (e.g., how many companies developed large military UAVs versus
small, commercial FPVs). Moreover, it contextualizes the financial data of the companies developing
different types of platforms (e.g., newer FPV manufacturers being more likely to receive venture capital
funding than high-revenue defense primes that exclusively develop military drones).
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4

Methodology
To overview the U.S. drone market and gauge the financial health of the domestic
drone industry, data from AUVSI’s Uncrewed Systems & Robotics Database (USRD) is
used as a starting point.10 This database includes a comprehensive list of UAVs
actively marketed in the United States, the companies that develop them, and their
technical specifications. The data is primarily sourced from the companies’ websites, as
well as news releases or other open-source information if the companies do not detail
this information. The analysis proceeds in two parts. First, a platform-level analysis of
UAVs actively marketed in the United States is conducted. This is followed by a
company-level analysis, looking only at firms that are headquartered in the country.
See Appendix A for more information on the methodology.
Platform-Level Analysis
The technical specifications provided in the USRD dataset include information
necessary to assign each UAV to its appropriate UAS group, as classified by the DOD.
There are likely instances where multiple companies are involved in the development
of a single platform, but the focus here is on the single primary developer for each
platform, as designated by USRD. Data from USRD used in this analysis was last
updated in , and it does not include platforms developed or companies
established since then.
The five UAS groups in which platforms are categorized are summarized as follows:
Groups 1 and 2 drones are generally considered “small,” as their respective maximum
ground takeoff weights are 0-20 and 21-55 pounds, and their respective normal
operating altitudes are below 1,200 and 3,500 feet. Group 3 drones weigh below
1,320 pounds and normally operate at altitudes below 18,000 feet; they are generally
considered a middle ground between smaller, dual-use platforms and larger, military
platforms. Lastly, UAS Groups 4 and 5 generally consist of military platforms; they
both weigh more than 1,320 pounds, with the primary difference being that the former
normally operates below 18,000 feet and the latter above that altitude. UAVs missing
the necessary fields are omitted from this analysis, but some of the fields for larger
platforms have been added manually.
U.S. Company-Level Analysis
Next, an analysis of the U.S.-headquartered companies that market UAVs in the United
States is conducted. The drone companies listed in USRD are matched to PitchBook, a
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5

platform that provides private and public market financial data.11 Matching the
companies in the two datasets allows for analysis of the financial information of UAV
developers, including company ownership status, investor histories, and capital raised.
The process involves searching for the production companies’ exact names or variants,
followed by a manual review of each company’s name, location, website, and history in
order to confirm a successful match.
Of the 187 companies in the USRD dataset that actively market UAVs and are
designated as being headquartered in the United States, 123 (66%) were matched
successfully to PitchBook (see Table 5 in Appendix A).* Therefore, the data provides
insights into the historical and current interest from private capital in a subset of U.S.-
headquartered UAV companies.
PitchBook tends to capture companies with some investment presence (either
providing or receiving funding), so it is not surprising that a portion of the USRD
companies could not be matched. These unmatched companies tend to be smaller
and/or younger, and either receive government funding or have not yet raised private
capital. Therefore, this paper analyzes an important subset of the U.S. drone industry
and provides insights into the finances and market presence of many U.S.-based UAV
developers. It does not capture all companies, and the conclusions drawn from the
data should be considered indicative of broader trends rather than an exhaustive
representation of the industry as a whole. For more information on the methodology,
see Appendix A.
* Note that some companies in USRD designated as being headquartered in the United States may be
subsidiaries of parent companies not headquartered in the country. When matching USRD companies to
PitchBook, two out-of-business companies (Top Flight Technologies and Flirtey/SkyDrop) were
identified that were incorrectly labeled in USRD as being active. These companies were manually
removed from the USRD data, along with the two platforms they produce (the Airborg H8 10K from Top
Flight Technologies and the Eagle from Flirtey/SkyDrop).
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6

U.S.-Marketed UAVs by Market Type and Application
According to USRD, 222 UAV developers collectively market 593 unique platforms in
the United States. There is public data on 456 platforms’ weight and altitude, allowing
the platforms to be categorized into UAS groups (the remaining 137 platforms that
cannot be categorized are omitted). As displayed in Table 1, the vast majority of these
UAVs are in UAS Groups 1-3; only 33 are in Groups 4 and 5. This distribution is to be
expected, given the higher costs and greater technical complexity associated with
developing military-grade drones in UAS Groups 4 and 5.
Table 1. U.S.-Marketed UAVs by UAS Group
UAS Number of Maximum Gross Normal Operating Airspeed
Group Platforms Takeoff Weight (lbs) Altitude (ft) (knots)
1 174 0 – 20 <1,200 AGL* <100
2 125 21 – 55 <3,500 <250
3 124 <1,320 <18,000 MSL** <250
4 9 >1,320 <18,000 MSL Any airspeed
5 24 >1,320 >18,000 Any airspeed
Unknown 137 N/A N/A N/A
* Above ground level (AGL).
** Mean sea level (MSL).
Note: USRD often does not specify whether normal operating altitude is AGL or MSL.
Sources: (1) CSET analysis of AUVSI USRD; (2) “Classification of the Unmanned Aerial Systems,” e-
education, Pennsylvania State University, accessed July 15, 2024, 
g892/node/5.
USRD also provides the sector(s) for which platforms are marketed based on the
companies’ websites and platform descriptions. The majority of UAS Group 4–5 drones
are marketed to military customers, primarily due to the fact that larger drones
generally have explicitly military uses, and possibly because the Federal Aviation
Administration has more stringent regulations around domestic use of larger platforms
within the National Airspace System.12 Notably, 12 of them are advertised for
commercial markets; this includes platforms such as the Volodrone and R550X, which
are marketed for logistics and precision agriculture applications. Moreover, only one
Group 5 platform is not marketed to the military. The Mercy platform, which was
designed by Avius Air Delivery (the Yates Electrospace Corporation’s civilian
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7

subsidiary), is marketed solely for disaster response and logistics in the civil sector.13
The majority of platforms in UAS Groups 1-2, on the other hand, are marketed to the
commercial and civil sectors, though a sizable portion is also marketed for military
uses.
That said, most drones, regardless of UAS group, can be used or repurposed for a
variety of applications, which allows them to be advertised for a range of sectors. This
diversity is a natural byproduct of UAV characteristics and components: they are flying
packages of hardware, software, sensors, communications, and (at times) munitions.
These dual- and multi-use characteristics are reflected in Figure 1, which displays the
sectors for which the platforms are marketed.
Figure 1. Number of U.S.-Marketed UAVs by Market Type and UAS Group
Note: According to AUVSI, USRD primarily focuses on platforms marketed for commercial, civil, and
military uses, which is one of the reasons why fewer platforms that are marketed for the consumer and
academic sectors are seen in the dataset. Of the platforms in USRD, 137 could not be categorized into a
UAS group, and they are therefore not reflected in this figure.
Source: CSET analysis of AUVSI USRD.
USRD also provides information about the applications for which the platforms are
marketed, representing how the primary manufacturer intends its platform to be used.
Platforms from each UAS group can be used for intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance; imaging; and surveying, because they possess the requisite cameras
and sensors. However, different groups tend to be marketed for particular applications,
as shown in Figure 2, which displays the top applications for which each UAS group is
marketed. For example, Group 1 drones are rarely marketed for logistics or
communications because they have extremely limited payload capacity, while only
Group 4 and 5 drones have attack and weapons delivery in their top 10 marketed
applications, because they can handle larger munitions and payloads.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8

Notably, although smaller drones have increasingly been used for attack and weapons
delivery in conflicts such as Ukraine, these are not within the top 10 applications of
Group 1 drones (as marketed by the developers). This may be due to the fact that
much of the data in USRD was populated before the proliferation of weaponized FPVs
in conflicts such as Ukraine; therefore, Group 1 drones were not frequently marketed
for weapons delivery, even though they have been used to carry small quantities of
munitions.
Figure 2. Number of U.S.-Marketed UAVs for Top 10 U.S.-Marketed UAV Applications
by UAS Group
Note: Of the platforms in USRD, 137 could not be categorized into a UAS Group, and they are therefore
not reflected in this figure.
Source: CSET analysis of AUVSI USRD.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9

U.S.-Headquartered Companies in the U.S. UAV Market
Of the 222 companies in USRD that actively market UAVs in the United States, 123
are headquartered in the country, develop platforms that can be designated into UAS
groups, and can be linked to financial data in PitchBook. The remainder of this report
focuses on these 123 companies.* U.S.-headquartered companies market 342
platforms, representing approximately 58% of the total platforms in USRD. As
displayed in Figure 3, most of these companies develop smaller platforms, and there is
a drop in the number of companies as platforms become larger and more complex. For
example, roughly half of the companies manufacture at least one Group 1 platform,
while only six and eight companies develop platforms in UAS Groups 4 and 5,
respectively. This makes sense, given that there are fewer platforms in larger UAS
groups.
Figure 3: Number of U.S. Companies and U.S.-Marketed UAVs per UAS Group
Note: Some companies develop platforms across multiple UAS groups; therefore, the total count of
companies is greater than the total number of U.S.-based companies linked to PitchBook. There are 87
platforms developed by 49 U.S.-headquartered companies in USRD that could not be categorized into a
UAS group, and they are therefore not reflected in this figure.
Source: CSET analysis of AUVSI USRD and PitchBook data.
* The 123 U.S.-headquartered companies in USRD correspond to 122 companies in PitchBook, because
different (actively marketed) platforms are listed for both FLIR Systems and Teledyne FLIR; FLIR
Systems was renamed to Teledyne FLIR when the company was acquired by Teledyne Technologies.
Therefore, analysis of PitchBook data (in the sections titled “Ownership Status of U.S. UAV Companies”
and “Investors”) assesses only 122 unique companies.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10

A focus on U.S. companies that market five or more platforms reveals that some
companies offer a range of platforms across UAS groups, while others specialize more
in particular groups. For example, Challenger Aerospace Systems, which produces the
most platforms overall (alongside AeroVironment), manufactures at least two
platforms in each UAS group, while Skydio and UAV Solutions market almost
exclusively small Group 1 drones. Among these companies, Group 1 platforms remain
the most common offering, likely because smaller systems are cheaper and easier to
prototype, test, and manufacture, especially for smaller companies. Figure 4 breaks
down the platforms offered by U.S. companies that market five or more platforms.
Figure 4. Number of U.S.-Marketed UAVs by Companies Marketing Five or More
Platforms
Note: Of the platforms developed by U.S.-headquartered companies in USRD, 87 could not be
categorized into a UAS group, and they are therefore not reflected in this figure.
Source: CSET analysis of AUVSI USRD and PitchBook data.
Only four of the top firms produce Group 4 or 5 platforms, two of which are defense
primes (Northrop Grumman and General Atomics). This aligns with broader trends in
the defense industry, where larger, established companies are more likely to have the
expertise and capital to produce expensive and complex military systems. General
Atomics, which is the manufacturer of military drones such as the MQ-1 Predator and
MQ-9 Reaper (and their variants such as the MQ-1C and MQ-9B SkyGuardian),
exclusively develops Group 5 platforms. Northrop Grumman, the developer of the
Global Hawk, develops both Group 3 and 5 platforms. Notably absent from the list is
Lockheed Martin, a defense prime that develops Group 1 and 2 drones such as the
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11

Condor XEP and Desert Hawk III; Lockheed only marketed three platforms that could
be categorized into a UAS group.14
Ownership Status of U.S. UAV Companies
The subset of the U.S. drone industry analyzed in this paper consists primarily of
privately held companies (62%), more than 90% of which have received financial
backing. The preponderance of recently founded, privately owned companies that have
received early stage or seed financial backing indicates that the U.S. drone market
consists of many relatively small startups.
The data also includes mergers and acquisitions: 29% of the companies have been
acquired or merged, and now either operate as subsidiaries (77%) or have been
absorbed into their parent companies (23%). In a notable example of this activity, one
of the most active drone manufacturers, Challenger Aerospace Systems, was acquired
in 2024 and is now a subsidiary of Resilient Energy.15
Table 2: Number of U.S. UAV Companies by Ownership Status
Ownership Status Number of Companies
Absorbed 8
Acquired/Merged
Operating Subsidiary 27
Backing 70
Privately Held
No Backing 6
Publicly Held 11
Total 122
Note: A successful match was made of 123 U.S. companies from USRD to PitchBook. However, two of
those companies matched to the same Pitchbook entity, so the total number of companies in the
PitchBook data is 122.
Source: CSET analysis of PitchBook data.
As shown in Figure 5, most of the companies were formed in or after 2010, which
aligns with the broader growth of investments in the drone industry, as well as the
development and proliferation of commercial drone technology.16 From January 1,
2010, through June 30, 2025, 81 U.S. UAV companies were founded; of those, 63
companies are privately held, 17 were merged or acquired, and one is publicly held.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12

During this period, Red Cat Holdings and TCOM were involved in the most mergers
and acquisitions.
Figure 5. Number of U.S.-Headquartered UAV Companies by Founding Year and
Current Ownership Status
Note: Colors indicate the companies’ current ownership status, not the year in which ownership status
changed. For example, nine companies founded in 2014 have since been acquired or merged; for all nine
companies, the acquisition or merger took place in 2020 or later. There is also a notable drop in founding
activity after 2021, likely due to a time lag in updating PitchBook data.
Source: CSET analysis of PitchBook data.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 13

Investment in U.S. UAV Companies
PitchBook data likely provides the best available snapshot of U.S. drone company
financing, but it comes with limitations that constrain the ability to estimate the total
amount of investment. While the database provides estimates of deal values, these
numbers are not reliable for several reasons, including the lack of public disclosures by
the companies involved.* This also limits the ability to track trends and forecast
potential growth in the wider U.S. drone market. Therefore, to indicate companies’
interest in the U.S. drone market, this report uses the number of deals in which funders
have participated and the number of companies in which they have invested.
Using PitchBook, 283 investment deals were identified involving U.S. UAV companies
from January 1, 2010, through June 30, 2025. As displayed in Table 3, developers of
UAS Groups 1 and 2 were involved in the most deals. This aligns with the fact that
most companies develop these types of platforms, and many of them are private and
were founded after 2010, making them more likely to seek funding. Conversely,
notably fewer deals are found for companies developing Group 4 and 5 drones, likely
because there are far fewer companies, and they are older and more established,
meaning they likely do not require additional outside investment. However, a more
even frequency of deals is found when controlling for the number of companies per
UAS group. Companies developing Group 2 and Group 5 platforms had the most (2.6)
and least (1.6) average deals per company, respectively, while developers of UAS
Group 1, 3, and 4 platforms were involved in 2.1, 2.2, and 2.0 average deals per
company, respectively.
The disparity in deals for companies developing smaller and larger drones could be
explained by several factors. Group 5 drones are generally marketed toward
governments and/or militaries, which may make them less attractive investments
because of the limited customer pool and challenges in establishing contracts with
governments. Moreover, they are typically far more expensive, complex, and
technologically advanced, requiring greater injections of capital, longer production
timelines, and more testing and evaluation. Perhaps most important, the companies
* For example, private companies are not required to disclose details about their finances. Even when
deals are reported, their values are often not publicly disclosed. The database may update information
well after a deal closes, which could lead to discrepancies over time. Therefore, it is challenging to
ascertain how much money is being invested in U.S. drone companies. This is a key blind spot that limits
the ability to track the growth of the U.S. drone market over time.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 14

that produce these platforms are generally more established and may not need or
solicit venture backing.
Table 3. Number of Investment Deals Involving U.S. UAV Companies by UAS Group
Number of
UAS Group Number of Deals Companies Average Deals per Company
1 113 53 2.1
2 107 41 2.6
3 69 32 2.2
4 12 6 2.0
5 13 8 1.6
Source: CSET analysis of AUVSI USRD and PitchBook data. Data last pulled from PitchBook Aug. 24,
2025.
An assessment of the top investors by deal count, as displayed in Table 4, shows that
Andreessen Horowitz, Founders Fund, and Y Combinator have been the most active
backers of identified U.S. drone companies. All three of these funders, which together
executed 34 unique deals involving firms in the dataset used for this report, backed
companies making platforms in UAS Groups 1-4, but predominantly Groups 1-3. The
top investor, Andreessen Horowitz, made 20 deals with five companies, including six
deals each with Shield AI, Skydio, and Anduril. Most of these deals consisted of later
stage venture capital (VC) funding. The prominence of Andreessen Horowitz may be
partly due to the fact that it has more assets under management than the other top
investors.* Founders Fund made a total of 10 deals, nine of which were with Anduril,
and one with Zenith Aerospace for seed round funding. Lastly, Y Combinator made a
total of 10 deals with five companies, including four with Volansi and three with Pyka
Inc. These deals were mostly accelerator/incubator funding as well as some early and
later stage VC funding.
* Assets under management means the current total market value of all the financial assets and
investments entrusted to an investment company.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 15

Table 4. Top Investors in U.S. UAV Companies by Number of Deals
Value of Investor’s Total Assets Under Management
Investor Name Number of Deals (mil USD)
Andreessen Horowitz 20 74,740
Founders Fund 10 12,000
Y Combinator 10 3,200
Lux Capital 7 5,000
Homebrew 7 210
Lockheed Martin Ventures 7 200
Note: Multiple investors often contribute to the same deal, which is why Andreessen Horowitz,
Founders Fund, and Y Combinator collectively contributed to only 34 unique deals.
Source: CSET analysis of PitchBook data. Data last pulled from PitchBook, Aug. 24, 2025.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 16

Future Work
This report provides high-level insights into the state of the U.S. drone industry at the
platform- and company-levels but does not investigate drone components and their
supply chains. Key components such as motors, batteries, sensors, and software are
often developed by companies that do not themselves develop the platforms and are
therefore not included in our platform-level data. Supply chain bottlenecks for such
components can impact entire segments of the drone market, shaping the downstream
costs of the platforms and the ability to scale manufacturing. For example, after Russia
invaded Ukraine in 2022, and for much of the war that has followed, Ukrainian drone
manufacturers relied heavily on Chinese suppliers for drone components. Due partly to
Chinese export restrictions, however, Ukraine later prioritized localizing domestic drone
component production.17 In another example, in , China placed sanctions
on the U.S. drone manufacturer Skydio, forcing the company to begin rationing
batteries and constraining platform manufacturing.18
A more comprehensive assessment of the U.S. drone industry would analyze domestic
drone companies’ manufacturing capabilities and firms that produce drone
components, as well as the upstream supply chains of the components themselves.
This would require breaking down each individual platform into its subcomponents
and assessing all of the companies involved in their development. Acquiring enough
reliable data at this level is challenging, with limited public information on components
for many of the drones assessed here (particularly those developed for military end
users). Moreover, the sheer quantity of companies involved and the complexities of
component-level supply chains further complicate such analysis. Finally, many
component developers likely sell products to customers outside of the drone industry,
so assessing their overall finances could include irrelevant data and paint an inaccurate
picture of the market.
More research into drone components and their supply chains, as well as into the
financial health of the companies involved, is necessary for a reliable assessment of
the United States’ drone manufacturing capacity.19 To that end, increased data sharing
among the DOD, platform manufacturers, and component manufacturers is essential.
This is key to identifying potential bottlenecks and vulnerabilities, which could inform
DOD policies and initiatives such as Replicator I and II, as well as aid the DOD in
contracting with drone manufacturers and procuring platforms. The need for this data
is echoed in the Defense Innovation Board’s recent report on scaling unmanned
weapon systems, which calls for the Pentagon to identify specific UAV components
“where it sees critical national security supply chain risks.”20 The report briefly
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 17

discusses supply chain vulnerabilities such as critical minerals and batteries, and
highlights the challenges in tracking a dynamic, largely commercial market. But, as
with many reports on U.S. drone manufacturing, there is ultimately insufficient public
data to gauge the manufacturing capacity and overall financial health of the industry.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 18

Conclusion
The U.S. drone industry is characterized by many small companies focused on
producing comparatively lightweight, commercially oriented platforms, and a smaller
group of established defense firms producing larger, military-grade systems.
Developers of smaller drones, particularly those in UAS Groups 1-3, received more
investments in the time frame considered here, reflecting both the commercial market’s
broader appeal and the relative ease of entry compared with the more capital-
intensive and specialized military drone sector. However, this investment pattern raises
questions about the industry’s ability to meet future defense needs, especially as the
Trump administration seeks to “unleash American drone dominance” and the
Replicator initiative seeks to rapidly procure large numbers of systems.
While this analysis provides a snapshot of U.S. drone developers and their financial
backing, it also points to major blind spots. Chief among these are domestic drone
company manufacturing capacity and the supply chains that underpin drone
production. Critical components such as batteries, sensors, and software are often
sourced from specialized suppliers that fall outside the scope of platform-focused
analyses. These component-level dependencies pose serious risks to U.S.
manufacturing resilience. Without more detailed data on the supply chains and
production capacities of both platform manufacturers and component developers, it is
difficult to fully assess the U.S. drone industry’s ability to scale production and
withstand external shocks. Greater data sharing between industry and government
will be crucial for identifying bottlenecks, mitigating risks, and ensuring that U.S. drone
production can meet the demands of future conflicts and national security priorities.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 19

Appendix A: Methodology
This publication draws from two dimensions of analysis: an overview of the actively
marketed UAVs and the financial status of the production companies. Financial status
refers to the ownership and investor histories of, as well as the capital raised by, U.S.-
based companies that produce UAVs. While these indicators provide insights into the
historical and current interest from private capital into domestically active UAV
companies, they do not benchmark the drone market relative to other industries.
Relying on USRD for this report, the first step was to gather a list of platform
manufacturers that develop drones actively marketed in the United States. To assess
companies’ financial standing, these manufacturers were then matched to their
corporate entities as recorded by PitchBook. Of the 222 companies in USRD, 143 could
be matched to PitchBook. Because this project focuses on the U.S. drone industry, the
data was filtered to matched companies headquartered in the United States, resulting
in 123 companies. The full USRD dataset includes 187 U.S.-headquartered companies,
so the set of 123 used here represents 66% of U.S.-headquartered companies in
USRD.21 Given that PitchBook is more likely to include established companies with a
history of investment funding, the non-matched manufacturers are likely smaller or
specialized producers. These smaller producers are important to the domestic drone
landscape; however, the matched percentage is sufficient for the analytical goals of
this data brief.
Table 5. Matching AUVSI USRD Companies to PitchBook Entities
Total USRD 222
Total U.S. USRD 187
Total Matched 143
Total Matched U.S. 123 *
U.S. Companies Matched to PitchBook 66%
* In USRD, 64 companies were labeled as U.S. companies but did not match to PitchBook.
Source: CSET analysis of AUVSI USRD and PitchBook data.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 20

Authors
Kyle Miller is a research analyst at CSET, where he works on the CyberAI Project
focusing on the impact of open models, AI efficiency, and compute.
Sam Bresnick is a research fellow and an Andrew W. Marshall fellow at CSET,
focusing on the national security applications of AI, U.S.-China tech competition, and
Chinese technology policy.
Jacob Feldgoise is a senior data research analyst at CSET, where his research focuses
on AI chip supply chains, export controls, and emerging technologies talent.
Christian Schoeberl is a former senior data research analyst at CSET.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Emelia Probasco, Owen Daniels, and Aditi Kumar for their feedback
and assistance. They are grateful for the valuable reviews provided by Sam Bendett, T.
S. Allen, and David Klein. They also like to thank Dale Brauner for fact-checking, Annie
Rehill and Shelton Fitch for editorial support, Jason Ly for graphic design, and Rai
Hasen Masoud Kharal for formatting.
© 2025 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit 
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20240048
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 21

Endnotes
1 Molly Campbell, “Drone Proliferation Dataset” (Center for a New American Security, ),

2 Kyle Miller, “The Future of Drones in Ukraine II: A Report from the NATO-Ukraine Defense Innovators
Forum” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, ),

defense-innovators-forum/.
3 Zeyi Yangarchive, “Why China’s Dominance in Commercial Drones Has Become a Global Security
Matter,” MIT Technology Review, ,
 David
Kirton, ”Game of Drones: Chinese Giant DJI Hit by U.S. Tensions, Staff Defections,” Reuters, ,

u-s-tensions-staff-defections-idUSKBN2AZ0PV/.
4 Siladitya Ray, “Largest U.S. Drone Manufacturer Says It Will Need to Ration Batteries for Customers
after Sanctions by China,” Forbes, ,

need-to-ration-batteries-for-customers-after-sanctions-by-china/; “China Revises Drone Export
Controls amid Western Scrutiny,” Reuters, , 
defense/china-adjust-drone-export-control-measures-sept-1-2024-07-31/; Sean Carberry, “Defense
Innovation Unit Flying to Close Drone Gap,” National Defense,

close-drone-gap.
5 Exec. Order No. 14307, 90 FR 24727 (2025).
6 Defense Innovation Unit, “Replicator,” Department of Defense, 
7 Anthony Capaccio, “Pentagon’s Drone Initiative Called ‘Alive and Well’ under Trump,” Bloomberg,
, 
alive-and-well-under-trump; “Deputy Secretary of Defense Hicks Announces First Tranche of Replicator
Capabilities Focused on All Domain Attritable Autonomous Systems,” U.S. Department of Defense, , 
hicks-announces-first-tranche-of-replicator-capabil/.
8 Defense Innovation Unit, “Implementing the Department of Defense Replicator Initiative to Accelerate
All-Domain Attritable Autonomous Systems to Warfighters at Speed and Scale,” Department of
Defense, , 
replicator-initiative-to-accelerate.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 22

9 Maria Tril, “Ukrainian Defense Ministry Delivers over 1.2 Million Drones to Defenders in 2024,”
Euromaidan Press, , 
ministry-delivers-over-1-2-million-drones-to-defenders-in-2024/.
10 “Uncrewed Systems and Robotics Database,” Association for Uncrewed Vehicle Systems
International, accessed August 15, 2024, 
systems-and-robotics-database/.
11 “Who and What You Can Research with PitchBook,” PitchBook, accessed February 15, 2025,

12 Federal Aviation Administration, “Section 3. Large UAS (MGOW 55 Pounds or More),” chapter 11,
“Unmanned Aircraft Systems,” in Aeronautical Information Manual (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Transportation, August 7, 2025),

13 “AVIUS Readying Cargo UAV to Deliver Supplies to Combat Pandemic,” Silent Arrow, ,

pandemic.
14 “Global Hawk: Vigilance for a Changing World,” Northrop Grumman, accessed March 13, 2025,
 “AFRL and Lockheed Martin
Improve Endurance and Payload Capacity for Small Unmanned Aerial System, Condor,” Lockheed
Martin, , 
capacity-small-unmanned-aerial-system-condor; “Desert Hawk: Enhancing Warfighter Capabilities,”
Lockheed Martin, 2015, 
martin/rms/documents/desert-hawk/Desert_Hawk_Brochure.pdf.
15 “RENI - Resilient Energy Inc. Completes Acquisition of Challenger Aerospace & Defense Inc.
Expanding into $35 Billion Drone Market,” PR Newswire, ,

challenger-aerospace--defense-inc-expanding-into-35-billion-drone-market-302105542.html.
16 Ed Alvarado, “Global Companies Invest in Drones Despite Recession,” Drone Industry Insights, , 
17 Kateryna Bondar, “Ukraine’s Future Vision and Current Capabilities for Waging AI-Enabled
Autonomous Warfare” (Center for Strategic and International Studies, ),

autonomous-warfare; Aosheng Pusztaszeri, “Why China’s UAV Supply Chain Restrictions Weaken
Ukraine’s Negotiating Power” (Center for Security and International Studies, ),

power; “China Is Cutting Off Drone Supplies Critical to Ukraine War Effort,” Bloomberg, December
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 23

2024, 
critical-to-ukraine-war-effort?embedded-checkout=true.
18 Ray, “Largest U.S. Drone Manufacturer Says It Will Need to Ration Batteries for Customers after
Sanctions by China.”
19 Edlyn V. Levine and Fiona Murray, “How the U.S. and Its Allies Can Rebuild Economic Security,” MIT
Technology Review, , 
economic-security-competitiveness/.
20 Defense Innovation Board, A Pathway to Scaling Unmanned Weapons Systems (Washington, DC:
Department of Defense, 2025),

0Weapon%20Systems_250113.pdf.
21 For this report, "L3Harris Technologies (Canada)" was recoded to "L3Harris Technologies (United
States)." USRD previously classified L3Harris as a U.S. company; however, in the version of the USRD
used for this analysis, L3Harris was listed as a Canadian company. Using the USRD website on June 29,
2025, it was confirmed that USRD reverted L3Harris’s country affiliation to the United States, so the
same change was made in the data used for this analysis.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 24