A REPORT OF
THE CSIS
AEROSPACE
SECURITY
PROJECT
S P A C E
T H R E A T
A S S E S S M E N T
2 0 1 9
Principal Authors
TODD HARRISON
KAITLYN JOHNSON
THOMAS G. ROBERTS
Contributing Authors
MADISON BERGETHON
ALEXANDRA COULTRUP
Foreword
REP. JIM COOPER (D-TN)

S P A C E
T H R E A T
A S S E S S M E N T
2 0 1 9
Principal Authors
TODD HARRISON
KAITLYN JOHNSON
THOMAS G. ROBERTS
Contributing Authors
MADISON BERGETHON
ALEXANDRA COULTRUP
Foreword
REP. JIM COOPER (D-TN)
A REPORT OF THE
CSIS AEROSPACE SECURITY PROJECT

ABOUT CSIS
Established in Washington, D.C., over 50 years ago, the Center for Strategic
and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research
organization dedicated to providing strategic ins ights and policy solutions
to help decisionmakers chart a course toward a better world.
In late 2015, Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of
Trustees. Mr. Pritzker succeeded former U.S. senator Sam Nunn (D-GA), who
chaired the CSIS Board of Trustees from 1999 to 2015. CSIS is led by John J.
Hamre, who has served as president and chief executive officer since 2000.
Founded in 1962 by David M. Abshire and Admiral Arleigh Burke, CSIS is
one of the world’s preeminent international policy ins titutions focused on
defense and security; regional study; and transnational challenges ranging
from energy and trade to global development and economic integration.
For eight consecutive years, CSIS has been named the world’s number one
think tank for defense and national security by the University of Pennsylva-
nia’s “Go To Think Tank Index.”
The Center’s over 220 full-time staff and large network of affiliated schola rs
conduct research and analysis and develop policy initiatives that look to
the future and anticipate change. CSIS is regularly called upon by Congress,
the executive branch, the media, and others to explain the day’s events and
offer bipartisan recommendations to improve U.S. strategy.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed
herein should be understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2019 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
All rights reserved.
ABOUT ASP
The Aerospace Security Project (ASP) at CSIS explores the technological,
budgetary, and policy issues related to the air and space domains and in-
novative operational concepts for air and space forces. Part of the Interna-
tional Security Program at CSIS, the Aerospace Security Project is led by
Senior Fellow Todd Harrison. ASP’s research focuses on space security, air
dominance, long-range strike, and civil and commercial space. Learn more
at aerospace.csis.org.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report is made possible by general support to CSIS. No direct sponsor-
ship contributed to this report. The authors would like to thank Rep. Jim
Cooper (D-TN), Brian Weeden, Matthew P. Funaiole, and Caroline Amenabar
for their support of this project.
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 2003
202-887-0200 | 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019
II

CONTENTS
IV FOREWORD
1 INTRODUCTION
2 TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
3 Kinetic Physical
3 Non-Kinetic Physical
4 Electronic
5 Cyber
5 Threat Characteristics
8 CHINA
10 Space Organization and Doctrine
11 Counterspace Weapons
16 Summary
17 RUSSIA
18 Space Organization and Doctrine
19 Counterspace Weapons
24 Summary
25 IRAN
26 Space Organization and Doctrine
27 Counterspace Weapons
29 Summary
30 NORTH KOREA
31 Space Organization and Doctrine
32 Counterspace Weapons
34 Summary
35 OTHERS
36 Europe
37 India
38 Israel
38 Japan
39 Libya
39 Pakistan
39 Ukraine
39 Non-State Actors
41 WHAT TO WATCH
43 ABOUT THE AUTHORS
44 APPENDIX I
III

FOREWORD
WE ARE ALMOST AS DEPENDENT ON SATELLITES as we are on
the sun itself. They are our “infrastructure of infrastructure,”
enabling our television, internet, telecommunications, ener-
gy, trade, and financial networks to function. Who wouldn’t
be lost without GPS, the free service we have given the world?
Satellites already crowd key orbits. And companies like SpaceX and Blue
Origin are building cheaper, reusable rockets to add as many as 100 new
satellites with every launch.
Every nation’s satellites face increasing threats, starting with killer debris in
the vast supersonic junkyards circling the earth. Even a paint chip is lethal
at 17,000 miles per hour. Fortunately, the U.S. Air Force tracks the larger
threats and warns all spacefaring nations how to maneuver their satellites
to safety. We provide free space traffic control to every nation.
Satellites are also vulnerable to a wide array of intentional threats, such
as killer satellites. Other nations have learned how to attack the global
commons of space. Our vulnerability is acute because our satellites are
the juiciest targets. Cripple our satellites, and you cripple us. Satellites are
not only our crown jewels but the crown itself—and we have no castle to
protect them.
The United States is not the leader in anti-satellite technology. We had na-
ively hoped that our satellites were simply out of reach, too high to be at-
tacked, or that other nations would not dare. As this report meticulously
documents, other nations are developing, testing, and fielding a range of
counterspace weapons that threaten to deprive us of the many economic
and military advantages we derive from space.
The risk of a space Pearl Harbor is growing every day. Yet this war would
not last for years. Rather, it would be over the day it started. Without our
satellites, we would have a hard time regrouping and fighting back. We may
not even know who had attacked us, only that we were deaf, dumb, blind,
and impotent.
We have been officially warned of this danger since at least 2001 when the
Rumsfeld Report was released, but the Pentagon has done very little to re-
duce this existential risk. The 2008 Allard Report even warned that “no one
is in charge” of our space strategy. Sadly, this is still true.
This is the year of decision. The House of Representatives has overwhelm-
ingly and on a bipartisan basis supported a new “Space Corps” for several
years, and the president has recently demanded a “Space Force.” The Pen-
tagon has responded with a proposal that assembles a Space Force that
resembles the House’s Space Corps proposal. This year’s National Defense
Authorization Act will decide the outcome.
REP. JIM COOPER (D-TN)
United States House of Representatives
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019
IV

INTRODUCTION
OVER THE PAST YEAR, much of the focus on national security
space issues has revolved around proposals to reorganize the
national security space enterprise by creating an independ-
ent military service for space, re-establishing United States
Space Command as the combatant command for space, and standing
up a Space Development Agency for innovative space technologies and
programs. While each of these proposals has generated some controversy
and skepticism, the energy and attention they have garnered reflects a
broader recognition of the important role space systems play in overall
U.S. national security.
The United States is increasingly dependent on space both economical-
ly and militarily. From the Global Positioning System (GPS) timing signals
on which many industries rely to the missile warning systems that under-
pin U.S. nuclear deterrence, the United States and its allies and partners
around the world depend on space for security and prosperity. U.S. mili-
tary strategy relies on being able to project power around the
world and over great distances—something space-based capa-
“New threats to commercial
bilities are uniquely able to support. But as the United States
and military uses of space are has developed more advanced national security space systems
emerging, while increasing digital and integrated them into military operations in increasingly so-
connectivity of all aspects of life, phisticated ways, space systems have become a more attractive
target for adversaries to exploit.
business, government, and military
creates significant vulnerabilities. A common theme heard among the national security policy com-
munity is that space has now become a contested warfighting
During conflict, attacks against
domain. But this is not true—space has been a contested warf-
our critical defense, government,
ighting domain from the beginning. The first anti-satellite (ASAT)
and economic infrastructure must
weapon was tested by the United States in 1959, just two years
be anticipated.”
after the launch of Sputnik, and both the Soviet Union and the
United States continued developing and testing anti-satellite
2018 NATIONAL DEFENSE STRATEGY,
weapons of various kinds throughout the Cold War.2 What is dif-
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE1
ferent now is that our ability to deter attacks against space sys-
tems has become less certain, and a wide range of counterspace
weapons are proliferating to hostile nations and non-state actors.
While the vulnerabilities of U.S. national security space systems are often
discussed publicly, the progress other nations are making in counterspace
systems is not as readily accessible. The purpose of this report is to review
the open-source information available on the counterspace capabilities that
can threaten U.S. space systems. It is intended to raise awareness and un-
derstanding of the threats, debunk myths and misinformation, and highlight
areas in which senior leaders and policymakers should focus their attention.
The report focuses on four specific countries that pose the greatest risk for
the United States: China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea. A fifth section ana-
lyzes the counterspace capabilities of select other countries, including some
allies and partners of the United States, and some non-state actors.
This report is not a comprehensive assessment of all known threats to U.S.
space systems because much of the information on what other countries
are doing to advance their counterspace systems is not publicly available.
Instead, it serves as an unclassified assessment that aggregates and high-
lights open-source information on counterspace capabilities for policymak-
ers and the general public. The information in this report is current as of
February 22, 2019.

COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
TYPES OF
COUNTERSPACE
WEAPONS
“Our adversaries IN , Vice President Mike Pence laid out the Trump admin-
istration’s plans for space reorganization in a speech delivered at the
have been working to
Pentagon. In his remarks, the Vice President spoke at length about the
bring new weapons
threats posed to U.S. space systems by other nations, specifically Rus-
of war into space
sia and China.
itself ... As their
“Russia has been designing an airborne laser to disrupt our space-
actions make clear,
based system[s]. And it claims to be developing missiles that can be
our adversaries have launched from an aircraft mid-flight to destroy American satellites.
transformed space Both China and Russia have been conducting highly sophisticated
into a warfighting on-orbit activities that could enable them to maneuver their satel-
lites into close proximity of ours, posing unprecedented new dangers
domain already.”
to our space systems.”4
VICE PRESIDENT MIKE PENCE3
Counterspace weapons are not just limited to the handful of examples cited
by the vice president. A wide array of counterspace weapons are available
to potential adversaries that vary in the types of effects they create, the level
of technological sophistication, and the resources required to develop and
field them. Counterspace weapons also differ in how they are employed and
how difficult they are to detect and attribute. The effects of these weapons
can also be temporary or permanent, depending on the type of system and
how it is used. This assessment uses four broad categories to discuss differ-
ent types of counterspace weapons: kinetic physical, non-kinetic physical,
electronic, and cyber.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

and the high-capacity communications
KINETIC PHYSICAL
lines that support them.
Kinetic physical attacks have catastrophic
KINETIC PHYSICAL COUNTERSPACE
and irreversible effects on the satellites
weapons attempt to strike directly or det-
and ground stations targeted. These coun-
onate a warhead near a satellite or ground
terspace weapons are likely to be attribut-
station. A direct-ascent ASAT weapon
able because the United States and others
attempts to strike a satellite using a tra-
can identify the source of a direct-ascent
jectory that intersects the target satellite
ASAT launch or ground attack, and can,
without placing the interceptor into or-
in theory, trace a co-orbital ASAT’s orbit-
bit. Ballistic missiles and missile defense
al data back to its initial deployment. In
interceptors can be modified to act as di-
both cases, the attacker is likely to know
rect-ascent ASAT weapons, provided they
whether its attack is successful almost im-
have sufficient energy to reach the target
mediately because the effects would be
satellite’s orbit. A co-orbital ASAT weapon
publicly visible, such as orbital debris or a
differs from a direct-ascent weapon be-
damaged ground station.
cause it is first placed into orbit and then,
when commanded, maneuvers to strike
its target. Co-orbital ASATs can remain
NON-KINETIC
dormant in orbit for days or even years
before being activated.5 PHYSICAL
A key technology needed to make both
direct-ascent and co-orbital ASAT weap- NON-KINETIC COUNTERSPACE weapons,
ons effective is the ability to detect, track, such as lasers, high-powered microwaves
and guide the interceptor into a target (HPM), and electromagnetic pulse (EMP)
satellite. An on-board guidance system weapons, can have physical effects on
requires a relatively high level of tech- satellites and ground stations without
nological sophistication and significant making physical contact. These attacks
resources to test and deploy. A co-orbital operate at the speed of light and, in some
ASAT without an on-board guidance sys- cases, can be less visible to third party ob-
tem, such as a satellite that is repurposed servers and more difficult to attribute.
to intentionally maneuver into the path of
High-powered lasers can be used to dam-
another satellite, can be a nuisance and
age or degrade critical satellite compo-
interfere with the normal operation of the
nents, such as solar arrays. Lasers can
targeted satellite by forcing it to maneu-
also be used to temporarily dazzle or per-
ver to safety. However, an incident like
manently blind mission-critical sensors
this is unlikely to pose a serious collision
on satellites. Targeting a satellite from
risk without the advanced guidance and
Earth with a laser requires high beam
targeting capabilities needed to make it
quality, adaptive optics, and advanced
an effective weapon.
pointing control to steer the laser beam
Ground stations are vulnerable to kinetic as it is transmitted through the atmos-
physical attacks by a variety of conven- phere—technology that is costly
tional military weapons, from guided mis- and requires a high degree of
siles and rockets at longer ranges to small sophistication.6 A laser can be
arms fire at shorter ranges. Because they
are often highly visible, located outside of
the United States, and are more accessi-
ble than objects in space, ground stations
can be an easier target for adversaries
Illustrations A ballistic mis-
seeking to disrupt or degrade space sys-
sile (top) is an example of a
tems. Even if the ground stations them-
kinetic physical counterspace
selves are difficult to attack directly, they
weapon. A laser (bottom) is
can be disrupted indirectly by attacking an example of a non-kinetic
the electrical power grid, water supply, counterspace weapon.

COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
effective against a sensor on a satellite if within the field of view of the antenna
it is within the field of view of its sensors, on the targeted satellite or receiver. Jam-
making it possible to attribute the attack ming is a reversible form of attack be-
to its approximate geographical origin. cause once a jammer is turned off, com-
The attacker, however, will have limited munications return to normal.
ability to know if the attack was success-
Commercial and military satellites are
ful because it would not produce debris
susceptible to both uplink and downlink
or other visible indicators.
jamming.9 The uplink is the signal going
An HPM weapon can be used to disrupt a from a ground station or user terminal
satellite’s electronics, corrupt data stored to the satellite, while the downlink is the
in memory, cause processors to restart, signal that is sent from the satellite back
and, at higher power levels, cause perma- to a ground station or user terminal.10 An
nent damage to electrical circuits and pro- uplink jammer interferes with the signal
cessors. A front-door HPM attack uses a going to a satellite, such as the command
satellite’s own antennas as an entry path, and control uplink, if it is within the field
while a back-door HPM attack attempts to of view of the antenna on the receiving
enter through small seams or gaps around satellite.11 Downlink jammers target the
electrical connections and shielding.7 Be- satellite’s users by creating noise in the
cause electromagnetic waves disperse same frequency and at roughly the same
and weaken over distance and the atmos- power as the downlink signal within the
phere can interfere with transmission at field of view of the receiving terminal’s
high power levels, an HPM attack against antenna.12 User terminals with omnidi-
a satellite is best carried out from another rectional antennas, such as many GPS re-
satellite in a similar orbit or a high-flying ceivers and satellite phones, have a wider
airborne platform. Both front-door and field of view and thus are more suscepti-
back-door HPM attacks can be difficult to ble to downlink jamming from different
attribute to an attacker, and as with a laser angles on the ground.
weapon, the attacker may not know if the
attack has been successful.
The use of a nuclear weapon in space is an
indiscriminate form of non-kinetic physi-
Spoofing Yachts in
cal attack. While a nuclear detonation
would have immediate effects for satel- the Mediterranean Sea
lites within range of the electromagnetic
IN THE SUMMER OF 2013, a group of stu-
pulse it creates, it also creates a high ra-
dents from The University of Texas at Aus-
diation environment that accelerates the
tin successfully demonstrated the ability
degradation of satellite components over
to spoof a GPS signal, causing a private
the long-term for all unshielded satellites
yacht to veer off of its GPS-guided course
in the affected orbital regime.8 in the Mediterranean Sea.15 Using a small
spoofing device—approximately the size
of a briefcase—the student researchers
ELECTRONIC redirected the ship hundreds of meters
away from its intended trajectory without
being detected.
ELECTRONIC ATTACKS TARGET the
While GPS jamming makes it difficult for a
means by which space systems transmit
receiver to determine its own location, of-
and receive data by jamming or spoofing
ten raising an alarm message to the user,
radio frequency (RF) signals. Jamming is
a spoofing attack is more devious. GPS
Illustration A truck-mounted a form of electronic attack that interferes spoofing can fool a receiver into calculating
GPS jammer is a type of electron- with RF communications by generating an incorrect position, potentially subvert-
ic counterspace weapon. noise in the same frequency band and ing loss-of-signal alarms in the process.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

The technology needed to jam many types of satel- of a satellite through a cyberattack
lite signals is commercially available and relatively on its command and control sys-
inexpensive. Jamming can also be difficult to detect tem, the attack could shut down all
or distinguish from accidental interference, making communications and permanent-
attribution and awareness more difficult. In 2015, ly damage the satellite by expend-
General John Hyten, then-commander of Air Force ing its propellant supply or dam-
Space Command, noted that the U.S. military was aging its electronics and sensors.
unintentionally jamming its own communications Accurate and timely attribution of
satellites an average of 23 times per month.13 a cyberattack can be difficult, if not
impossible, because attackers can
Spoofing is a form of electronic attack where the at-
use a variety of methods to conceal their identity, such Illustration
tacker tricks a receiver into believing a fake signal,
as using hijacked servers to launch an attack. Data monitoring is a
produced by the attacker, is the real signal it is trying
type of cyber coun-
to receive. If an attacker successfully spoofs the com-
terspace weapon.
mand and control uplink signal to a satellite, it could
take control of the satellite for nefarious purposes. THREAT CHARACTERISTICS
Spoofing the downlink from a satellite can be used
to inject false or corrupted data into an adversary’s
THE TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE THREATS described
communications systems.
above have distinctly different characteristics that
Through a type of spoofing called ‘meaconing,’ even make them more or less suitable for different situa-
encrypted military GPS signals can be spoofed. Mea- tions. As shown in Table 1, some types of threats are
coning does not require cracking the GPS encryption difficult to attribute or have fully reversible effects,
because it merely rebroadcasts a time-delayed copy such as mobile, intermittent jammers. High-powered
of the original signal without decrypting it or altering lasers, for example, are “silent” and can carry out an
the data.14 Like jammers, once a spoofer is developed, attack with little public awareness that anything has
it is relatively inexpensive to produce and deploy in happened. Other types of counterspace weapons
large numbers and can be proliferated to other state produce effects that make it difficult for the attacker
and non-state actors. to know if the attack was successful, and some pro-
duce collateral damage that can affect space systems
other than the one being targeted.
CYBER Counterspace weapons that are reversible, difficult
to attribute, and have limited public awareness are
ideally suited for situations in which an opponent
UNLIKE ELECTRONIC ATTACKS, which interfere with
may want to signal resolve or create uncertainty in
the transmission of RF signals, cyberattacks target the
the mind of its opponent without triggering an es-
data itself and the systems that use this data. The an-
calatory response. For example, an adversary that
tennas on satellites and ground stations, the landlines
wants to deter the United States from intervening in
that connect ground stations to terrestrial networks,
a situation may believe that such attacks will stay be-
and the user terminals that connect to satellites are
low the threshold for escalation (i.e., not trigger the
all potential intrusion points for cyberattacks. Cyber-
very thing it is trying to prevent) while creating sig-
attacks can be used to monitor data traffic patterns
nificant operational challenges for the United States
(i.e., which users are communicating), to monitor the
that make the prospect of intervention more costly
data itself, or to insert false or corrupted data in the
and protracted. Conversely, counterspace weap-
system. These different types of cyberattacks vary in
ons that have limited battle damage assessment
terms of the difficulty and technical sophistication
or that risk collateral damage may be less useful to
required. While cyberattacks require a high degree of
adversaries in many situations. Without reliable bat-
understanding of the systems being targeted, they do
tle damage assessment, for example, an adversary
not necessarily require significant resources to con-
cannot plan operations with the confidence that its
duct. Cyberattacks can be contracted out to private
counterspace actions have been successful. Further-
groups or individuals, which means that a state or
more, weapons that produce collateral damage in
non-state actor that lacks internal cyber capabilities
space, such as large amounts of space debris, run the
can potentially pose a cyber threat.16
risk of escalating a conflict unintentionally and turn-
A cyberattack on space systems can result in data loss, ing other nations against the attacker other nations
widespread disruptions, and even permanent loss of a against the attacker, or could damage the attacker’s
satellite. For example, if an adversary can seize control own space systems.

Kinetic Physical Non-Kinetic Physical
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

kcattA
fo
sepyT
High Altitude High-
Ground Direct-Ascent High- Laser Dazzling
Co-Orbital ASAT Nuclear Powered
Station Attack ASAT Powered Laser or Blinding
Detonation Microwave
noitubirttA Variable Can be Clear attribution
attribution, Launch site can attributed by Launch site can Limited of the laser’s Limited
depending on be attributed tracking previous- be attributed attribution location at the attribution
mode of attack ly known oribt time of attack
ytilibisreveR Reversible or Reversible or
Irreversible or re- irreversible; irreversible;
Irreversible Irreversible versible depend- Irreversible Irreversible attacker may or attacker may or
ing on capabilities may not be able may not be able
to control to control
ssenerawA May or May or
Publicly known Only satellite Only satellite Only satellite
may not be may not be
depending on Publicly known operator will be operator will be operator will be
publicly publicly
trajectory aware aware aware
known known
egamaD
rekcattA
tnemssessA Limited Limited
Near real-time Near real-time Near real-time Near real-time confirmation of confirmation of
No confirmation
confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of success if satellite success if satellite
of success
success success success success begins to drift begins to drift
uncontrolled uncontrolled
egamaD
laretalloC
Table 1
TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS
Unsystematic
Station may
Orbital debris effects from Could leave Could leave target
control multi- May or may not
could affect higher radiation target satellite satellite disabled
ple satellites; produce orbital None
other satellites in lelvels in orbit disabled and and uncontrol-
potential for loss debris
similar orbits would persist for uncontrollable lable
of life
months or years

Electronic Cyber

kcattA
fo
sepyT
Uplink Downlink Data Interccept Data Seizure
Spoofing
Jamming Jamming or Monitoring Corruption of Control
noitubirttA
Modest attribution Modest attribution Modest attribution Limited or Limited or Limited or
depending on mode depending on mode depending on mode uncertain uncertain uncertain
of attack of attack of attack attribution attribution attribution
ytilibisreveR
Irreversible or
Reversible Reversible Reversible Reversible Reversible reversible, depending
on mode of attack
ssenerawA Satellite operator Satellite operator Satellite operator
Only satellite May or may not be May or may not be
will be aware; may will be aware; may will be aware; may
operator will be known to the known to the
or may not be known or may not be known or may not be known
aware public public
to the public to the public to the public
egamaD
rekcattA
tnemssessA
Limited
confirmation of Limited
Near-real time Near-real time Near-real time
No confirmation success if monitoring confirmation of
confirmation of confirmation of confirmation of
of success of the local RF success if effects
success success success
environment is are visible
possible
egamaD
laretalloC
Only dirupts the Only disrupts the
Only corrupts the Could leave target
signals targeted and signals targeted and
specific RF signals None None satellite disabled
possible adjacent possible adjacent
targeted and uncontrollable
frequencies frequencies

CHINA Number of Successful
Orbital Launches in 201817

CHINA
“Exploring the vast S INCE ITS FIRST SATELLITE LAUNCH in , China has been
steadily progressing as a global space power. A string of Chinese
universe, developing
space achievements has marked the past 20 years including
space programs and
launching a human into orbit, successfully operating two space
becoming an aero-
stations, and most recently, landing a lunar rover on the far side of the
space power have
Moon. Carried into orbit by its robust family of Long March space launch
always been the vehicles, China is progressing rapidly in space. In 2018, China conducted 38
dream we’ve been orbital launches, surpassing the United States’ 34 launches.19 China plans
striving for.” to attempt over 30 launches in 2019, including 10 satellites for positioning,
navigation, and timing (PNT), as well as a new launch capability, the Long
PRESIDENT XI JINPING18
March 11 via a sea-based platform.20 The Long March 5—the country’s heavy
lift launch system—will return to operation after a two-year hiatus in . If all goes well, the Long March 5 will launch China’s next lunar probe
and return lunar samples to Earth at the end of 2019.21
China showcased its fast-paced technological advancements and dedica-
tion to being a space power this year with its lunar lander Chang’e-4. Named
after the Chinese goddess of the Moon, the Chang’e spacecraft successfully
landed on the far side of the Moon on January 3, 2019, becoming the first
ever spacecraft to do so. The lunar rover, Yutu-2, is named after the goddess
Chang’e’s pet rabbit. Thus far, the mission has already been a great success,
reporting that the surface temperature on the far side of the moon drops
to well below -300 degrees Fahrenheit. The rover will continue its science
and exploration missions in the upcoming months.23 These advancements
showcase China’s civil space aspirations.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

China is also moving forward with a new ed States.28 Information on China’s 2018 Yutu-2 became the first lunar rover
modular space station. China has suc- civil and military space spending is not to explore the far side of the Moon
cessfully operated two previous space yet publicly available. in . The rover is part of
labs in Low Earth Orbit (LEO), Tiangong-1 the Chinese Chang’e-4 mission, which
As China continues to invest more in its
and -2 through its Project 921 program, launched on December 7, 2018.
own state-run space programs, it is also
which began in 1992.24 The new space
becoming one of the largest investors in afp / getty images
station will consist of three modules. The private companies. As a recent Depart-
core module for the new space station is ment of Defense (DoD) report to Congress
expected to be launched in 2020, while
the two additional experimental modules
are planned for launch in 2021 and 2022.
Three or four manned missions, and sev-

eral cargo missions, are also planned for CHINA
USA
2021–2022.25 The station is estimated to
100 RUSSIA
have a 10 year lifespan, with the possibili- OTHERS
ty of an extension.26 China is also currently

developing a new space telescope, called
Xuntian—meaning “Heavenly Cruiser” in

Mandarin—which will reportedly have a
field of view 300 times larger than the U.S. 40
Hubble Space Telescope. This telescope
will be placed near the new space station 20
in the case that astronauts need to ser-
vice it manually.27 0
1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2018
In 2017, it was estimated that China spent
almost $11 billion on space, across its
civil and military programs. This was the Figure 1: Chinese orbital space launches (1957–2018). China supported more successful
second most spending for any country on orbital space launches in 2018 than it did in the entire first space age, from 1957 to 1991.
space activities in 2017, behind the Unit- space-track.org / csis aerospace security22

CHINA
noted, Chinese president Xi Jinping “has lance, and reconnaissance (ISR) satel-
emphasized the importance of science lites and PNT satellites. This PNT system,
and technology (S&T) innovation, both AS CHINA called the Beidou satellite system, gives
for rejuvenating China and modernizing China independence from the United
China’s military.” Commercial advances CONTINUES TO States’ GPS constellation for military and
in science and technology are often in- commercial applications. China has also
INVEST MORE
corporated into China’s military capabil- been providing access to the Beidou sys-
ities.29 The Chinese government invested tem to its partners and allies as coverage
IN ITS OWN
approximately $336 million in private grows. By 2020, China “plans to establish
Chinese space companies in 2018.30 One a global, 24-hour, all-weather earth re-
STATE-RUN
of the most active China-based private mote sensing system and a global satel-
investors, Tencent Holdings, has also in- SPACE PRO- lite navigation system.”36
vested in several U.S.-based space start-
Furthermore, to increase its ISR capabili-
ups such as Moon Express, Planetary Re- GRAMS, IT IS
ties, in China launched its high-
sources, and World View Enterprises.31
est resolution imagery satellite to-date,
ALSO BECOM-
After a 2014 decree to allow private com- Gaofen-11, part of the China High-resolu-
panies to develop space launch vehicles, ING ONE OF tion Earth Observation System (CHEOS).
several new nominally private, but often CHEOS is intended to provide meteor-
state-backed, Chinese companies began THE LARGEST ological coverage through “advanced
to develop and test new launch vehicles. optical and synthetic aperture radar
In 2017, the government made a $182 INVESTORS satellites, and could also include air-
million investment in a new launch com- borne and near-space systems such as
pany called ExPace Technology, which IN PRIVATE stratospheric balloons.” It is expected to
to-date is still “the largest investment in a be completed by 2020.37 China has also
COMPANIES.
non-U.S. space start-up.”32 Similarly, One experimented with new capabilities in
Space, another Chinese launch company, space, including such feats as launching
received $44 million in Series B funding the first-ever quantum communications
in 2018 after successfully launching its satellite in 2016.38
first and second sub-orbital payloads in
May and September, respectively, ear-
lier that year.33 One Space is looking to SPACE ORGANIZATION
launch its first orbital payload in the first
AND DOCTRINE
half of 2019. Another company called iS-
pace—also known as Beijing Interstellar
Glory Space Technology Ltd.—completed CHINA’S CIVIL AND MILITARY SPACE ac-
a sub-orbital launch of its single-stage tivities are run by separate governmental
rocket known as Hyperbola-1Z in mid- organizations. The State Council’s State
2018 and plans to launch three more Administration for Science, Technology,
times in 2019.34 and Industry for National Defense (SAS-
TIND) is the primary organizational force
In , the first Chinese com-
for China’s civil space activities. Within
mercial orbital launch was attempted
SASTIND, the China National Space Admin-
by a new company called LandSpace. A
istration (CNSA) leads the majority of civil
third-stage malfunction prevented the
space activities. The China Aerospace Sci-
rocket, called Zhuque 1, from reaching
ence and Technology Corporation (CASC),
orbit. The company intends to build two
a state-owned aerospace corporation, also
larger rockets and provide heavier lift ca-
handles China’s burgeoning space pro-
pabilities to LEO.35
gram, including developing space launch
To further improve its space capabilities, vehicles, satellites, and related items. Mil-
China is continuing to rapidly develop itary space activities are run through the
and launch both intelligence, surveil- People’s Liberation Army (PLA). These en-
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

tities collaborate with one another on de- the peaceful use of outer space, the PLA
veloping space technologies.39 appears to remain focused focused on de-
veloping counterspace capabilities.49
In 2015, a Chinese white paper stated
that “outer space and cyberspace have China views U.S. space and cyber assets
become new commanding heights in as vulnerable. Chinese military schol-
strategic competition among all parties.”40 ars wrote in 2007 that “space domi-
Many scholars believe that this statement nance will be a vital factor in securing air
is a formal designation of both space and dominance, maritime dominance, and
cyberspace as new warfighting domains.41 electromagnetic dominance. It will di-
That same year, the PLA founded the Stra- rectly affect the course and outcome of
tegic Support Force (SSF) to centralize wars.”50 In a 2015 report, the U.S.-China
and manage the military’s space, cyber, Economic and Security Review Commis-
and electronic warfare missions. The SSF, sion determined that while China has not
however, may not have full control over published an official, public document
China’s anti-satellite (ASAT) capabilities. detailing its counterspace strategy and
Specifically, experts believe that the re- doctrine, its actions since the early 2000s
sponsibility for direct-ascent ASATs may indicate that the Chinese program is
lie with either the PLA’s Rocket Force, “primarily designed to deter U.S. strikes
which manages China’s nuclear arsenal, against China’s space assets, deny space
or the PLA’s Air Force.42 superiority to the United States, and at-
tack U.S. satellites.”51
Before the 2015 reorganization, respon-
sibilities for cyber, space, and electronic
warfare were scattered across at least four
COUNTERSPACE
different PLA departments. Establishing
the SSF indicates the PLA’s prioritization WEAPONS
of these critical areas of warfare. The PLA
leadership publicly recognizes China’s
growing reliance on space for its expand- Kinetic Physical
ing military capabilities and reach.43
China has proven its kinetic physical
Although many details about the SSF re-
counterspace capabilities several times
main unknown, a military parade cele-
with a range of direct-ascent ASAT sys-
brating the PLA’s 90th anniversary in July
tems and conventional mid-
2017 featured a formation of electronic
course missile interceptors
reconnaissance officers from the SSF. This “China will keep abreast
that could potentially be used
group “reportedly provides highly mobile, of the dynamics of outer
as an ASAT. Thus far, its pri-
integrated, flexible, multidomain informa- space, deal with security
mary focus has been targets
tion warfare capabilities.”44 Featuring the
threats and challenges in
in LEO. Some experts argue
group in the parade indicates the PLA’s
“Chinese [direct-ascent] ASAT that domain, and secure
increasing prioritization of the SSF and its
capability against deep space its space assets to serve
capabilities.45 The United States Defense
targets (Medium Earth Orbit its national economic
Intelligence Agency (DIA) assesses that
“strategists in the PLA regard the ability to (MEO) and Geosynchronous and social development,
Orbit (GEO)) is likely still in
use space-based systems and deny them to and maintain outer space
adversaries as central to enabling modern the experimental or develop- security.”
informatized warfare.”46 According to Chi- ment phase, and there is not
nese sources, achieving space superiority sufficient evidence to con- CHINA’S MILITARY STRATEGY,
means China must ensure its ability to fully clude whether it will become MAY 201552
utilize its own space assets while simulta- an operational capability in
neously degrading, disrupting, or destroy- the near future.”53 Howev-
ing its adversary’s space capabilities.47 The er, speaking in 2015 then-Lt Gen James
PLA is heavily investing in space-based ISR, Raymond stated at a conference that
satellite communications, PNT, and other because of China’s investment in ASAT
military space missions.48 Despite China’s weapons, “soon every satellite in every
many international statements supporting orbit will be able to be held at risk.”54

CHINA
In , China had its first suc-
cessful test of a kinetic physical ASAT
New Heights for China’s ASAT Program
weapon. This test of a direct-ascent SC-19
missile targeted and destroyed an aging
IN , China launched a new type of ASAT system, which Beijing
Chinese meteorological satellite, produc-
claimed was intended to reach a height of 10,000 km and disperse a barium
ing hazardous debris in LEO. Over 3,000 cloud for scientific research.60 Although China claimed the test used an SC-19,
trackable pieces of debris have been experts deduced that the altitude reached was far beyond SC-19 capability.61
identified, while thousands of smaller According to the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, this
pieces that are unable to be tracked with test in fact used a new DN-2 rocket. After the test, the United States suggest-
today’s technology continue to pollute ed that this test was likely a high-altitude direct-ascent ASAT test that could
LEO. This debris threatens the safe opera- reach satellites as high as GEO, which includes satellites used for missile
warning, military communications, GPS, and ISR.62
tion of hundreds of other satellites in LEO,
including the International Space Station
(ISS).55 China’s first two tests of the SC-19
United States has high confidence in its
anti-satellite system—occasionally re-
assessment, that the event was indeed an
ferred to as the DN-1—occurred in 2005
ASAT test.”65 However, experts have noted
and 2006 from Xichang Satellite Launch
that “very little information is available in
Center and were unsuccessful.56
the public record about this launch, other
As the DIA notes in its assessment, “Chi- than that it occurred, remained suborbital,
na has not publicly acknowledged the and does not appear to have had a clearly
existence of any new programs since evident target, ballistic or otherwise.”66
it confirmed it used an ASAT missile
China is also suspected of testing a DN-3
to destroy a weather satellite in 2007.”
ASAT missile capable of reaching higher
Analysts believe several other kinetic
orbits, with tests conducted in October
physical tests—or suspected tests—have
2015, , , and
occured since then.57 In response to the
.67 Although each of these
international outrage at China’s pollu-
tests cannot be verified, anonymous U.S.
tion of LEO, China designed follow-on
officials made statements asserting that
tests of ASATs to not produce orbital de-
the tests were of a new ASAT capability.68
bris.58 The same SC-19 system was also
China may be developing three or more
reportedly tested against ballistic targets
direct-ascent ASAT systems simultane-
in 2010 and 2013 from the Korla Missile
ously, but it is not clear if each is intended
Test Complex with success.59
to become operational or if some are in-
U.S. intelligence experts assess that “Chi- tended to be missile interceptors.69
na probably intends to pursue addition- China has also developed and launched “China is employing more
al ASAT weapons capable of destroying several satellites for testing technologies sophisticated satellite
satellites up to” GEO.63 A kinetic ASAT which could be used as co-orbital coun- operations and is probably
attack in GEO could be devastating for terspace capabilities, however none of testing dual-use technol-
the United States and other space-faring these tests have resulted in a verifiable ogies in space that could
nations because the debris it would pro- destructive incident. Co-orbital satellite
be applied to counterspace
duce could linger for generations in this capabilities can serve a dual-purpose role
missions.”
unique region of space and interfere with as both on-orbit servicing and inspection
the safe operation of satellites. satellites for peaceful purposes and as
U.S. DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY70
counterspace threats—and it is difficult to
Another suspected test was conducted in
distinguish between the two.
. China claimed the launch was
a missile interceptor test.64 Then-assistant For example, in 2008 a Chinese spacecraft
secretary of state for arms control verifi- deployed a miniature imaging satellite,
cation, and compliance Frank Rose stated called BX-1, that was jettisoned from its
that “despite China’s claims that this was mother spacecraft. The satellite was una-
not an ASAT test, let me assure you the ble to be actively controlled until after it
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

had passed near the International Space Aolong-1 was intended to test technolo-
Station (ISS).71 However, many reports in gies needed to collect space debris and
the United States claimed that this was remove it from orbit. Though studies on
the first co-orbital ASAT test from China. the incident debate the success of this
While the BX-1 did fly dangerously close test, the technology could potentially be
to the ISS, the maneuver appears to be further developed and used to damage
unintentional.72 or disable other satellites.79 On that same
mission, China also deployed the Tianyu-
In 2010, China launched a satellite, des-
an-1 spacecraft, which according to Chi-
ignated SJ-12, which conducted a series
nese press accounts, successfully tested
of remote proximity maneuvers with
the ability to refuel other satellites while
an older Chinese satellite, SJ-06F. “The
in orbit.80 Both tests received significant
maneuvers occurred over several weeks
media coverage in the U.S. due to their
between June 12, 2010, and August 16,
potential dual-use as ASAT weapons.
2010, and indicated a very slow and me-
thodical approach.”73 Some have specu- While none of China’s rendezvous and
lated that this mission was designed to proximity operations (RPO) activities in
test co-orbital jamming or other counter- LEO or GEO appear to have damaged
space capabilities.74 At one point, SJ-12 other satellites, these technological ad-
made contact with SJ-06F at low speed; vancements have many experts con-
however, this incident was “unlikely to cerned about their intent.
have resulted in debris or significant
China can also pose a threat to space
damage to either satellite.”75 Although
systems through its ability to attack the
this may have been a test run for the ground stations that control them with
2011 docking of the Shenzhou space cap- conventional forces. China has the larg-
sule with the Tiangong-1 space station, est standing army of any nation and over
the SJ-12 maneuver could have serious the past decade, has significantly in-
counterspace implications as well.76 creased its military budget and modern-
In , China placed three sepa-
rate satellites into similar orbits. At the
time, China claimed that the satellites
Inspecting the GEO Belt
were “conducting scientific experiments
Figure 2: Chinese rendezvous
on space maintenance technologies.”77
and proximity operations in the IN , China tested RPO activities be-
However, U.S. officials reported that the
geosynchronous belt. Publicly tween two Chinese satellites in GEO. On the maid-
one satellite was equipped with a robot-
available data suggests that en launch of the Long March 5, it carried an experi-
ic arm, which tested its ability to grapple Chinese satellite SJ-17 made mental satellite designated SJ-17 into geostationary
and seize another satellite. This maneu- orbit.81 SJ-17 later went on to approach a Lockheed
several close approaches in GEO.
ver has yet to be verified from public- Martin-built Chinese communications satellite, Chi-
The figure below highlights sever-
ly-available information.78 nasat 5A. SJ-17 circled nearby Chinasat 5A several
al satellites that appear to have
times before remaining in a nearby orbit.82 SJ-17
In , China launched the experienced close approaches
restarted maneuvers around the GEO belt in April
Aolong-1 spacecraft, which included a ro- with SJ-17 between 
2017, visiting another Chinese satellite designated
botic arm and a sub-satellite that would and . Learn more at
Chinasat 6A, and continued RPO activities with Chi-
be released and recovered during its mis- aerospace.csis.org/sj17. nasat 20, through April 14, 2018.83 SJ-17 has not con-
sion. According to official statements, the space-track.org tinued RPO activities since .
Chinasat 5A
SJ-17
Apr. 2017
Chinasat 6A Chinasat 20
Sep. 2017 Feb. 2018

CHINA
ized its conventional military forces.84 In a conflict,
China could be capable of striking an adversary’s
satellite ground stations with ballistic missiles, CHINESE MILITARY AND
cruise missiles, or long-range strike aircraft. As Chi-
na’s military reach continues to expand, it will be TECHNICAL WRITINGS OFTEN
able to use its conventional forces to hold ground
stations at risk over progressively greater distances. REFERENCE DIRECTED EN-
Non-Kinetic Physical ERGY AS A KEY TECHNOLOGY
In 2018, the U.S. Director of National Intelligence
IN A SUCCESSFUL COUNTER-
stated that China is making advances in direct-
ed-energy technology that can “blind or damage SPACE STRATEGY.
sensitive space-based optical sensors, such as
those used for remote sensing or missile defense.”85
In 2019, the DIA made a similar claim, stating “China
likely is pursuing laser weapons to disrupt, degrade,
or damage satellites and their sensors and possibly
already has a limited capability to employ laser weapon capable of being placed on a ship. This tech-
systems against satellite sensors.”86 Moreover, Chi- nological advance indicates that “China could have a
nese military and technical writings often reference mobile HPM system capable of attacking electronics
directed energy as a key technology in a successful on aircraft and anti-radiation missiles.”94 However,
counterspace strategy.87 adding a mobile HPM system to a satellite would re-
In 2005, several Chinese scientists claimed to have quire further reductions in size, weight, and power in
successfully blinded a satellite in a test using a “50- addition to a number of other integration challenges
100 [kilowatt] capacity mounted laser gun in Xinjiang unique to the space environment.
province.”88 However, this claim has not been con-
As a nuclear power with intercontinental ballistic Electronic warfare
firmed through publicly-available information.
missiles (ICBMs), China also has the latent capability (EW) units within
In 2006, reports surfaced that U.S. imagery satel- to launch a nuclear weapon into LEO. The resulting
the PLA “routinely
lites were illuminated by lasers over Chinese terri- EMP from the detonation would cause indiscriminate
conduct jamming
tory.89 Though much speculation surrounded these damage to satellites, creating a high level of radiation
and anti jamming
incidents, senior United States officials have stated in LEO that could last for years.95 Although China has
operations against
that “China not only has the capability [to blind sat- the technology necessary to field a nuclear-armed
ellites], but has exercised it.”90 Indeed, then-Director ASAT weapon, it appears to be focusing its efforts in multiple commu-
of the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), Donald other areas. nication and radar
Kerr, acknowledged that U.S. imagery satellites were systems and GPS
Electronic
dazzled while passing over China, but stated that it
satellite systems
did not “damage the U.S. satellite’s ability to collect China acquired foreign ground-based satellite jam-
in force-on-force
information.”91 This incident demonstrates that Chi- mers from Ukraine in the late 1990s, and has con-
exercises.”
na has much of the technology necessary to field an tinued to develop the technology independently in
operational capability to dazzle or blind a satellite; the ensuing decades.97 Currently, China has the abil-
OFFICE OF THE
and experts believe China will continue to work on ity to jam common satellite communication bands SECRETARY OF DEFENSE96
developing efficient and accurate high-powered la- and GPS signals, and it has made the development
ser systems.92 As one China expert highlighted, “the and deployment of satellite jamming systems a high
only fundamental barrier to learning these abstract priority.98 The DIA claims that China is developing
elements [directed-energy] and achieving a practical jamming technologies to target SATCOM over a large
weapon capability is effort—time, will, and money.”93 range of frequencies, including several military pro-
tected communication bands.99
China has also shown interest in developing HPM
weapons for air and missile defense. In January Non-military sources give further insight into Chinese
2017, Chinese media celebrated the work of expert focus on electronic warfare. A paper from the China
Huang Wenhua, who developed a miniaturized HPM Electronic Technology Group Corporation proposed
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

solutions for “overcoming the high power
requirements for jamming U.S. millimeter Truck-mounted Long-range
wave (MMW) satellite communications by Jamming Equipment
using space-based jammers hosted on
small satellites, in a ‘David versus Goliath’
attack.” The authors further identified
U.S. satellites that would be particularly
susceptible to such an attack, like “the
Advanced Extremely High Frequency
(AEHF), Wideband Global SATCOM (WGS),
and Global Broadcast Service (GBS) sat-
ellite constellations.”100 Another Chinese
technical paper provides further insight
into how China plans to jam GPS signals
used by U.S. drones, such as the RQ-4
Global Hawk, over the Spratly Islands and
South China Sea.101
At the DefCon hacking convention in Las
Vegas in 2015, two Chinese research-
ers presented a guide to building a GPS
spoofing device and sold kits for about
$300.102 Although there are no public ac-
counts of the PLA spoofing GPS signals, Satellite imagery of Mischief Reef in the Spratly Islands on May 6, 2018. Three tarp-covered
the ability to spoof GPS and other satellite truck-mounted jammers were placed on Mischief Reef in 2018. This type of jamming
signals is well within the reach of the PLA, equipment will most likely affect ships and aircraft operating in the area.
especially given the priority China places digitalglobe / csis asia maritime transparency initiative
on electronic forms of attack.
China carried through with some of these
plans, namely installing jamming equip- coherent scatter radar, is reported to “be capable of “These writings suggest
ment on the Spratly Islands. As of April influencing the ebb and flow of subatomic particles
that China is prepared to
2018, U.S. officials confirmed that there are as far away as Singapore, a distance of over 2,000 km
use cyber operations to
two islands in the Spratly Island chain that (1,200 miles).”105 Such a radar could disrupt signals
manage the escalation of a
have been equipped with jamming sys- from satellites, cutting off communications or access
tems targeting communications and radar. to satellite networks for those operating in the area. conflict, as they view cyber
This assessment is supported by satellite According to the same source, a Chinese scientist operations as a low-cost
imagery that shows a suspected jamming confirmed that the radar would be used for both civil deterrent and can demon-
system on Mischief Reef. China has been and military applications.106 Primarily, however, ion-
strate capabilities and
building military installations across the ospheric radars are used in scientific experiments to
resolve to an adversary.”
island chain since 2014, but this is the first learn more about the Earth’s atmosphere.107
visual evidence of jamming equipment on
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Cyber
these islands.103 Shortly after the identifica- OF DEFENSE108
tion of the jammers, Vietnam condemned China has highly advanced cyber capabilities, a ma-
China’s continued militarization and weap- jority of which are run by the SSF in conjunction with
onization of the South China Sea and the its counterspace operations. Chinese hacks against se-
Spratly Islands, stating that the jamming cure government networks to steal personal informa-
equipment violates international law.104 tion and technical data are well known, but the coun-
In , the South China Morning try’s efforts to attack and infiltrate space systems has
Post reported that China had made sig- received relatively less attention.109 Chinese writings
nificant progress on an ionospheric radar, and research efforts indicate that in a conflict, it would
located on the island of Hainan, which attempt to conduct cyberattacks against U.S. satellites
also hosts China’s newest spaceport—the and ground stations.110 Specifically, “PLA military writ-
Wenchang Satellite Launch Center—in ings detail the effectiveness of information operations
the southeastern part of the country. The and cyberwarfare in modern conflicts, and advocate
device, described as a high-powered in- targeting an adversary’s Command and Control and

CHINA
IN 2018 ALONE, CHINA TESTED TECHNOLOGIES
IN THREE OF THE FOUR COUNTERSPACE
WEAPON CATEGORIES.
logistics networks to affect the adversary’s ability to identify if the attack came from the Chinese govern-
operate during the early stages of conflict.”111 ment or non-state cybercriminals.117
China has already been implicated or suspected in On June 19, 2018, several researchers at Symantec—a
several cyberattacks against U.S. satellites.112 In Octo- U.S. software company—reported that a “sophisti-
ber 2007 and again in , cyberattacks believed cated hacking campaign launched from computers
to have originated in China targeted a remote sensing in China burrowed deeply into satellite operators,
satellite operated by the U.S. Geological Survey called defense contractors and telecommunications compa-
Landsat-7. These attacks are believed to have occurred
nies.” The two targeted companies were “U.S.-based
through a ground station in Norway.113 Each attack
satellite companies, a Defense Department contractor
caused at least 12 or more minutes of interference with
and another private firm that sells geospatial imag-
ground station communications but the attackers did
ing technology.”118 The researchers could not deter-
not gain control of the satellite. In June and October of
mine exactly which systems had been accessed in the
2008, hackers also believed to be from China attacked
breach, however they did admit that “the hackers in-
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s
fected computers that controlled the satellites, so that
(NASA) Terra Earth observation satellite. In these at-
they could have changed the positions of the orbiting
tacks, the hackers “achieved all steps required to com-
devices and disrupted data traffic.” While Symantec
mand the satellite but did not issue commands.”114
did not directly blame the Chinese government for the
In , Chinese hackers attacked the attack, the company made it clear that the well-coor-
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Adminis- dinated attack originated from mainland China.119
tration’s (NOAA) satellite information and weather
systems. The attack forced NOAA to take down the
system and stop transmitting satellite images to the
SUMMARY
National Weather Service for two days before the or-
ganization was able to seal off the vital data.115 After
the attack was made public, almost two months lat- CHINA SHOWS NO SIGNS of slowing its investment
er, U.S. Representative Frank Wolf (R-VA) announced in developing counterspace capabilities. Government
that NOAA had informed him that China was respon- and military officials often comment on how military
sible for the hack on its systems. Chinese officials space capabilities will ensure their success in conflict
denied these claims, asserting that cyberattacks are and create a significant advantage if China can inter-
common in today’s world.116 fere with the United States’ reliance on space architec-
tures. China is clearly investing in its counterspace ca-
Anonymous sources in India leaked that a “high-pro-
pabilities. Evidence confirms that in 2018 alone, China
file government meeting last month involving video
chat via satellite was compromised by Chinese hack- tested technologies in three of the four counterspace
ers” in . The video call was in Chinese weapon categories. Specifically, China has tested sev-
control for four to five minutes before Indian cyber- eral direct-ascent ASAT weapons capable of reaching
security teams were able to launch a counterattack satellites in LEO and possibly GEO. China is also more
and neutralize the breach. The sources also claimed frequently testing RPO capabilities that could lend
that the attack was able to breach the nation’s “most themselves to a co-orbital ASAT system. Additionally,
sophisticated and secret link.” However, the sources recent activities demonstrate that China is proliferat-
note that the Indian response team was unable to ing its electronic and cyber capabilities.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

Number of Successful RUSSIA
Orbital Launches in 2018120

RUSSIA
B ECAUSE OF THE SOVIET UNION’S DOMINANCE in the space
domain during the Cold War—launching more payloads to orbit
than all other countries combined—Russia remains a prominent
“Russia is develop- space power today. Before the collapse of the Soviet Union in
ing a diverse suite 1991, marking the end of the first global space age, the Soviets were driv-
en to outperform the United States by reaching several key space technol-
of ground-launched
ogy milestones first.122 The Soviet space agency placed the world’s first
and directed-energy
satellite into orbit (Sputnik 1 in ), achieved first contact with
ASAT capabilities,
the surface of the Moon (Luna 2 in ), and sent the first
and continues to
human into space (Yuri Gagarin in ).
launch ‘experimen-
After its founding, the Russian Federation inherited three active Soviet
tal’ satellites that
spaceports: the Baikonur Cosmodrome, the Plesetsk Cosmodrome, and the
conduct sophisti- Kapustin Yar Cosmodrome.123 Since 1991, Russia has successfully launched
cated on-orbit ac- space objects from three more facilities, including the relatively new
tivities to advance Vostochny Cosmodrome in the country’s far east, where it hopes to support
human space launches in the future.124 Unlike the Soviet Union, Russia is
Russian counter-
no longer responsible for the majority of global space launches. Although it
space capabilities.”
achieved the greatest number of successful orbital launches of any country
U.S. MISSILE in 2014, Russia fell behind China and the United States in 2018 with only 19
DEFENSE REVIEW121 launches to China’s 38 and the United States’ 34.125
Roscosmos—the Russian state corporation responsible for civil spaceflight—
currently operates the world’s most robust human space launch program.
Since the end of the U.S. Space Shuttle program in 2011, the Soyuz launch
system has been the only vehicle transporting astronauts to and from the
ISS, fulfilling its partnership responsibilities as outlined in the Station’s part-
nership agreements.126 Russia was a founding partner of the ISS and is the
second largest contributor to its construction and operation. Despite a de-
terioration in diplomatic and military relationships in recent years, Russia

RUSSIA
deteriorated through the 1990s, dropping
at one point to just nine functional satel-
lites out of the 24 that are necessary for
global coverage. In 2011, Russia began
work on a third generation of satellites
(GLONASS-K) that will greatly improve the
accuracy and reliability of the system, and
the constellation has now returned to the
full complement of satellites necessary for
global coverage.132 Over the next decade,
Russia plans to revamp its optical imag-
ing satellites, land a scientific probe on
the surface of Mars, and develop a new
human launch system capable of placing
cosmonauts in lunar orbit.133 These mis-
sions will almost certainly require a sig-
nificant budget increase for Russian civil
space activities—an unlikely prospect ac-
cording to some industry experts.134
and the United States maintain a strong The launch of Soyuz MS-11 to
SPACE ORGANIZATION
partnership in civil space, largely due to the International Space Station on
human spaceflight collaboration. The two December 3, 2018. This launch carried one AND DOCTRINE
nations share training, communications, Russian cosmonaut, one U.S. astronaut, and
operations, and launch capabilities in one Canadian astronaut. The Soyuz carried
THE RUSSIAN SPACE SECTOR is largely
support of the ISS. Currently, NASA pays six foreign astronauts to the ISS in 2018.
represented by two government organi-
Roscosmos over $80 million each for seats
kirill kudryavtsev / afp / getty images zations: Roscosmos, a state corporation
aboard the Soyuz for American astro-
nauts.127 In 2018, Roscosmos flew three
successful crewed missions (and one that
was safely aborted before it reached orbit)

carrying five Americans, four Russians, CHINA
USA
one Canadian, and one European.128 Ac-
100 RUSSIA
cording to budgetary data revealed during OTHERS
a meeting between Russian

president Vladimir Putin and Roscosmos
director general Dmitry Rogozin, foreign

revenue—including Soyuz seats sold to
ISS partners—made up an estimated 17

percent of the corporation’s total income
in 2018.129 The same document revealed

the corporation ran deficits of approxi-
mately $156 million and $244 million in

2016 and 2017 respectively, but an esti- 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2018
mated $29 million profit in 2018.130
Since the mid-2000s, Russia has embarked Figure 3: Russian orbital space launches (1957–2018). In the first space age, from
on a series of programs to modernize 1957 to 1991, the Soviet Union completed more orbital space launches than any other
many of its languishing space capabilities. space-faring nation. Since then, Russia’s launch rate has fallen significantly, trailing
The Global Navigation Satellite System behind the United States and China in 2018.
(GLONASS) constellation of PNT satellites space-track.org / csis aerospace security131
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

responsible for civil spaceflight, and the Other Russian military leaders’ public re-
Russian Aerospace Forces, the branch marks have shed more light on Russian
of the Russian armed services tasked military doctrine in the space domain
with military operations in the space do- since the formal document was last re-
main. Roscosmos was formed in 2015, leased in 2014. Former Deputy Prime
when two separate organizations—the Minister Dmitry Rogozin—who is now the
Russian Federal Space Agency and the Roscosmos director general—has stat-
United Rocket and Space Corporation— ed that Russia does not use satellites to
were consolidated into one corporation damage other space objects.144 Rogozin,
tasked with “comprehensive reform a centerpiece in Russian space leader-
of the Russian space industry” and the ship, has also said that the United States’
pursuit of international cooperation ballistic missile defense systems and
with space partners around the world.135 space operations—which he regularly
In 1992, Russia became the first country compares to the Reagan-era Strategic De-
to establish a space force—a branch of fense Initiative or “Star Wars”—are a prin-
the Russian Armed Forces dedicated to cipal justification for Russia’s need to de-
space operations.136 In 2015, after a se- velop domestic counterspace weapons.145
ries of military space reorganizations, More recently, the current First Deputy
the space force merged with the Rus- Minister of Defense Valery Gerasimov
sian air force—becoming the Russian stated that the proposal to create a U.S.
Aerospace Forces.137 The new Russian space force is in and of itself “a pretext for
Space Forces sub-branch is responsible militarizing space.”146
for launching military satellites, main-
taining space-based assets, monitoring
space objects, and identifying potential COUNTERSPACE
attacks against the Russian homeland
WEAPONS
from space.138
According to the Military Doctrine of the
Russian Federation, last updated in De- Kinetic Physical
cember 2014, Russia considers the “in-
Russia appears to be fielding several ki-
tention to place weapons in outer space”
netic physical counterspace weapons—
a main external military danger.139 To
including both ground- and air-launched
address this concern, the doctrine states
direct-ascent ASAT missiles and poten-
that one of Russia’s principal tasks is to
tially several co-orbital ASATs—capable
establish “an international treaty on [the]
of threatening satellites in all orbital
prevention of placement of any types of
regimes. Although several of these pro-
weapons in outer space.”140 In 2008, Rus-
grams resemble previous, Soviet-era
sia and China submitted the “Treaty on
ASAT systems, and likely benefit from
the Prevention of the Placement of Weap-
the Soviet Union’s rich history of devel-
ons in Outer Space, the Threat or Use of
oping and operating anti-satellite weap-
Force Against Outer Space Objects” to
ons during the Cold War, others may be
the Conference on Disarmament.141 While
much newer.
the topic of preventing an arms race in
space has garnered a lot of attention, few In , Russia conducted its
countries have been supportive of the seventh test of the PL-19/Nudol direct-as-
proposal. The United States dismissed it cent ASAT system.147 Unclassified U.S. re-
as a “diplomatic ploy,” but so far has not ports suggest that both this launch and a
offered an alternative.142 Before the doc- previous test in used a mobile
trine’s release, co-author General Yuri transporter erector-launcher (TEL) within
Baluyevsky, former First Deputy Minister the Plesetsk Cosmodrome complex in-
of Defense, articulated Russia’s need to stead of a static launch pad.148 Although
develop defense systems that could both at least six of the seven launches are ver-
retaliate and preemptively strike an ag- ified to have originated from Plesetsk, a
gressor’s space forces.143 mobile launch system would theoretically

RUSSIA
allow the ASAT to be launched outside of
the Cosmodrome facility, ensuring much
greater flexibility to target LEO satellites
with orbital inclinations above 40 degrees
as they transit over Russian territory.149 The
PL-19/Nudol completed its first success-
ful flight test in , after two
unsuccessful attempts.150 U.S. intelligence
sources confirm that the system is indeed
designed as an ASAT weapon, but some
analysts disagree on whether the launch-
es should be considered ASAT tests, since
the PL-19/Nudol missile system is also an
exo-atmospheric missile interceptor.151
Other missiles in the Russian arsenal that
MiG-31BM “Foxhound” aircraft on September 14, 2018. Photographed at the
are not specifically designed to strike sat-
Zhukovsky airfield outside of Moscow, the aircraft is carrying what has since
ellites can also reach objects in space. The
been identified as a potential anti-satellite weapon.
existing S-300 and S-400 surface-to-air
shipsash / jetphotos.com
missiles are capable of “near space” ac-
tivity, with maximum altitudes of 75 and
200 km respectively.152 Production of a fol-
low-on surface-to-air missile system, the
S-500, reportedly began in .153 RUSSIA'S matter.159 Although this development
Oleg Ostapenko, former Deputy Minister follows a 2013 statement from the Rus-
of Defense, once stated that the S-500 will NEWEST sian Duma expressing the Russian gov-
be able to intercept “low-orbital satellites ernment’s intent to build an air-to-space
and space weapons.”154 The S-500 is ex- CO-ORBITAL system designed to “intercept absolute-
pected to be capable of reaching air tar- ly everything that flies from space,” the
SYSTEM MAY
gets up to 600 km away—corresponding to system depicted in the 
orbital altitudes up to 300 km if launched photo would almost certainly be limited
BE DESIGNED
directly upwards.155 The new missile’s first to targeting objects in LEO.160 In 2017, a
successful test in reached an air TO TARGET Russian Aerospace Forces squadron com-
target 480 km away.156 Since the S-300, mander confirmed that an ASAT missile
S-400, S-500, and the latest version of the SATELLITES had been designed for use with the MiG-
PL-19/Nudol systems are launched using 31BM aircraft—the same variant spotted
mobile platforms, the use of any of these IN GEO. with the mysterious missile.161 Some ex-
systems to actually destroy a target on or- perts have interpreted the confirmation
bit would require a high-precision target- as a revival of the Soviet-era 30P6 Kontakt
ing capability that has yet to be demon- program. Although the Kontakt program
strated via a destructive test.157 was also supported by the MiG-31 air-
craft, it used a different missile than the
In , a photographer post-
one photographed in .162
ed a photo to an online forum for avia-
tion enthusiasts depicting a variant of Historically, the Soviet Union’s principal
the Russian MiG-31 fighter jet carrying an anti-satellite programs—which target-
unidentified missile.158 One month later, ed satellites in both LEO and GEO—were
CNBC reported that the missile was like- co-orbital. The oldest co-orbital ASAT
ly a “mock-up” of an air-launched ASAT program—Istrebitel Sputnikov (IS), mean-
weapon that could become operation- ing “satellite destroyer” in Russian—
al as early as 2022, citing three sources completed 20 tests from 1963 to 1982,
familiar with U.S. intelligence on the and successfully destroyed several of its
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

targets on orbit.163 A modified version of Suspicious RPO activity has also been ob-
the IS system, named IS-MU, became op- served in at least one Russian satellite in
erational in 1991.164 Like its predecessor, GEO.176 The satellite—known as Olymp-K,
the IS-MU program was only designed to but misleadingly referred to as Luch by
target satellites in LEO. The program offi- the Russian government—has attracted
cially ended in .165 attention for shifting its position within
the geosynchronous belt on a relatively
In the early 1980s, the Soviet Union began
frequent basis, occupying at least four-
developing its most powerful anti-satel-
teen different positions since its launch in
lite weapon to date, known as the Naryad.
.177 Olymp-K first attracted
Also a co-orbital ASAT, the Naryad may
attention when it repositioned itself be-
have been designed to reach altitudes
as high as 40,000 km, and could contain tween two satellites operated by Intelsat,
multiple individual warheads in a single a U.S. satellite communications compa-
launch, posing a serious threat to satel- ny.178 The two Intelsat satellites were sep-
lites in GEO.166 The Naryad system’s orig- arated by approximately 0.2 degrees of Russian Nesting
inal upper stage—now called Briz-K—is longitude in the geostationary belt, likely
Satellites
still in use today as part of the commercial occupying the same orbital slot.179 Ap-
Rokot and Briz staging combination.167 The proaching satellites in GEO in this manner IN 2017 AND 2018, three small Russian
Naryad-era ground station—named Okno, could allow for close inspection or poten- satellites—Cosmos 2519, 2521, and
meaning “window” in Russian—can track tially intercepting their communication 2523—engaged in RPO in LEO, prompt-
space objects in MEO and GEO. Although links.180 Kay Sears, an Intelsat executive, ing a statement of concern from the U.S.
Okno is in modern-day Tajikistan, control expressed her concern over the issue and State Department.172 Although a June
of the facility was transferred to Russia in highlighted the Russian satellite’s behav- 2017 Russian Soyuz launch appeared to
the mid-2000s and it remains operation- ior as “not normal.”181 Although U.S. Space place just one satellite in LEO—Cosmos
2519—a second satellite was detected
al.168 The system has undergone upgrades, Command sent warnings to Russia after it
two months later, likely deployed from
and a 2016 report suggests that Okno can predicted that Olymp-K would soon pass
the first as a subsatellite.173 In October
now detect objects as high as 50,000 km within 5 km of another satellite, Russia
2017, a third satellite was deployed from
(well past the geostationary belt).169 appeared unresponsive and later dismiss-
either Cosmos 2519 or its subsatellite,
ive.182 In , Olymp-K ap-
New analysis published in Jane’s Intel- resulting in three independent satel-
ligence Review in sug- proached a third Intelsat satellite.183 The lites in orbit. Over the course of several
international response escalated in Sep- months, the satellites engaged in a se-
gests that Russia’s newest co-orbital
tember 2018, when French Minister of the ries of maneuvers and RPO exercises,
system may be designed to target sat-
including slow flybys, close approaches,
ellites in GEO.170 Designated Burevest-
and rendezvous.
nik—a commonly-used name for Rus-
In , Assistant U.S. Secretary
sian defense systems, meaning “stormy
of State for Arms Control, Verification,
petrel”—the new co-orbital ASAT system
Figure 4: Russian rendezvous and
and Compliance Yleem Poblete expressed
is likely connected to a recent Russian
proximity operations in the geosynchro- concern over Russian RPO activity, calling
RPO observed with suspicion by the in-
nous belt. Publicly available data suggests it “very abnormal behavior.”174 Although
ternational space community over the
that Russian satellite Olymp-K made several secretive subsatellite deployments are in-
past five years.171 The on-orbit inspection
close approaches in GEO. The figure be- deed uncommon, space security experts
component of the Burevestnik system low highlights several satellites that have disagreed with the U.S. State Department
appears to share greatest similarity with experienced close approaches with Olymp-K official, saying that RPO activities like the
Russian RPO activities in LEO in 2017 and ones observed by Cosmos 2519 and its
between and . Learn
2018, including the use of relatively light- subsatellites are not inherently “nefari-
more at aerospace.csis.org/olymp.
weight satellites for close approaches. space-track.org ous or suspicious.”175
Intelsat 901
Olymp-K
Jul. 2015
Intelsat 905
Oct. 2015
Intelsat 7 Athena-Fidus
Jul. 2015 Oct. 2017

RUSSIA
Armed Forces Florence Parly accused Russia of com-
mitting “an act of espionage” after it approached a
French-Italian military satellite “a bit too closely” in RUSSIA LIKELY HAS
. For more details on Olymp-K’s move-
ments in GEO, see Figure 4. THE CAPABILITY TO DE-
With the most diverse ballistic and cruise missile ar-
STROY AND DEGRADE
senal in the world, Russia poses a significant coun-
terspace threat to satellite systems through its ability SATELLITES IN SPACE
to strike satellite ground stations around the world
with conventional forces.184 USING NON-KINETIC
Non-Kinetic Physical PHYSICAL COUNTER-
Russia likely has the capability to destroy and de-
SPACE SYSTEMS.
grade satellites in space using non-kinetic physical
counterspace systems, including high-altitude EMPs
and directed energy weapons. Though perhaps not
intentionally intended as ASAT weapons research,
the Soviet Union first tested a non-kinetic coun-
terspace weapon in 1961 and 1962, when it deto-
In , Interfax reported that Russian
nated three nuclear warheads approximately 400
weapons manufacturer Almaz-Antey had finished
km above the Earth’s surface—including one over
construction for a new laser ASAT weapon system
Kazakhstan, which destroyed the region’s electri-
with both ground- and air-based components.192 Al-
cal grid.185 Like the United States after the Starfish
though the new system could be considered a
Prime test in 1962, the Soviets quickly learned of
follow-on to Sokol Eshelon, the Interfax report ex-
the indiscriminate damage of high-altitude nucle-
plicitly stated that the new laser weapon program
ar tests and soon began working on other, kinetic
would most likely rely on a “fundamentally new
physical weapons with more localized effects.186 In
aircraft [that is] not based on the Il-76MD.”193 An air-
, Vladimir Lukin, chairman of the Duma In-
craft-mounted laser weapon could be capable of
ternational Affairs Committee, told a U.S. congress-
dazzling or blinding sensors on satellites. If they are
man during an official visit that Russia had retained
capable of higher power levels, they could also po-
the Soviet Union’s capability to detonate a high-
tentially degrade other light- or heat-sensitive phys-
altitude nuclear weapon.187
ical components on a satellite, such as solar arrays,
More recently, Russia appears to have renewed causing more permanent damage.
its Soviet-era directed energy counterspace weap-
In , analysis published in Jane’s In-
on development and testing, including air- and telligence Review suggested that a component of the
ground-based laser weapons. In 2010, Russian Krona laser space surveillance system less than 40
news agency Interfax reported the development km north of the Georgian border may be upgraded
of a laser ASAT weapon for use aboard a modified to become a laser ASAT weapon.194 Since 2005, the
Ilyushin Il-76MD cargo plane, known as the Ber- Krona facility has used laser ranging—sending short
iev A-60.188 The system—known as Sokol Eshelon, laser pulses to a satellite in order to observe the
meaning “Falcon Echelon”—appears to be a revival pulses’ deflection and determine the distance be-
of a Soviet system first developed in 1965.189 Leaked tween it and the observation site—to track space ob-
photos of the aircraft from 2011 show a vertical- jects.195 Similarly, Russia also has a robust network of
ly-oriented laser mounted on the top of the plane. ground-based lasers that are ostensibly for scientific
The laser system was reportedly used in 2009 to il- purposes as part of the International Laser Ranging
luminate a Japanese satellite at an altitude of 1,500 Service (ILRS), which has stations located all over
km.190 Although a 2012 report said the program was the world.196 Although there is no evidence showing
halted in 2011 due to budget cuts, a second Russian that these lasers have been used to dazzle satellites,
news report from the same year claimed the pro- some of the same technologies used for laser ranging
gram is still operational.191 could be adapted for a counterspace system.197
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

GPS Signal Loss Reported
Barents Sea
Russian Military Activity
Mehamn
Russian
Berlevag
North
Fleet
Alta
Tromsø Kirkenes
Norway
Lyngen Russian Base
at Pechenga
Finland
Sweden Russia
Figure 5: Instances of GPS Jamming in the Arctic Circle. Civilian airports in northern Norway and Finland have expe-
rienced periodic GPS outages that appear to correspond with military exercises happening in the region. Learn more at
aerospace.csis.org/arcticjamming the barents observer / the guardian
of jamming Iridium communication satel-
Electronic
lite signals and spoofing GPS during the
“There is a tendency nowadays
Russia is regularly accused of aggressive
Kerch Strait incident a month earlier—dur-
to accuse Russia of all sins, GPS jamming and spoofing campaigns,
ing which the Russian coast guard opened
mortal or otherwise...as a rule, affecting conflict regions like Ukraine and
fire on three Ukrainian Navy ships.200
these accusations are baseless.” Syria during Russian interventions, and
A video leaked in 2015 confirmed Rus-
also bordering states like Norway and
DMITRY PESKOV, PRESS SECRETARY sia’s deployment of the Krasukha-4
Finland during peacetime. These accusa-
FOR THE PRESIDENT OF RUSSIA198 truck-mounted jamming system in Syria.
tions are supported by strong evidence.
Reports also indicate that Russia supplied
During the Crimean conflict in 2014, Rus-
the Assad regime with R-330P jammers of
sia jammed GPS signals in Ukraine, which
its own.201 In , NBC news report-
resulted in the loss of GPS for radios and
ed that more recent Russian jamming in
phones, as well as the grounding of some
Syria has affected small U.S. drones oper-
remotely piloted aircraft. According to
ating in the region, citing four anonymous
independent reports from Ukrainian an-
U.S. officials.202
alysts, Russia used six different jamming
and radio monitoring platforms in Ukraine For a week in , Wid-
from 2014 to 2017, including the R-330Zh erøe—one of Norway’s largest regional
jammer and the R-381T2 ultra-high fre- airlines—suffered a loss of GPS signals in
quency (UHF) radio monitoring system.199 the northernmost region of the country.203
In , Ukrainian Navy Com- Analysis by the Norwegian National Com-
mander Ihor Voronchenko accused Russia munications Authority suggests that the

RUSSIA
signal disruptions originated from the east, hijack older commercial satellite internet services
where Norway’s Finnmark County borders that still use unencrypted data links as part of their
Russia’s Murmansk Oblast.204 The affected command and control infrastructure.213
week coincided with a Russian-Belarusian
Outside of the space domain, Russia is regularly ac-
joint military exercise in Murmansk called
cused of engaging in cyberwarfare. In 2007, Russia
Zapad-2017.205 A year later, in October and
was blamed for cyberattacks against Estonia which
, Norway hosted the North
paralyzed online banking services, government com-
Atlantic Treaty Organization’s (NATO) Tri- munications, and Estonian media outlets.214 Similarly,
dent Juncture 18 exercise in its eastern Ukraine has sustained thousands of Russian cyberat-
and central region—well south of Finn- tacks throughout the Crimean conflict over the past
mark—using northern airports in Norway, few years.215 In 2015, a French satellite TV network was
Sweden, and Finland for supporting air- pulled off the air in an attack linked to a Russian hack-
craft participating in the exercise.206 Soon er group known as APT 28.216 In 2017, four U.S. intelli-
after the exercise, NATO spokesman Oana gence agencies assessed with “high confidence” that
Lungescu announced that “Norway has de- Russia interfered with the 2016 presidential election
termined that Russia was responsible for using a variety of cyberattacks and social engineering
jamming GPS signals in the Kola Peninsula schemes.217 The governments of the United Kingdom,
during Exercise Trident Juncture.”207 Sever- France, Germany, Kyrgyzstan, and Georgia have each
al prominent Russian officials adamantly accused Russia of similar cyberattacks. Given Russia’s
denied the accusations.208 In , prolific use of cyberattacks in other domains, Russia’s
the northern Finnmark region of Norway cyber capabilities likely pose a significant threat to
again experienced GPS jamming during space systems as well.
Exercise Clockwork, a British training ex-
ercise in Norway using Apache attack hel-
icopters.209 For more details on Russian SUMMARY
jamming in the Arctic Circle, see Figure 5.
In , the U.S. Maritime Adminis- OVERALL, RUSSIA POSES a significant threat across
tration reported an apparent GPS spoofing all four counterspace weapon categories. Evidence
attack in the Black Sea.210 A ship operating suggests that the country is currently developing
near Novorossiysk, Russia, measured a 30 TEL- and air-launched direct-ascent ASAT weapons,
mile error in its GPS fixing position. Over co-orbital systems for on-orbit inspection, ground-
20 other ships in the region reported sim- and air-based laser weapons, and a world-class net-
ilar issues.211 work of electronic weapons. Russia is likely also ca-
pable of destructive cyberwarfare targeting satellite
Although the majority of electronic at-
systems and the ground stations that support them.
tacks attributed to Russia primarily affect
Although a large portion of the country’s counter-
relatively small regions, Russia may also
space programs has been inherited from the Soviet
be developing the capability for more
Union, recent activities observed in the unclassified
widespread GPS jamming across its terri-
domain make it clear that developing a robust, di-
tory. In 2016, the Russian military began
verse arsenal of counterspace weapons is a priority
installing GPS jammers, a system called
for the modern-day Russian Federation.
Pole-21, on each of the country’s 250,000
cell phone towers. Each Pole-21 system
has an effective range of 80 km.212
Cyber
Russia’s cyber capabilities are among
the most advanced in the world. Since
2007, a Russian-speaking group of hack-
ers—likely linked to the Russian govern-
ment—has used malware called Turla to
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

Number of Successful IRAN
Orbital Launches in 2018218

IRAN
IRAN’S PURSUIT OF SPACE CAPABILITIES is a relatively recent develop-
ment, and its efforts in space are often viewed as a thinly-veiled cover
for its developing ballistic missile program.220 Iran has a relatively weak
“Iran’s regional space industrial base, especially given the Iranian Space Agency’s close
ambitions and ties to the nation’s Ministry of Defense, and evidence suggests that a por-
improved mili- tion of Iran’s space technologies were adapted from Russian and North Ko-
rean counterparts.221 Iran maintains a domestic space launch facility in the
tary capabilities
northeastern Semnan Province, and in 2014, it also secured an agreement
almost certainly
to use the Russian-owned Baikonur Cosmodrome Cosmodrome in Kazakh-
will threaten US
stan for space launch.222
interests in the
Iran successfully launched its first domestically-manufactured satellite on
coming year.”
a Safir-1 rocket in , and has vowed to put a human in space
DANIEL R. COATS, by 2025.223 While human spaceflight remains a stretch for Iran, the space
U.S. DIRECTOR OF NA- agency claims to have sent various living creatures into space in recent
TIONAL INTELLIGENCE219
years, including a monkey in 2013.224 In , Planet, an Earth im-
aging company, released images of two new Iranian space launch pads at
the Imam Khomeini Space Center.225 One of these pads was the launch site
of a failed launch attempt on January 15, 2019. According to press reports,
“Iran’s information and communications minister, Mohammad Javad Azari
Jahromi, announced on social media that the rocket failed to reach the
speed needed to enter orbit around the Earth due to a failure in the launch-
er’s third stage.”226 The Simorgh, the space launch vehicle used in this test,
has yet to complete a fully successful mission, despite several attempts.227
The U.S. intelligence community has concluded that Iran’s continued work
to develop space launch vehicles will shorten the timeline to create a suc-
cessful ICBM since the two systems use similar technologies.228 After the
January launch attempt, Israeli president Benjamin Netanyahu claimed
the launch was, in fact, a test of the first stage of an ICBM.229 A few days

IRAN
with possible propellant tanks.”231 On
February 6, images showed burn marks
on the pad—a tell-tale sign of a launch—
but Iran has not claimed to have success-
fully placed a satellite in orbit.232 Reports
speculate the payload on board was a
remote-sensing satellite developed by
the Sharif University of Technology.233 Ex-
perts assess that something must have
gone awry in the second stage or deploy-
ment of the satellite into its intended or-
bit, since Iran did not publicly announce
a successful launch or the placement of a
satellite into orbit.234
Iran has also developed space capabilities
with military applications, such as a space
monitoring center announced in that uses radar, electro-optical, and
radio tracking. According to the Iranian de-
fense minister Ahmad Vahidi, “[t]he base
is aimed at securing the country’s space
facilities and monitoring space objects, es-
pecially satellites that pass overhead.”235
SPACE ORGANIZATION
AND DOCTRINE
IN 2003, IRAN FORMED the Iranian Space
Agency to coordinate its space activities
and technology development. The space
agency is in charge of both military and
civil space programs, and the distinc-
tions between the two have at times been
blurred.236 The agency is under the over-
sight of the Ministry of Information and
A replica of the Iranian Safir launch prior to the test, U.S.secretary of state,
Communications Technology, but it takes
vehicle on display on February 10, 2009. Mike Pompeo, made a similar statement,
direction from the Supreme Space Coun-
The Safir-1 launch vehicle has a 50 asserting that tests of Iran’s space launch
percent success rate. vehicle program include “virtually identi- cil. The Supreme Space Council is chaired
scott peterson / getty images cal” technology as a ballistic missile and by the president of Iran and is presided
over by the defense minister.237 The head
are a violation of the 2015 nuclear deal.230
of the Iranian Space Agency serves as the
Experts noted that a second launch was secretary of the Supreme Space Council.238
attempted on February 6, 2019 by a Sa- Little is publicly known about Iran’s doc-
fir-1 launch vehicle. Images released by trine for space and counterspace opera-
Planet showed preparation activity for tions, but evidence suggests that Iran be-
the launch on February 5, “including lieves the capability “to deny the United
people and launch vehicles at the site, States the ability to use space in a region-
the two-stage Safir rocket and a truck al conflict” is critical to its security.239
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

believed to be derived from the North Ko-
rean No Dong 1 missile,242 and the Safir-2,
which has been used as a space launch ve-
EVIDENCE SUGGESTS THAT
hicle.243 Iran has demonstrated the ability
IRAN BELIEVES THE CAPABILITY to launch and operate rudimentary satel-
lites, and its space monitoring center gives
TO DENY THE UNITED STATES it the ability to track objects and better
understand the space environment. But
THE ABILITY TO USE SPACE IS many other technological hurdles would
need to be overcome before it could field
CRITICAL TO ITS SECURITY.
a direct-ascent kinetic ASAT weapon, such
as onboard sensors that could guide a
warhead into a target satellite.
Iran could construct a crude direct-as-
cent ASAT capability in the near-term by
using existing ballistic missile technology
to launch an unguided warhead within
Iran’s military spending has expanded the vicinity of a target satellite. An un-
by over 50 percent in the last five years, Tracking guided kinetic ASAT weapon is unlikely to
swelling to 7.5 percent of its total budget be effective at striking a satellite directly,
Iran’s Launch
for 2018–2019.240 Though Iranian leader- but it could create a debris hazard that
ship takes steps to obscure the specifics Infrastructure threatens the safety of the target satel-
of its budget, priorities include improving lite and other satellites in a similar orbit,
IRAN MAY ONCE AGAIN be de- forcing them to maneuver and expend
domestic missile production capabilities,
veloping and testing long-range precious propellant.
which are currently limited due to Iran’s
missiles at a site that hosted a
reliance on imported missile engines. In 2018, United States-based analysts
lone missile launch test in 2013,
Traditionally, Iran’s military doctrine has discovered that Iran was bringing a long-
but has since been considered
included using its ballistic missile capabil- thought defunct missile test site back on-
defunct. Recent satellite im-
ities to respond to attacks by striking large agery of Shahrud, Iran, shows line. This site is outfitted for long-range
targets, an activity limited by its arsenal’s dramatic increases in facility missile tests, which inherently could evolve
poor accuracy. Evidence shows that Iran infrastructure over the last few into an ASAT capability, although there is
hopes to continue development focused years, including buildings paint- no reason to think this is the intended pur-
on precision targeting.241 While Iran is not ed a vibrant hue favored by the pose of these test sites.244 To date, Iran has
a major space power in terms of its space former lead scientist of Iran’s not tested or proven capabilities needed
long-range missile program.
capabilities, it has developed significant for a co-orbital anti-satellite weapon.
counterspace capabilities that can threat- Though analysts determined Iran can also pose a moderate threat to
that the majority of the
en U.S. space systems. space systems through its ability to at-
Shahrud facility features un-
tack ground stations with conventional
derground structures, open-
air evidence of missile activity forces. Iran has fairly substantial conven-
COUNTERSPACE is also apparent. Evident in tional forces with an estimated 534,000
WEAPONS the photos are highly specif- active personnel.246 Certain aspects of
ic signs of long-range missile
their conventional forces could pose a
testing such as prominent
kinetic physical threat, especially to ac-
ground scars, a known result
Kinetic Physical cessible regional ground stations. For
of missile test-fires. The scars
example, through a successful ground or
Open-source information does not indi- appeared in 2016 and 2017 in
cate that Iran is attempting to develop front of missile stands capable sea-based attack, or a cruise or ballistic
of supporting engines with be- missile, Iran could hypothetically dam-
either direct-ascent or co-orbital ASAT
tween 62 and 93 tons of thrust age or destroy a U.S. ground station in
weapons; however, Iran has the ballistic
of power (enough thrust for an Bahrain that supports GPS.247
missile technology necessary to form the
ICBM, or anti-satellite capabil-
basis of a future direct-ascent kinetic ASAT
ity). If Iran is indeed working Non-Kinetic Physical
capability. Iran has developed, tested,
toward developing ICBMs, the
and proliferated a wide range of ballistic process may take between 5 Iran may have acquired and used a laser
missiles, including the Shahab-3, which is and 10 years.245 dazzling or blinding counterspace system

IRAN
on a United States satellite. In 2011, the
Christian Science Monitor quoted an un-
named European intelligence source stat- THE MOST
ing that Iran managed to “blind” a U.S.
satellite by “aiming a laser burst quite CONCERNING
accurately.”248 The technology necessary
ELECTRONIC
to do this, particularly the adaptive op-
tics needed to steer and focus a laser as
ATTACK CAPA-
it passes through the Earth’s atmosphere,
is rather sophisticated. Iran may have
BILITY IRAN
obtained this technology from Russia or
China. Its capabilities in this area remain
HAS PUBLIC-
highly uncertain based on the limited
publicly available information. LY CLAIMED IS
If Iran were to pursue a breakout nuclear
ITS ABILITY TO
capability, it is conceivable that it could
mate a nuclear weapon with one of its
SPOOF GPS
ballistic missiles to create a nuclear ASAT
capability.249 However, the U.S. Director of
SIGNALS.
National Intelligence has publicly stated
that Iran has not yet developed a nucle-
ar weapon and the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) “has extended the
amount of time Iran would need to pro-
nian facility and issued a note of protest
duce enough fissile material for a nucle-
to the Iranian government.252 Similar at-
ar weapon from a few months to about a
tacks emanated from Bulgaria and Lib-
year.”250 The aim of Iran’s nuclear program
ya from 2005 to 2006.253
all along has been to develop a nucle-
ar-armed ICBM to deter the United States, In 2010, Iran jammed British Broadcast-
not a nuclear counterspace ASAT weapon, ing Corporation (BBC) and VOA satel-
so it is unlikely to pursue this capability in lite downlink signals going into Iran. At
the foreseeable future. first, the jamming targeted BBC and VOA
broadcasts on the Hot Bird 6 commer-
Electronic
cial satellite; when the broadcasts were
“Iran undertakes more Iran has an extensive record of using moved to other commercial satellites, the
purposeful interference electronic forms of attack against space jamming targeted them as well.254
with U.S. military and systems, including uplink jamming, Perhaps the most concerning electron-
downlink jamming, and spoofing. On ic attack capability Iran has publicly
commercial space systems
July 16, 2003, Voice of America (VOA) acknowledged is its ability to spoof
using lasers and jammers
broadcasts to Iran began to experience GPS signals. In 2011, Iran claimed to
than any other country.”
interference with their transmissions have downed a U.S. RQ-170 drone by
over the Telestar-12 satellite. The up- jamming its satellite communications
MICAH ZENKO,
COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS251 link jamming of this commercial sat- links and spoofing the GPS signals it
ellite originated from the area around received. An Iranian engineer was quot-
Havana, Cuba. The U.S. State Depart- ed at the time as saying that they were
ment notified Cuba of the issue, and the able to make the drone “land on its own
Cubans determined that the jamming where we wanted it to, without having
was “by the Iranians in Cuba, using a to crack the remote-control signals and
compound in a suburb of the capital be- communications.”255 The U.S. govern-
longing to the Iranian embassy.” Cuban ment did not verify Iran’s claims, but if
authorities promptly shut down the Ira- true, they represent a significant coun-
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

IRAN WAS SUPPORTED BY
THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT IN A
COORDINATED JAMMING EFFORT
AGAINST APPROXIMATELY 25
INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTERS.
terspace capability that could be used sufficient justification for a pre-emptive
to thwart U.S. precision-guided weap- military strike.259
ons in the future.
In 2014, Iranian hackers “successfully
Iran has also been jamming several inter- compromised a Kurdish satellite televi-
national and regional television broad- sion station, Newroz TV,” which is aligned
casts in the Middle East. Al Jazeera faced with the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK).
targeted attacks in after its Iranian cyber capabilities are growing and
coverage of the the conflict in Syria. The so is Iran’s willingness to employ cyber at-
origin of the attacks were traced to two tacks against targeted defense companies,
locations in Iran.256 Later that year, Iran media conglomerates, and adversaries.260
was supported by the Syrian government Iran’s sophisticated cyber capabilities sug-
in a coordinated jamming effort against gest that it could employ cyberattacks on
approximately 25 international broad- space systems as well.
casters, “including the BBC, France 24,
Deutsche Welle and the Voice of America.”
This attack also affected Eutelsat broad- SUMMARY
casts in Western Europe.257
Cyber ALTHOUGH IRAN IS OPENLY investing in
space launch capabilities, it is far from de-
Iran is also believed to have advanced
veloping any direct-ascent kinetic physi-
offensive cyber capabilities that could
cal ASAT weapon. Similarly, with only
potentially be used to target U.S. space
a few successful satellites in orbit, Iran
systems. Specifically, Iran is believed to
is unlikely to develop co-orbital kinetic
be actively exploring the military uses of
physical capabilities in the near future.
cyber capabilities to disrupt enemy mis-
To make significant quick progress on
sile defense systems, remotely piloted
any kinetic physical system, Iran would
aircraft, logistics operations, and com-
likely need technology and resources
mand and control links.258 In the past,
from either from either Russia or China.
Iran has demonstrated its cyber capa-
The same may be true for Iran’s kinetic
bilities by attacking U.S. infrastructure.
non-physical capabilities. However, Iran
In 2012, Iran launched a massive denial
has moderate electronic and cyber coun-
of service attack against United States
terspace capabilities and has demon-
banks and telecommunications compa-
strated successful jamming and hacking
nies. This particular incident prompt- attacks in recent years.
ed a public statement by then-defense
secretary Leon Panetta warning that
the imminent threat of a cyberattack
that could cause significant property
damage or kill U.S. citizens would be

NORTH KOREA Number of Successful
Orbital Launches in 2018261

NORTH
KOREA
“Pyongyang and Wash- L IKE MANY SPACEFARING NATIONS, North Korea’s space capabilities
are closely tied to its ballistic missile development. The Unha-3—the
ington’s position on their
space launch vehicle used for North Korea’s only two successful or-
satellite launches are
bital launches—likely used components from other missiles within
radically different, and
the country’s arsenal, including the medium-range Nodong and Scud-class
thus a crisis may arise ballistic missiles.263 Although reaching orbit is a significant achievement,
once again, and one many experts doubt that the few satellites launched by North Korea perform
cannot say it will not all of the functions the North Korean government claims.264 There is little in-
dication that North Korea is making substantial efforts to build or sustain a
end up with a war.”
space industrial base, but its missile program is growing and many believe
CHEONG SEONG-CHANG, that it is aided by technology from China, Iran, and Pakistan.265
SEJONG INSTITUTE262
Although North Korea has successfully achieved orbital space launch in the
past, satellite imagery suggests that the nation’s only active spaceport—the
Sohae Satellite Launching Station on the country’s western coast—was be-
ing actively disassembled in 2018.266 In a press conference following the re-
lease of a joint declaration between the U.S. president and the North Kore-
an leader, President Donald Trump stated that leader Kim Jong-un agreed
to destroy “a major missile engine testing site.”267 While such a commit-
ment was not included in the signed declaration, the North Korean govern-
ment appeared to have selected Sohae.268 More recent satellite imagery—
acquired in —suggests that the North Koreans have sharply re-
versed their activities and are rapidly rebuilding the site.269
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

suggested that the Kwangmyongsong-5—
which uses the same name as all previ-
Vertical Engine
Test Stand ous North Korean satellites—would be
significantly more advanced than its pre-
decessors, featuring remote sensing and
communications capabilities. The sat-
ellite may be launched on a transporter
erector launcher (TEL) as opposed to the
previously successful Unha vehicle. Us-
ing a TEL would allow North Korea to use
several of its dispersed missile operating
bases—effectively launching a satellite
unannounced—instead of the Sohae Sat-
ellite Launching Station, where an Unha
rocket would be visible on the launch pad
via satellite imagery prior to launch.278
In parallel with its space program, North
Korea has also made significant progress
in developing and testing ballistic mis-
Copyright © 2019 by Airbus siles. After a significant increase in ballistic
missile tests since leader Kim Jong-un’s
Satellite imagery of the Sohae Satellite Launching Station, January 20, 2019. The spaceport inauguration in 2011, reaching a peak of
has not been used for an orbital space launch attempt since . Satellite imagery shows 25 launches in 2017, North Korea abrupt-
some dismantling activity between June and , but little since then. ly halted its test program and launched
digitalglobe / csis beyond parallel no missiles in 2018.279 The most powerful
missile tested thus far, the Hwasong-15,
reached an altitude of almost 4,500 km
during its test flight, higher than satel-
Before constructing the Sohae spaceport, pan—using a variant of the Taepodong-1,
lites in LEO.280 Based on publicly availa-
North Korea attempted an orbital space an intermediate-range ballistic missile.272
ble information, however, it is not clear
launch in 1998 from the Tonghae Satellite Although North Korea claimed that a
whether North Korea has developed the
Launching Ground—a launch facility on satellite reached orbit and broadcasted
re-entry vehicle technology that would be
the country’s east coast, well-positioned songs honoring North Korean leaders,
necessary to deploy a conventional or nu-
for eastward launches over the Sea of Ja- U.S. Space Command later stated that
clear warhead on its long-range missiles.
no payload successfully reached orbit
as a result of the launch.273 The Tonghae
launch site hosted two more failed launch
Disassembling SPACE ORGANIZATION
attempts in 2006 and 2009.
AND DOCTRINE
a Spaceport North Korea suffered another failure in
, this time using the Unha-3 at
ACCORDING TO A report
the Sohae spaceport. In , LITTLE IS KNOWN about North Korea’s
from the Center for Strategic and Interna-
the country successfully orbited its first doctrine or operational concepts for the
tional Studies’ Beyond Parallel program,
satellite.274 In , it success- use of counterspace capabilities. It has
the Sohae Satellite Launching Station-
showed “some initial steps” of disassem- fully placed a second satellite in orbit.275 been noted that the absence of discus-
bly in the two months following the 2018 While the space capabilities provided by sion about counterspace capabilities
Singapore Summit meeting between U.S. these two satellites have little, if any, mili- that could threaten the U.S. military is
president Donald Trump and North Kore- tary significance, it demonstrates that the curious given the aggressive rhetoric
an leader Kim Jong-un, but little evidence nation has the capability of placing an ob- used by the regime in touting its nuclear
of any additional dismantling activity af- ject into orbit. and missile programs.281
ter .270 A second CSIS Beyond
North Korea has been clear in the past In , North Korea became a sig-
Parallel report showed images from —just two days after President Trump about its plans to continue launching sat- natory to two United Nations space trea-
and the North Korean leader met at the ellites.276 In 2017, a South Korean news- ties: the Outer Space Treaty of 1967 and
Hanoi summit—showing rapid rebuilding paper reported that a new satellite was the Convention on Registration of Ob-
activities at Sohae.271 being prepared for launch.277 The report jects Launched into Outer Space of 1974.282

NORTH KOREA
Four years later, in , the coun- In 2018, the Center for Strategic and
try’s Supreme People’s Assembly estab- International Studies’ Beyond Parallel
lished the National Aerospace Develop- program released a report identifying
ment Administration (NADA), the official undeclared missile operating bases in
North Korean space agency.283 North Korea, which could be used for
In public remarks, representatives from TEL launches in a crisis scenario.286 One
North Korea’s delegation to the United newly identified site—the Sino-Ri mis-
Nations aggressively assert their state’s sile operating base pictured below—is
right to pursue peaceful space operations equipped with Nodong-1 medium-range
that benefit its technological develop- ballistic missiles (MRBM).287 A missile of
ment and improve the quality of life for this class would likely be able to carry a
its citizens.284 But due to the means by 1200 kg payload to a maximum altitude
which the country reaches space—hitch- of 600 to 750 km, well within the LEO or-
ing a ride onboard a launch system clear- bital regime.288
ly derived from a ballistic missile—North
Missiles launched from North Korean
Korean space activities are constantly at
territory could more easily be used in a
odds with UN Security Council resolu-
conventional attack on nearby ground
tions prohibiting missile development.
stations that support satellite opera-
tions, such as the U.S.-operated GPS
monitoring station in South Korea.289 Al-
COUNTERSPACE
though North Korea’s missile technolo-
WEAPONS gy has developed quickly over the last Satellite imagery of the Sino-Ri missile
15 years, it is unlikely that the country operating base on April 4, 2018. The facility
could threaten ground stations at long likely hosts Nodong-1 MRBM, a TEL-launched
Kinetic Physical
distances, due to the limited range and missile capable of reaching LEO if used in a
accuracy of its ballistic and cruise mis- direct-ascent ASAT scenario.
To date, North Korea has not tested, or in-
sile arsenal.290 digitalglobe / csis beyond parallel
dicated that it is attempting to develop, a
direct-ascent or co-orbital ASAT capabili-
ty. The space launch and ballistic missile
technology demonstrated by North Ko-
rea could serve as the basis for a kinetic
ASAT capability, but many technological
hurdles remain. An effective direct-ascent
or co-orbital ASAT weapon would require
onboard sensors—optical, infrared, radar,
etc.—and a guidance system to steer the
warhead into a target satellite. There are
no indications that North Korea has or
is attempting to acquire the technology
needed for this.285 It is conceivable that
North Korea could field a crude direct-as-
cent ASAT capability in the near-term by
adapting a ballistic missile to launch an
unguided warhead to detonate in the vi-
cinity of a target satellite. Such a weap-
on would be unlikely to directly strike a
Underground Facility or Bunker Entrance
satellite, but it could create a debris field
Unconfirmed Underground Facility Entrance
that complicates future operations for the Facility Boundary
target satellite and any other satellites in
European Space Agency (ESA)
a similar orbit.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

Non-Kinetic Physical
Some evidence suggests that North Korea
may be developing the capability to de-
ploy a nuclear EMP. However, the technol-
ogy necessary to develop other directed
energy weapons, such as lasers that can
dazzle or blind the sensors on satellites,
requires a level of sophistication that
North Korea likely does not possess.291 A
third country, such as China or Russia,
could provide these capabilities to North
Korea, but there is no publicly available
evidence to suggest this has happened.
In a written statement to Congress in
2017, the Commission to Assess the
Threat to the United States from Elec-
tromagnetic Pulse Attack, commonly
referred to as the EMP Commission, of-
fered evidence that North Korea may be
developing an EMP weapon, warning of
a “potentially imminent and existential
threat of nuclear EMP attack” against the The view from the North Korean mission the warhead reaches its target on the
United States.292 The EMP Commission control room on April 8, 2012, during the first ground—a nuclear-armed missile aimed
notes that in 2004 two Russian generals Unha-3 launch. Although this launch did not at destroying satellites in LEO could be
warned the commission that the design successfully reach orbit, the same launch facil- detonated above the atmosphere, requir-
for a Russian EMP warhead was unin- ity supported a successful orbital launch using ing significantly less advanced technolo-
tentionally transferred to North Korea. the same launch system just eight days later. gies.297 Although North Korea is not a sig-
South Korean intelligence officials told pedro ugarte / afp / getty images natory of the 1963 Partial Test Ban Treaty,
the press in 2009 that Russian scientists the country has never tested a nuclear
were in North Korea helping to develop weapon at high altitudes.298
an EMP weapon. Moreover, the commis-
Electronic
sion notes that in 2013 a Chinese mili-
tary commentator indicated that North North Korea has acquired and is actively
Korea already has “super-EMP nuclear using electronic forms of attack against
weapons.”293 In 2018, The Daily NK—a space systems. In 2010, the South Korean
South Korean news site—obtained a Defense Minister, Kim Tae-young, said in
North Korean internal document de- a speech to parliament that “North Korea
scribing the level of damage possible as has imported vehicle-mountable devices
a result of a nuclear EMP attack.294 The capable of jamming GPS signals from Rus-
material was originally distributed as sia.” These downlink jamming systems
part of a collection of propaganda cel- reportedly have an effective radius of 50
NORTH KOREA
ebrating the political platform of the to 100 km. North Korea began using this
Workers’ Party of Korea, the ruling party jamming equipment against South Korea
HAS REPEAT-
of North Korea. in , but South Korean forces
could not pinpoint the location of the jam-
A 2017 U.S. DIA assessment concluded EDLY USED ITS
mers at that time because the jamming
that North Korea has the capability to
produce a nuclear weapon small enough GPS JAMMING lasted just 10 minutes in each instance.299
to be launched aboard a ballistic missile.295 In the years since, North Korea has re-
CAPABILITIES
Thus, North Korea could theoretically peatedly used its GPS jamming capabili-
launch a nuclear weapon into space and ties against the South. More GPS jamming
AGAINST SOUTH
detonate it.296 Unlike an ICBM—which occurred in and again
would require an accurate guidance in . The 2011 incident lasted
KOREA.
system and a reentry vehicle to ensure 10 days and coincided with an annual

NORTH KOREA
U.S.-Korean military exercise.300 Jamming occurred strate the capability to damage physical infrastruc-
again in , disrupting air traffic at Incheon ture through cyberspace, North Korea conducted a
and Gimpo International Airports, and forcing flights cyberattack on a South Korean nuclear power plant.309
to use alternative navigation systems.301 In March In 2018, the U.S. Department of Justice unsealed its
and , over 250 South Korean fishing boats criminal charges against an individual North Korean
lost access to GPS, forcing them to return to shore.302 citizen for stealing over $80 million from a Bangla-
A few days later, South Korea complained to the deshi bank.310
United Nations Security Council that North Korea
Given its demonstrated cyber capabilities, it is con-
was jamming GPS signals across the border, with ceivable that North Korea could initiate a cyberattack
the jamming coming from five areas in North Ko- against U.S. space systems to intercept information,
rea: Pyongyang, Kaesong, Haeju, Yonan county, and as it did in the Sony attack, or to inject corrupt infor-
Mount Kumgang.303 mation that could cause physical damage to U.S. sat-
The South Korean Defense Ministry has said it be- ellites or the forces that depend on them.
lieves the jamming attacks originate from “a regi-
ment-sized electronic warfare unit near the North
Korean capital Pyongyang, and battalion-sized units SUMMARY
closer to the inter-Korean border.”304 The jammers
are mounted on mobile platforms and are operated
NORTH KOREA HAS ONLY DEMONSTRATED its capa-
intermittently, so they could be difficult to locate and
bilities in two of the four counterspace weapon cate-
neutralize in a conflict. North Korea appears to be
gories: electronic and cyberattack capabilities.
gaining operational experience using these systems
Although North Korea has demonstrated its dedi-
in peacetime. To what extent these capabilities are
cation to increasing the range of its ICBM-class mis-
integrated into its overall military operations remains
siles, its failures on-orbit—or in most cases, failures
unknown. Since the GPS jammers were acquired
to reach orbit—suggest that the country is far from
from Russia, it is possible that North Korea could
developing the capabilities needed to pose a signifi-
also have acquired other types of jamming capabil-
cant kinetic physical threat to satellite systems. The
ities that can target different satellite systems, such
only significant risk of non-kinetic physical attack
as uplink jammers that can disrupt military satellite
from North Korea is high altitude nuclear detonation,
communications. Despite South Korean protests to
a devastating, irreversible counterspace attack that
the United Nations that North Korea’s GPS jamming
would indiscriminately affect all satellites in the tar-
is a violation of the 1953 armistice agreement, no ef-
get’s orbital regime.
fective measures have been publicly undertaken to
date to curb this activity.305
Cyber
General Vincent Brooks, then-commander of United
States Forces Korea, noted in congressional testimo-
ny that North Korea’s well-organized and advanced
cyber forces are perhaps among the best in the
world.306 South Korea’s Ministry of National Defence
reports that North Korea doubled its cyber warfare
personnel from approximately 3,000 troops in 2013
to 6,000 in 2015.307
Under the Kim Jong-Un regime, North Korea has ex-
ercised its cyber forces frequently, launching attacks
on South Korea, the United States, and others. In one
of the most widely reported incidents, North Korea
launched a cyberattack against Sony Pictures Enter-
tainment in .308 The following month,
in a move that may have been intended to demon-
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

Number of Successful OTHERS
Orbital Launches in 2018311

OTHERS
“The security environ- A CTORS BEYOND CHINA, RUSSIA, IRAN, AND NORTH KOREA have
developed or have laid the foundation for counterspace weapons
ment is becoming more
and dual-use technologies. This chapter explores the demon-
complex with our ad-
strated space and counterspace capabilities of other countries,
versaries’ determined
including some U.S. allies and partners, along with changes in doctrine,
pursuit of advanced tech-
infrastructure, and financing that might contribute to counterspace capa-
nologies across multiple
bilities in the future.
domains to include cyber,
space, and [weapons
EGYPT
of mass destruction],
expanding regional and
global ambitions.” IN 2018, EGYPT SIGNALED its intent to invest more heavily in space by estab-
lishing the Egyptian Space Agency.313 The Egyptian Space Agency’s primary
objective is to manufacture and launch satellites. The agency plans to “de-
velop and transfer space science and technology into Egypt to build satellites
LTG ROBERT ASHLEY,
DIRECTOR OF THE U.S. DEFENSE and launch them from Egyptian territories.”314 On February 21, 2019, Egypt-
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY312 Sat-A was launched from Russia on a Soyuz rocket and placed into LEO.315
EgyptSat-A is Egypt’s third remote-sensing satellite and was jointly devel-
oped by Egypt’s National Authority for Remote Sensing and Space Sciences
together with RKK Energiya, a Russian satellite and rocket company.316
In addition to developing its own domestic space capabilities, Egypt has
demonstrated some counterspace capabilities in recent years. In 2013, the
Qatar-based news organization Al Jazeera reported that its satellite signals
were being jammed by Egyptian authorities in order to block the news site
from reporting on the military takeover of the government. The operation
targeted Arabsat, a satellite owned by the Arab League, and NileSat, Egypt’s
own satellite.317 The company was forced to change frequencies several
times to avoid the jamming. According to Al Jazeera, it traced the jammers

OTHERS
120 CHINA back to at least four Egyptian military in-
USA stallations near Cairo.318
RUSSIA

OTHERS
EUROPE

THE EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY (ESA) is
responsible for some of the most promi-

nent aspects of today’s space infrastruc-
ture, including the PNT system Galileo

and the earth-observation system Co-
pernicus. Through its Ariane and Vega

1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2018 launch vehicle families, launched from
the Guiana Space Centre in French Gui-
ana, the ESA supported eight launches
Figure 6: Orbital space launches from all countries (1957–2018).
last year. The Guiana Space Center also
space-track.org / csis aerospace security319
hosted three Soyuz rocket launches in
2018.320 About 16 billion euros have been
earmarked for space in the 2021–2027 EU
Active Debris budget, representing a continued interest
in joint capabilities.321 While ESA is a col-
Removal
lective European agency, many European
countries have developed their own inde-
ACTIVE DEBRIS REMOVAL
pendent capabilities as well.
technology toes the line be-
tween the peaceful use of out- European space capabilities that could
er space and potential coun-
have counterspace implications have been
terspace weapons. Almost any
demonstrated in several instances. For
technology designed to move,
example, in 2000 a British microsatellite,
de-orbit, or destroy an object
SNAP, was launched in the same faring as a
in space could hypothetically
larger Chinese microsatellite, Tsinghua-1.
be used against an adversary’s
Despite initial technical difficulties, SNAP
satellite. However, space de-
bris removal is a potentially successfully maneuvered within 2km of
lucrative business and com- the Tsinghua-1.326 This demonstrated the
panies from the United States, maneuverability necessary to accomplish
Japan, and other nations are both kinetic and non-kinetic physical at-
developing several methods tacks. In 2012, Iran reported that Iranian
for active debris removal.322 broadcasts on the European Hotbird satel-
A project led by the Universi- lite network were being jammed by British
ty of Surrey and sponsored by technicians in Bahrain.327 In 2010, Sweden
the European Commission and performed a series of RPOs and formation
other partners has completed flying with two experimental satellites,
two successful tests of active dubbed Mango and Tango.328 And in August
debris removal in space.323 The
2018, NASA and ESA confirmed plans for a
project, known as RemoveDE-
collaborative mission—part of the cooper-
BRIS, first successfully used a
ative Asteroid Impact and Deflection As-
net to capture a pre-designat-
Active debris removal in low Earth orbit. A research group ed target in .324 sessment—to demonstrate the capability
at University of Surrey has demonstrated two techniques Later, in , the to redirect an asteroid using the force of a
for removing space debris on-orbit: one using a harpoon RemoveDEBRIS mission de- kinetic impact.329 Although this technology
(top) and another using a webbed net (bottom). ployed a harpoon to spear a is intended to be used for entirely peace-
university of surrey / bbc tethered plate.325 ful purposes, its testing and development
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

could also inform the design of a kinetic India’s Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle on Feb- vehicles, India conducted seven launches
physical counterspace weapon. ruary 15, 2017. The PSLV, breaking the pre- in 2018, just a fraction of the 61 total Indi-
vious record of highest-number of satellites an launches since 1980, from their Satish
launched on a single vehicle. The previous Dhawan Space Centre.333
INDIA record was held by Russia with 34 satellites.
India has not successfully demonstrated
xinhua / stringer via getty images
a direct-ascent ASAT capability. However,
IN , India became the seventh high-ranking government officials have
country to indigenously launch its own claimed such capability through their
satellite, using its SLV-3 rocket.330 While Agni-V ICBM system.334 India most re-
India does not currently have a formal cently successfully tested its Agni-V ICBM
national space policy, the Indian Space in from a mobile launch
Research Organization (ISRO) does make system. According to news sources, the
two sector-specific policies available pub- Indian Ministry of Defense reported that
licly on satellite communications and re- the test was successful and all objectives
mote sensing.331 Furthermore, India does were met.335 In 2010, the then-head of
not have an official military department India’s Defense Research and Develop-
focused on space. Instead, “India estab- ment Organization, Director General
lished an Integrated Space Cell, located V.K. Saraswat, stated that India had the
in the Integrated Defense Headquarters, building blocks and capability to create
which is comprised of all three branches a direct-ascent ASAT weapon, even if the
of India’s armed forces.”332 Currently, In- country did not openly test the technolo-
dia has two operational orbital launch ve- gy. Saraswat also stated that India would
hicles, the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle “validate the anti-satellite capability on
(PSLV) and the Geosynchronous Satellite the ground through simulation.”336 While
Launch Vehicle (GSLV). With these two they have reiterated that they possess

OTHERS
ASAT capabilities, Indian officials claim to not want and launched it as a secondary payload
to weaponize space or create harmful debris in orbit on a Falcon 9 mission.348
from a test.337 India also has several medium-range INDIAN In terms of counterspace capabilities, Is-
and ICBMs that could be used to deliver a nuclear
rael’s Arrow missile defense system could
weapon into orbit.338 OFFICIALS
in theory be used as an ASAT weapon.
A 2010 Technology Perspective and Roadmap re- Israel successfully demonstrated the re-
ALSO STATE
leased by the Ministry of Defense detailed that ASAT quired capabilities for an ASAT intercept
weapons “for electronic or physical destruction of (detection, targeting, and discrimination
THAT THEY
satellites (2,000 km altitude above earth’s surface) of a satellite target) using its Arrow 3 de-
and geosynchronous orbits” are a key area of focus.339 DO NOT fense systems in .349 Isra-
In 2013, a new Technology Perspective and Capabili- el completed another successful test on
ty Roadmap noted a focus on developments in elec- WANT TO January 22, 2019 of the same system.350
tronic weapons, specifically miniaturization of EW as Though not a true ASAT test, like that of
payloads on satellites.340 WEAPONIZE China in 2007, the test proved that Israel
could have a latent ASAT capability to hit
In its 2018 Technology Perspective and Capabili-
SPACE OR
ty Roadmap, India detailed investments in a two- satellites in LEO.
phased Tactical High Energy Laser System. The sec- CREATE
ond phase of this system is intended to “be capable
of anti satellite role from ground & aerial platform.”341 HARMFUL JAPAN
This same document also shows investment in an
Integrated EW System with requirements to “detect, DEBRIS
JAPAN HAS INCREASED its focus on de-
monitor, locate and jam enemy cellular receivers and
veloping space technologies since the
satellite communication receivers.”342 Another sys- IN ORBIT
Basic Space Law was passed in 2008.351
tem, the Aerostat Based EW System, has the same
FROM A In its recent National Defense Program
requirement as the integrated system, as well as be-
Guidelines for FY 2019 and beyond, Ja-
ing able to “carry out jamming & spoofing of satellite
TEST. pan states its plans to “ensure superi-
based positioning systems.”343
ority in use of space at all stages from
peacetime to armed contingencies”
and to “work to strengthen capabilities
ISRAEL
including mission assurance capabili-
ty and capability to disrupt opponent’s
THE ISRAEL SPACE AGENCY (ISA) was established in command, control, communications and
1983 as part of the Ministry of Science and Technol- information.”352 To achieve these goals,
ogy.344 While the ISA continues to emphasize a broad Japan will leverage its national space
civil space infrastructure, “a diverse scope of activi- enterprise, including the Self-Defense
ties was established both for defense led by Israel Forces, the Japan Aerospace Exploration
MOD and for civilian applications under the leader- Agency (JAXA), its growing defense-in-
ship of ISA.”345 Despite having a longstanding space dustrial base, and its longstanding rela-
agency, Israel lacks a clear national space policy. tionship with the United States.
On February 21, 2019, SpaceX successfully Due to the dual-use nature of many space
launched an Israeli startup company’s lunar space- technologies, even benign space capabil-
craft named Beresheet, which in Hebrew means ities can be viewed by others as counter-
‘genesis.’346 This is the nation’s first lunar space- space weapons. In 1998, Japan proved it
craft, making Israel the fourth nation—behind Rus- could rendezvous and successfully dock
sia, the United States, and China—to land on the two orbiting satellites. In this same ren-
moon.347 Beresheet was developed by an Israeli pri- dezvous, Japan tested the functionality
vate commercial space company, SpaceIL. SpaceIL of a robotic arm that could grapple and
was created in 2011 to compete in Google’s Lunar exercise coordinated control over a sec-
XPrize program, which ended without a winner. De- ond satellite.353 Both of these capabilities
spite this, SpaceIL continued developing Beresheet could be used as part of a co-orbital ASAT
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

weapon, but Japan has given no indica- dollars. This includes allocations for the
tion that it plans to do so. Pakistan Multi-Mission Satellite (PakSat-
MM1), a Pakistan Space Centre in Karachi,
Lahore, and Islamabad, as well as the
LIBYA establishment of Space Application Re-
search Centre in Karachi.359 Pakistan also
plans on sending a human to space, with
THURAYA SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS,
the help of China, by 2022.360
a company based in the United Arab Emir-
Pakistan has developed nuclear weapons
ates, accused Libyan nationals of multi-
and integrated them with ballistic missile
ple satellite jamming activities occurring
systems. Pakistan’s longest-range missile,
over six months in 2006. Concerned that
the Shaheen 3, could potentially deliver
smugglers were using the company’s ser-
a nuclear weapon into LEO.361 However,
vices to bring illegal contraband into the
Pakistan has not indicated that it plans to
country, Thuraya claimed that three sep-
test or field a nuclear ASAT system.
arate locations in Libya carried out a bar-
rage of jamming activities on its satellite
communications services. The situation
was rectified by “a diplomatic initiative UKRAINE
made by the government of the United
Arab Emirates to the government of Lib- ELECTRONIC WARFARE HAS BEEN a sta-
ya.”354 Five years later, in 2011, Thuraya’s ple of Russian activity in Ukraine, and the
satellite communications were once Ukrainian government is employing simi-
again jammed over Libya.355 lar techniques to jam broadcasts support-
In , the UAE Telecommuni- ing Moscow-backed separatists. In 2014,
cations Regulatory Authority announced Ukraine attempted to jam Russian com-
that several transmissions from two munications satellites that were broad-
television broadcasting satellites were casting Russian television in the country.362
reportedly disrupted by frequent jam- Furthermore, Ukraine’s secretary of the
ming.356 According to press reports, the National Security and Defence Council has
stations affected included: Five, BBC stated that “blocking the destructive influ-
World, CNN International, US sports chan- ence of separatist and Russian information
nels, other cable TV networks, and near- propaganda ... is one of our priorities.”363
ly two dozen radio stations. It was also
reported that FBI communications were
disrupted by the jamming.357 Later that NON-STATE ACTORS
month, Al Jazeera also accused the Libyan
government of jamming its satellite trans-
IN WHAT WAS POSSIBLY THE FIRST in-
missions in the region. Al Jazeera report-
stance of satellite spoofing by a non-state
ed that it had pinpointed the source of the
actor, a disgruntled employee at a local
jamming to a Libyan intelligence services
satellite uplink station spoofed HBO pro-
building south of Tripoli.358 It is unknown,
gramming in 1986 in order to display his
whether these capabilities are still acces-
own message: “Good evening, HBO, from
sible by the Libyan Naitonal Army.
Captain Midnight. $12.95 a month? No
way! Showtime/The Movie Channel, be-
ware.”364 Similarly, a Chinese spiritual or-
PAKISTAN ganization, Falun Gong, spoofed Chinese
satellite television broadcasts in 2002,
replacing the footage with its own video.365
PAKISTAN IS INVESTING MORE in its
space agency, the Space and Upper At- In 2007, the Tamil Tigers, a non-state
mosphere Research Organisation’s (SU- actor based in Southeast Asia, hijacked
PARCO). SUPARCO’s budget for fiscal an Intelsat satellite and replaced the
year 2019 was reported to be 4.7 billion feed with its own propaganda and data.366
Pakistani rupees, or just under 34 million The attack caused Intelsat to shut down

OTHERS
the satellite transponder after more traffic from Iridium communications
than a year of unauthorized use.367 satellites. A presentation entitled “Irid-
ium Hacking: ‘please don’t sue us’”
In , after successful jamming
taught attendees just how easy it was to
operations by the Libyan government
access Iridium communication links and
on communications satellites operated
eavesdrop on traffic.372
by the UAE-based company Thuraya, a
team of rebels assisted by Libyan-Amer-
ican telecom executives were able to
re-establish their own satellite commu-
nications. The “cutoff had
rebels waving flags to communicate on
the battlefield.” Several steps were taken
to re-establish satellite telephone com-
munications, including securing a direct
feed to the jammed satellite to bypass
the interference.368
Terrorist and insurgent organizations
have also used electronic attacks against
U.S. military space capabilities. In the
early years of Operation Iraqi Freedom,
insurgents or remnants of the former
Iraqi regime repeatedly jammed com-
mercial SATCOM links used by the U.S.
military. At least five jamming instances
were later determined to be deliberate
jamming of the satellite uplink using a
“sweeper” signal meant to create inter-
ference across a broad segment of the
spectrum.369 The Washington Post, in
2013, reported on concerns within the
DIA that “al-Qaeda was sponsoring si-
multaneous research projects to devel-
op jammers to interfere with GPS signals
and infrared tags that drone operators
rely on to pinpoint missile targets.” The
story cites an instance in 2011 in which
U.S. intelligence believed that jihadists
Sophisticated
in Pakistan had started testing a GPS
jamming capability for the first time.370 Truck Robbers
In 2014, a 25-year old British citizen was
MEXICAN GANGS are conducting sophisti-
arrested for hacking into an unnamed cated highway robberies using small jam-
satellite system used by the U.S. military, mers—some of which can be powered by
where he accessed hundreds of Pentagon a cigarette lighter in a car. Armed robbers
employees’ personal information. In the use these small jammers to target GPS
same attack, the hacker also accessed downlinks to the truck’s navigation sys-
data from about 30,000 satellite phones.371 tem. These navigation systems are used
to send the truck’s location to the parent
At the 2015 Chaos Communication
company or client in the case of an un-
Camp hacker conference, attendees planned stop. Without this safety feature,
were given “software-defined radios” police are typically not alerted of the rob-
sensitive enough to pick up on satellite bery until after the crime has occured.373
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

WHAT TO WATCH
WHAT TO
WATCH
AS THIS REPORT DEMONSTRATES, many countries have devel-
oped and tested a variety of counterspace weapons. However,
only a portion of the threats to space systems identified in this
report make significant advances in any given year. This section
details a shortlist of specific threats and technical developments that are
important to watch in the near future.
For spacefaring nations with a history of successful kinetic physical ASAT
tests, like China and Russia, an important area to watch is the development
and testing of new boost systems that may suggest further diversification
of kinetic physical counterspace threats. With ASAT tests every year for the
past five years, it is likely China will continue to test and refine its direct-as-
cent ASAT capabilities. It would be unexpected, however, for China to con-
duct another ASAT test that creates debris, like its SC-19 test in 2007. For
Russia, a key area to watch is evidence of tests relating to its air-launched
and mobile ground-launched ASAT weapons. Unlike ASAT weapons that are
launched from a spaceport, air-launched ASATs (like those launched from a
MiG-31 fighter jet) and mobile ground-launched ASATs (like the PL-19/Nu-
dol) could be deployed on short notice in the event of a crisis and are more
difficult to track and neutralize.
Recent satellite imagery of launch sites in both Iran and North Korea sug-
gest a renewed interest in orbital space launch capabilities. A successful
orbital launch from either country would certainly be newsworthy, since
Iran and North Korea have not placed an object in orbit since 2015 and
2016, respectively. Watch for new satellite imagery or public remarks sug-
gesting renewed development of space launch infrastructure at the Imam
Khomeini Space Center in Iran and the Sohae Satellite Launching Station in
North Korea. For both countries, having a reliable space launch capability is
a key precursor to developing kinetic physical counterspace weapons such
as direct-ascent or co-orbital ASATs.

WHAT TO WATCH
SATELLITES PERFORMING CLOSE
APPROACHES OR RENDEZVOUS IN ANY OR-
BITAL REGIME COULD SUPPORT A BROAD
RANGE OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS IN-
CLUDING KINETIC PHYSICAL, NON-KINETIC
PHYSICAL, AND ELECTRONIC.
China and Russia are also likely to continue the de- continued proliferation of these electronic forms of
velopment and testing of RPO capabilities in both attack to other regional conflicts and new, possibly
LEO and GEO. More specifically, a key activity to non-state, actors.
watch is the behavior of Chinese GEO satellite SJ-17
A final area, and perhaps the most important area
as it continues to perform rendezvous activities on
to watch, is how the United States responds to new
orbit. So far, only other Chinese satellites have ap- and ongoing developments in the counterspace
peared to serve as targets for SJ-17’s RPO activity. capabilities of others. The 2018 National Defense
If the Chinese satellite approached other non-Chi- Strategy says the military will prioritize “resilience,
nese objects on orbit, those objects’ operators might reconstitution, and operations” to protect space
choose to make a public statement condemning the assets. What remains to be fully defined, however,
behavior, like the operators of satellites that have are the specific steps the Department of Defense
been approached by Russian GEO satellite Olymp-K. intends to take to improve the protection of space
While Olymp-K has not caused international alarm systems across the full spectrum of threats posed by
since its close approach to a French-Italian military potential adversaries. Key developments to watch
satellite in , it appears to have contin- within the United States are changes in the organi-
ued its RPO activities in the GEO belt since then. Sat- zation of the national security space enterprise, fur-
ellites performing close approaches or rendezvous ther development and articulation of military space
in any orbital regime could support a broad range strategy and doctrine, and investments in new space
of counterspace weapons including kinetic physical, capabilities, counterspace capabilities, and space
non-kinetic physical, and electronic. A reckless close situational awareness capabilities. Changes in these
approach or malfunction in one of these satellites areas are an indication of the level of priority being
placed on space and how the United States intends
could result in a close call, potentially forcing an un-
to compete in this domain.
planned maneuver in one of the targeted satellites—
or worse yet, a debris-producing collision in GEO.
Given the proliferation and ongoing use of electronic
forms of attack against space systems, it is likely that
the coming years will bring continued use of these
counterspace weapons in both regional conflicts and
pre-conflict situations. For example, both Russia and
North Korea may continue to use electronic counter-
space weapons in an attempt to disrupt or signal re-
solve in response to U.S.-allied military exercises that
occur on their periphery. Another area to watch is the
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
TODD HARRISON is the director of the Aerospace Security Project and the director of Defense
Budget Analysis at CSIS. As a senior fellow in the International Security Program, he leads the
Center’s efforts to provide in-depth, nonpartisan research and analysis of space security, air
power, and defense funding issues. Mr. Harrison joined CSIS from the Center for Strategic and
Budgetary Assessments, where he was a senior fellow for defense budget studies. He previously
worked at Booz Allen Hamilton where he consulted for the Air Force on satellite communications
systems and supported a variety of other clients evaluating the performance of acquisition pro-
grams. Prior to Booz Allen, he worked for a small startup (AeroAstro Inc.) developing advanced
space technologies and as a management consultant at Diamond Cluster International. He is a
graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with both a BS and an MS in aeronautics
and astronautics.
KAITLYN JOHNSON is an associate fellow and associate director of the CSIS Aerospace Security
Project. Ms. Johnson manages the team’s strategic planning and research agenda. Her research
specializes in topics such as space security, military space systems, commercial space policy, and
U.S. air dominance. Previously, Ms. Johnson has written on national security space reorganiza-
tion, threats against space assets, the commercialization of space, escalation and deterrence dy-
namics, and defense acquisition trends. Ms. Johnson holds an MA from American University in
U.S. foreign policy and national security studies, with a concentration in defense and space secu-
rity, and a BS from the Georgia Institute of Technology in international affairs.
THOMAS G. ROBERTS is a research associate and program manager of the CSIS Aerospace Securi-
ty Project. His research interests include satellite system architecture analysis, civil and commer-
cial space operations, and international collaboration in science research. Previously, Mr. Rob-
erts has written on space-based missile defense, threats against space-based assets, and human
spaceflight programs. His work has appeared in the Atlantic, War on the Rocks, the Bulletin of the
Atomic Scientists, and other publications. Mr. Roberts is the host and executive producer of Moon-
struck, a podcast about the history of human spaceflight. He holds a BA in astrophysical scienc-
es with honors and an undergraduate certificate in Russian studies from Princeton University. In
2015, he was named a Harry S. Truman Scholar.
MADISON BERGETHON is a research intern for the CSIS Aerospace Security Project. Prior to join-
ing CSIS, Madison worked for the government affairs and international business team at SpaceX.
She is a senior at The George Washington University studying international affairs and naval sci-
ence. As a designated student naval aviator she will attend flight school in the summer of 2019,
after commissioning as an officer in the United States Navy.
ALEXANDRA COULTRUP is a research intern for the CSIS Aerospace Security Project. She is a grad-
uate student at Florida Institute of Technology, pursuing an MS in aviation human factors with a
concentration in spaceflight safety. Prior to joining CSIS, Ms. Coultrup worked at local NPR station
WFIT 89.5 FM and Thales Avionics. Ms. Coultrup also serves as a graduate research assistant at the
Aldrin Space Institute at Florida Tech.

APPENDIX I
LIST OF ACRONYMS USED
AEHF Advanced Extremely High Frequency
ASAT Anti-Satellite
BBC British Broadcasting Corporation
BMD Ballistic Missile Defense
CASC China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation
CHEOS China High-resolution Earth Observation System
CNAS China National Space Administration
DIA Defense Intelligence Agency
DoD U.S. Department of Defense
EMP Electromagnetic Pulse
ESA European Space Agency
EW Electronic Warfare
GBS Global Broadcast Service
GEO Geosynchronous Orbit
GLONASS Global Navigation Satellite System (Russia)
GPS Global Positioning System
GSLV Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle
HPM High Powered Microwave
ICBM Intercontinental Ballistic Missile
ILRS International Laser Ranging Service
IS Istrebitel Sputnikov (Russia)
ISA Israel Space Agency
ISR Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance
ISS International Space Station
JAXA Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency
JCPOA Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
KCNA Korean Central News Agency (North Korea)
LEO Low Earth Orbit
MEO Medium Earth Orbit
MMW Millimeter Wave
MRBM Medium-Range Ballistic Missiles
NADA National Aerospace Development Administration (North Korea)
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NOAA National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration
NRO U.S. National Reconnaissance Office
PKK Kurdistan Workers’ Party
PLA People’s Liberation Army (China)
PNT Positioning, Navigation, and Timing
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

PSLV Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (India)
RF Radio Frequency
RPO Rendezvous and Proximity Operations
State Administration for Science, Technology, and Industry
SASTIND
for National Defense
SATCOM Satellite Communications
SLV Satellite Launch Vehicle (India)
SSF Strategic Support Force (China)
SUPARCO Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Organisation
S&T Science and Technology
TEL Transporter erector-launcher
UHF Ultra High Frequency
VOA Voice of America
WGS Widespread Global SATCOM (Satellite Communications)

SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

tech.com/downloads/Global_Space_Industry_Dynamics_2017.pdf.
29 Office of the Secretary of Defense, “Annual Report to Congress: Military Power of the People’s Republic of China 2018,” U.S. Department
of Defense, May 16, 2018, 1, 
F#page=14.
30 Space Angels, “Q4 2018,” Space Investment Quarterly, October 9, 2018, 3, 
31 Ibid., 11.
32 Bryce Space and Technology, LLC, “Start-Up Space: Update on Investment in Commercial Space Ventures” (Alexandria, VA: Bryce Space
and Technology, 2018), v, 
33 Andrew Jones, “Chinese Rocket Maker OneSpace Secures $44m in Funding; Expace Prepares for Commercial Launch,” SpaceNews, August
14, 2018, 
34 Andrew Jones, “Chinese Companies OneSpace and iSpace Are Preparing for First Orbital Launches,” SpaceNews, January 24, 2019, https://
spacenews.com/chinese-companies-onespace-and-ispace-are-preparing-for-first-orbital-launches/.
35 Stephen Clark, “LandSpace Falls Short of Orbit in Private Chinese Launch Attempt,” Spaceflight Now, October 28, 2018, 
now.com/2018/10/28/landspace-falls-short-of-orbit-in-private-chinese-launch-attempt/.
36 Kevin Pollpeter, Michael Chase, and Eric Heginbotham, “The Creation of the PLA Strategic Support Force and Its Implications for Chinese
Military Space Operations,” (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2017), 8, 
ports/RR2000/RR2058/RAND_RR2058.pdf.
37 Andrew Jones, “China Completes 22nd Launch This Year with Gaofen-11, Matches National Record,” SpaceNews, July 31, 2018, https://
spacenews.com/china-completes-22nd-launch-this-year-with-gaofen-11-matches-national-record/.
38 Mike Wall, “China Launches Pioneering ‘Hack-Proof’ Quantum-Communications Satellite,” Space.com, August 16, 2016, 
space.com/33760-china-launches-quantum-communications-satellite.html.
39 Marco Aliberti, When China Goes to the Moon... (Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2015), 7–19, 
content/document/cda_downloaddocument/9783319194721-c1.pdf?SGWID=0-0-45-1513274-p177396349.
40 The State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s Military Strategy (Beijing, China: People’s Republic of China,
), 
41 Pollpeter, Chase, and Heginbotham, “The Creation of the PLA Strategic Support Force,” 3–4.
42 United States Congress, U.S. - China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Military Reforms and Modernization:
Implications for the United States, 115th Cong., 2nd sess., February 15, 2018, 40, 
ing%20Transcript%20-%20February%2015%2C%202018.pdf.
43 Pollpeter, Chase, and Heginbotham, “The Creation of the PLA Strategic Support Force,” 7.
44 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, “China Military Power: Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win,” (Washington, DC: U.S. Defense Intelli-
gence Agency, 2018), 97, 
NAL_5MB_20190103.pdf.
45 Office of the Secretary of Defense, “Annual Report to Congress,” 14.
46 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, “China Military Power,” 40.
47 Pollpeter, Chase, and Heginbotham, “The Creation of the PLA Strategic Support Force,” 7.
48 Ibid.
49 United Nations Office of Outer Space Affairs, “Office for Outer Space Affairs and China Renew Commitment to Cooperation in Space Activi-
ties,” April 21, 2017, 
50 People’s Liberation Army National Defense University,”China Military Encyclopedia, Second Edition” (Beijing, PRC: Encyclopedia of China
Publishing House, 2007), 211, quoted in Bruce W. MacDonald, et al., “Crisis Stability in Space,” 29.
51 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2015 Report to Congress of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Com-
mission” (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office, 2015), 283-284, 
Chapters/Chapter%202%2C%20Section%202%20-%20China%27s%20Space%20and%20Counterspace%20Programs.pdf.
52 The State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, “China’s Military Strategy.”
53 Brian Weeden and Victoria Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities: An Open Source Assessment (Broomfield, Colorado: Secure
World Foundation, 2018), 1–11, 
54 Colin Clark, “Chinese ASAT Test Was ‘Successful:’ Lt. Gen. Raymond,” Breaking Defense, April 14, 2015, 
com/2015/04/chinese-asat-test-was-successful-lt-gen-raymond/.
55 Weeden and Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities, 1–11.
56 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2015 Report to Congress,” 294.
57 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, “China Military Power,” 43.
58 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2015 Report to Congress,” 294.
59 Weeden and Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities, 1–12.
60 “China Again Conducts a High Altitude Science Mission: Higher Altitude and More Data” (中国再次高空科学探测试验：高度更高数据更
多), China News (中国新闻网), May 14, 2013,
61 Weeden and Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities, 1–14.
62 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2015 Report to Congress,” 293.

SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

99 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, “Challenges to Security in Space,” 20.
100 Lin Jin-shun, Wu Xianzhong, Lu Shengjun, and Jiang Chunshan, “Countermeasure Technology for MMW Satellite Links,” Aerospace Elec-
tronic Warfare, , 20–22, as quoted in David D. Chen, “Opening Statement of Mr. David Chen,” 82.
101 Bill Gertz, “Inside the Ring: China targets Global Hawk drone,” Washington Times, December 11, 2013, 
news/2013/dec/11/inside-the-ring-china-targets-global-hawk-drone/.
102 Huang Lin and Yang Qing, “GPS Spoofing: Low-cost GPS Simulator” (presentation, 23rd Annual DefCon, Las Vegas, NV, August 6-9, 2015),

103 Michael R. Gordon and Jeremy Page, “China Installed Military Jamming Equipment on Spratly Islands, U.S. Says,” Wall Street Journal, April
9, 2018, 
104 “Vietnam Demands That China Remove Military Jamming Equipment from Spratly Islands,” VnExpress International, April 26, 2018,

html.
105 Stephen Chen, “Could China Be Trying to Play God with the Weather?” South China Morning Post, June 2, 2018, 
news/china/society/article/2148697/could-new-chinese-radar-system-really-be-used-play-god-weather.
106 Ibid.
107 Nick Whigham, “A new Chinese radar facility could become a weapon hiding in plain sight,” News.com.au, August 26, 2018, 
news.com.au/technology/science/space/a-new-chinese-radar-facility-could-become-a-weapon-hiding-in-plain-sight/news-story/acbe-
423f03b2e1d042723892bb080bb8.
108 Office of the Secretary of Defense, “Annual Report to Congress,” 40.
109 The State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, “China’s Military Strategy.”
110 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2015 Report to Congress,” 296.
111 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, “China Military Power,” 46.
112 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2015 Report to Congress,” 296.
113 Sui-Lee Wee, “China Denies It Is behind Hacking of U.S. Satellites,” Reuters, October 31, 2011, 
hacking/china-denies-it-is-behind-hacking-of-u-s-satellites-idUSTRE79U1YI20111031.
114 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2015 Report to Congress,” 296.
115 Ibid.
116 Mary Pat Flaherty, Jason Samenow and Lisa Rein, “Chinese hack U.S. weather systems, satellite network,” Washington Post, November 12,
2014, 
65cea7903f2e_story.html.
117 Yatish Yadav, “Hackers from China Break into Secret Indian Government Video Chat,” New Indian Express, November 19, 2017, 
newindianexpress.com/nation/2017/nov/19/hackers-from-china-break-into-secret-indian-government-video-chat-1705010.html.
118 Chris Bing, “Chinese Hacking Group Resurfaces, Targets U.S. Satellite Companies and Systems,” Cyberscoop, June 19, 2018, 
cyberscoop.com/symantec-thrip-satellite-hacking-trojans/.
119 Joel Schectman and Christopher Bing, “UAE Used Cyber Super-weapon to Spy on IPhones of Foes,” Reuters, January 30, 2019, https://

1PO1AN.
RUSSIA
120 Roberts, Spaceports of the World.
121 U.S. Department of Defense, Missile Defense Review (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense, 2019) VI, 
gov/2019/Jan/17/2002080666/-1/-1/1/2019-MISSILE-DEFENSE-REVIEW.PDF.
122 Todd Harrison et al., Escalation and Deterrence in the Second Space Age, (Washington DC: Center for Strategic and International Studies,
October 3, 2017), 
123 Roberts, Spaceports of the World.
124 Ibid.
125 Ibid.
126 Todd Harrison and Nahmyo Thomas, “NASA in the Second Space Age: Exploration, Partnering, and Security,” Strategic Studies Quarterly,
Winter 2016, 3, “Partners Sign ISS Agree-
ments,” NASA, October 23, 2010, 
127 Thomas G. Roberts, “Beyond the Glass Ceiling: Why NASA Must Continue to Launch a Diverse Astronaut Corps,” CSIS Aerospace Security,
July 31, 2018, 
128 Sarah Lewin, “Russians ID Cause of Soyuz Launch Abort, Release Dramatic Rocket Video,” Space.com, November 1, 2018, 
space.com/42319-soyuz-launch-abort-russia-identifies-cause.html; Thomas G. Roberts, “International Astronaut Database,” CSIS Aero-
space Security, December 3, 2018, 
129 Anatoly Zak, “Russian space program in the 2010s: decadal review,” Russian Space Web, February 11, 2019, 
com/russia_2010s.html#2019.
130 Ibid.

131 CSIS Aerospace Security, “Space Environment.”
132 Yuri Urlichich et al., “GLONASS Modernization,” GPS World, November 1, 2011, 
133 «На противника посмотрят с двухметровой объективностью,» Коммерсантъ, July 28, 2018, 
doc/3049019; «The ExoMars Programme 2016-2020,» European Space Agency, 
view/; Asif Siddiqi, «Russia Is the Only Nation That Regularly Sends Humans to Orbit, But Its Space Program Is in Trouble,» Slate Magazine,
March 21, 2017, 
134 Paulina Glass, “Russia Is Slowly Declining As a Space Superpower,” Defense One, August 5, 2018, 
threats/2018/08/russia-slowly-declining-space-superpower/150279/.
135 Elizabeth Howell, “Roscosmos: Russia’s Space Agency,” Space.com, January 29, 2018, 
“Roscosmos General Information,” Roscosmos, undated, accessed February 7, 2019, 
136 Matthew Bodner, “As Trump Pushes for Separate Space Force, Russia Moves Fast the Other Way,” Defense News, June 22, 2018, https://

137 Matthew Bodner, “Russia Merges AF with Missile Defense, Space Commands,” Defense News, August 8, 2015, 
com/2015/08/08/russia-merges-af-with-missile-defense-space-commands/.
138 Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, “Aerospace Defence Forces,” Russian Federation, undated, accessed February 7, 2019, http://
eng.mil.ru/en/structure/forces/cosmic.htm.
139 President of the Russian Federation, “The Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation,” , 
140 Ibid.
141 Nuclear Threat Initiative, “Proposed Prevention of an Arms Race in Space (PAROS) Treaty,” Nuclear Threat Initiative, September 29, 2017,

142 “Militarization, Weaponization, and the Prevention of an Arms Race,” Reaching Critical Will, 
fact-sheets/critical-issues/5448-outer-space.
143 Alexander Velez-Green, The Unsettling View from Moscow: Russia’s Strategic Debate on a Doctrine of Pre-emption (Washington, DC, Center
for a New American Security), April 27, 2017, 11, 
pdf.
144 «Рогозин: Россия не использует спутники для повреждения космических аппаратов других стран,» TASS, October 1, 2018, https://
tass.ru/kosmos/5624853.
145 U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, “Russia Military Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations” (Washington, DC: Defense
Intelligence Agency, 2017), 36, 
tary%20Power%20Report%202017.pdf?ver=2017-06-28-144235-937; “Рогозин не исключил, что американский космоплан X-37 может
нести оружие,” TASS, October 1, 2018, 
146 “US creating pretexts for militarization of space — Russian General Staff,” TASS, March 3, 2018, 
147 Note: PL-19 is a Western identifier (corresponding to the 19th system in its category observed from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome), while Nudol
is a Russian identifier; Amanda Macias and Michael Sheetz, “Russia Conducted Another Successful Test of and Anti-satellite Missile, Accord-
ing to a Classified US Intelligence Report,” CNBC, January 18, 2019, 
ellite-missile-test-us-intelligence-report.html
148 “Russia’s ASAT Development Takes Aim at LEO Assets,” Jane’s Intelligence Review, 2018, 1 
sets/591/81591/Russias_ASAT_development_takes_aim_at_LEO_assets.pdf.
149 Ibid., 3.
150 Bill Gertz, “Russia Flight Tests Anti-Satellite Missile,” The Washington Free Beacon, December 2, 2015, 
curity/russia-conducts-successful-flight-test-of-anti-satellite-missile/.
151 Ankit Panda, “Russia Conducts New Test of ‘Nudol’ Anti-Satellite System,” Diplomat, April 2, 2018, 
conducts-new-test-of-nudol-anti-satellite-system/; Bill Gertz, “Russia Flight Tests Anti-Satellite Missile.”
152 “Russian S-300 missile systems capable of targeting near space ‘enter service’,” RT International, March 12, 2015, 
news/239961-near-space-missile-defense/; Missile Defense Project, “S-300,” CSIS Missile Threat, July 13, 2018, 
org/defsys/s-400/; Missile Defense Project, “S-400 Triumf,” CSIS Missile Threat, June 15, 2018, 
trumf/.
153 Vladimir Karnozov, “Russia’s Next-generation S-500 SAM Enters Production,” AIN Online, March 14, 2018, 
tion-news/defense/2018-03-14/russias-next-generation-s-500-sam-enters-production.
154 Mark B. Schneider, “Russian Nuclear Weapons Policy,” RealClearDefense, April 28, 2017, 
cles/2017/04/28/russian_nuclear_weapons_policy_111261.html.
155 Missile Defense Project, “S-500 Prometheus,” CSIS Missile Threat, September 28, 2017, 
metheus/.
156 Steve Lambakis, “Foreign Space Capabilities: Implications for U.S. National Security,” National Institute for Public Policy (Fairfax, VA: Na-
tional Institute Press, 2017), Missile Defense
Project, “Russia Tests S-500 Air Defense System” CSIS Missile Threat, September 28, 2017, 
tests-s-500-air-defense-system/.
157 “Russia’s ASAT Development Takes Aim at LEO Assets,” Jane’s Intelligence Review, 1.
158 “Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-31BM Foxhound,” JetPhotos, September 14, 2018, 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

159 Amanda Macias, “A Never-before-seen Russian Missile Is Identified as an Anti-satellite Weapon and Will Be Ready for Warfare by 2022,”
CNBC, October 25, 2018, 
160 U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Armed Services, Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community, written statement of
James Clapper, February 9, 2016, 10, 
161 Alexander Zudin, “Russia to Deploy Anti-satellite Weapon on MiG-31BM,” IHS Jane’s Missiles and Rockets, February 22, 2017.
162 Jana Honkova, The Russian Federation’s Approach to Military Space and Its Military Space Capabilities (Arlington, VA: George C. Marshall
Institute, 2013); “Эксперт: разрабатываемая в РФ противоспутниковая ракета эффективнее существующих в мире,” TASS, October
26, 2018, 
163 Asif A. Siddiqi, “The Soviet Co-Orbital Anti-Satellite System: A Synopsis,” Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 50, no. 6 (1997),
225–40, 
164 Anatoly Zak, “IS Anti-Satellite System,” Russian Space Web, July 31, 2017, 
165 Ibid.
166 Anatoly Zak, “Naryad Anti-Satellite System (14F11),” Russian Space Web, November 30, 2017, 
html.
167 “Briz,” Gunter’s Space Page, 2019, 
168 “Okno ELINT complex in Tajikistan is becoming Russian,” Ferghana News, April 17, 2006, 
php?id=1390; Alexander Zolotukhin, “Space Force of Russia: Guarding the Space Borders of the State for Ten Years,” News Line Novosti
Kosmonavtiki, July 3, 2011.
169 “«Окно» в Таджикистане «увидит» 50 тысяч км космоса,” Rambler, November 27, 2016, 
no-v-tadzhikistane-uvidit-50-tysyach-km-kosmosa/.
170 Bart Hendrickx, “Russia Develops Co-orbital Anti-satellite Capability,” Jane’s Intelligence Review, September 27, 2018, 1.
171 Ibid., 8.
172 Mike Wall, “’Very Abnormal’ Russian Satellite Doesn’t Seems So Threatening, Experts Say,” Space.com, August 16, 2018, 
com/41511-weird-russian-satellite-not-so-abnormal.html.
173 Jonathan McDowell, “Jonathan’s Space Report,” August 17, 2018, 
174 Yleem D.S. Poblete, “Remarks on Recent Russian Space Activities of Concern” (speech, Conference on Disarmament, Geneva, Switzerland,
August 14, 2018), 
175 Wall, “’Very Abnormal’ Russian Satellite Doesn’t Seems So Threatening, Experts Say”; Brian Weeden, Twitter post, August 16, 2018, 9:46
a.m., 
176 Weeden and Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities, 2-2; Hendrickx, “Russia Develops Co-orbital Anti-satellite Capability,” 5.
177 «Космический аппарат ‹Луч› выведен на расчетную орбиту,» Aviation Explorer, September 29, 2014, 
news/2014/9/29/125060/.
178 Brian Weeden, “Dancing in the dark redux: Recent Russian rendezvous and proximity operations in space,” The Space Review, October 5,
2015, 
179 Thomas G. Roberts, “Russian Rendezvous and Proximity Operations in the GEO Belt,” CSIS Aerospace Security Project, accessed April 4,
2019, 
180 Ibid.; Laurence Peter, “Russia Shrugs off US Anxiety over Military Satellite,” BBC News, October 20, 2015, 
world-europe-34581089.
181 MIke Gruss, “Russian Satellite Maneuvers, Silence Worry Intelsat,” Space News, October 9, 2015, 
lite-maneuvers-silence-worry-intelsat/.
182 Peter, “Russia Shrugs off US Anxiety over Military Satellite.”
183 “Luch (Olimp-K),” Gunter’s Space Page, 2019, 
184 Missile Defense Project, “Missiles of Russia,” CSIS Missile Threat, 2018, 
185 U.S. Congress, House, Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee on Oversight and Management Efficiency, Empty Threat or Serious
Danger: Assessing North Korea’s Risk to the Homeland, written statement of William R. Graham and Peter Vincent Pry, October 12, 2017, 6,
 Jerry Emanuelson, “Soviet Test
184: The 1962 Soviet Nuclear EMP Tests over Kazakhstan,” FutureScience, 
186 Siddiqi, “The Soviet Co-Orbital Anti-Satellite System,” 230.
187 Clay Wilson, High Altitude Electromagnetic Pulse (HEMP) and High Power Microwave (HPM) Devices: Threat Assessments, Congressional
Research Service, July 21, 2008, ; Mark Schneider, “Emerging EMP Threat to the United States,”
National Institute for Public Policy (Fairfax, VA: National Institute Press, 2007), 
per-Final-November07.pdf.
188 «Наука и Техника: Россия Создаст Лазер Для Подавления Разведки Противника,» Lenta.ru, August 8, 2010, 
news/2010/08/19/laser.
189 Ibid.
190 Pavel Podvig, “Russia Has Been Testing Laser ASAT,” Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces, October 8, 2011, 
blog/2011/10/russia_has_been_testing_laser.shtml.
191 Alexei Mikhailov, “Пиу-пиу,” Lenta.ru, May 22, 2013, “Beams away: Russia boosts air-

borne combat laser program,” Russia Today, November 19, 2012, 
192 Patrick Tucker, “Russia Claims It Now Has Lasers To Shoot Satellites,” Defense One, February 6, 2018, 
nology/2018/02/russia-claims-it-now-has-lasers-shoot-satellites/146243/.
193 «Источник узнал о перспективах создания в РФ нового самолета с лазерным оружием,» Interfax, February 25, 2018, translation by
author, 
194 Hendrickx, “Russia Develops Co-orbital Anti-satellite Capability”, 9; Steven Aftergood, “The Okno and Krona Space Surveillance Systems,”
The Federation of American Scientists, January 31, 2008, 
195 «Космические войска получили лазерный локатор,» Коммерсантъ, May 25, 2018, 4, 
196 National Aeronautics and Space Administration, “International Laser Ranging Service (ILRS),” November 14, 2017, 
nasa.gov/network/stations/index.html.
197 Weeden and Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities, 2–26.
198 “Russia Denies Disrupting GPS Signals during Nato Arctic Exercises,” Guardian, November 12, 2018, 
world/2018/nov/12/russia-denies-blame-for-arctic-gps-interference.
199 Sergey Sukhankin, “Russian Electronic Warfare in Ukraine: Between Real and Imaginable,” RealClearDefense, May 26, 2017, 
realcleardefense.com/articles/2017/05/26/russian_electronic_warfare_in_ukraine_111460.html; “It is official, Russian army deployed
R-330Zh jammer in the battle of Debaltseve,” Inform Napalm, May 14, 2016, 
seve/; “Russian R-330Zh jammer detected 7 km from the contact line in Donbas,” Inform Napalm, November 16, 2017, 
palm.org/en/russian-r-330zh-jammer-detected-7-km-from-the-contact-line-in-donbas/.
200 Patrick Tucker, “US and Russia Regard Each Other Warily in the Baltic and Black Seas,” Defense One, January 24, 2019, 
seone.com/threats/2019/01/us-and-russia-eye-each-other-warily-baltic-and-black-seas/154404/.
201 Elias Groll, “Spy Planes, Signal Jammers, and Putin’s High-Tech War in Syria,” Foreign Policy, October 6, 2015, 
com/2015/10/06/spy-planes-signal-jammers-and-putins-high-tech-war-in-syria; David Stupples, “How Syria is becoming a test bed for
high-tech weapons of electronic warfare,” Conversation, October 8, 2015, 
for-high-tech-weapons-of-electronic-warfare-48779.
202 Courtney Kube, “Russia Has Figured out How to Jam U.S. Drones in Syria, Officials Say,” NBC News, April 10, 2018, 
com/news/military/russia-has-figured-out-how-jam-u-s-drones-syria-n863931.
203 “Russian Exercise Jams Aircraft GPS in North Norway for a Week,” Resilient Navigation and Timing Foundation, October 5, 2017, https://
rntfnd.org/2017/10/05/russian-exercise-jams-aircraft-gps-in-north-norway-for-a-week-nrk/.
204 Ibid.
205 Dave Johnson, “ZAPAD 2017 and Euro-Atlantic Security,” NATO Review, December 14, 2017, 
so-in-2017/zapad-2017-and-euro-atlantic-security-military-exercise-strategic-russia/en/index.htm.
206 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, “Trident Juncture 18,” October 31, 2018, 
207 Mark Episkopos, “Russia Jammed GPS Signals During a NATO Military Exercise. That’s a Really Big Deal.,” National Interest, December 1,
2018, 
208 Thomas Nilsen, “Norway Tired of Russia’s Electronic Warfare Troubling Civilian Navigation: ‘Unacceptable and Risky’,” Barents Observ-
er, January 20, 2019, 
able-and-risky.
209 Ibid.
210 “Ships Fooled in GPS Spoofing Attack Suggest Russian Cyberweapon,” New Scientist, August 10, 2017, 
cle/2143499-ships-fooled-in-gps-spoofing-attack-suggest-russian-cyberweapon/.
211 Dana Goward, “Mass GPS Spoofing Attack in Black Sea?” Maritime Executive, July 11, 2017, 
mass-gps-spoofing-attack-in-black-sea#gs.QGC4kZ8.
212 Brian Wang, “Russia will place GPS jammers on 250,000 cellphone towers to reduce enemy cruise missile and drone accuracy in the event
of large scale conventional war,” Next Big Future, October 18, 2016, 
mers-on-250000.html.
213 Ellen Nakashima, “Russian hacker group exploits satellites to steal data, hide tracks,” Washington Post, September 9, 2015, 
washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/russian-hacker-group-exploits-satellites-to-steal-data-hide-tracks/2015/09/08/c59fa7cc-
5657-11e5-b8c9-944725fcd3b9_story.html?utm_term=.43d8b0ed4c7f; “Turla: Spying tool targets governments and diplomats,” Symantec
Security Response, August 7, 2014, 
214 Damien McGuinness, “How a cyber attack transformed Estonia,” BBC News, April 27, 2017, 
215 Sergey Sukhankin, “Russian Electronic Warfare in Ukraine: Between Real and Imaginable,” RealClearDefense, May 26, 2017, 
realcleardefense.com/articles/2017/05/26/russian_electronic_warfare_in_ukraine_111460.html.
216 Gordon Corera, “How France’s TV5 Was Almost Destroyed by ‘Russian Hackers’,” BBC News, October 10, 2016, 
technology-37590375.
217 David E. Sanger, “Putin Ordered ‘Influence Campaign’ Aimed at U.S. Election, Report Says,” New York Times, January 6, 2017, 
nytimes.com/2017/01/06/us/politics/russia-hack-report.html.
IRAN
218 Roberts, Spaceports of the World.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

219 Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community, Daniel R. Coats, 2019, 10.
220 Aria Bendix, “Iran Claims It Launched a Satellite-Carrying Rocket Into Space,” Atlantic, July 28, 2017, 
archive/2017/07/iran-claims-it-launched-a-satellite-carrying-rocket-into-space/535161/.
221 Farzin Nadimi, “Iran’s Space Program Emerges from Dormancy,” The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, August 1, 2017, 
washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/view/irans-space-program-emerges-from-dormancy.
222 “Russia, Kazakhstan Sign Agreement on Creation of Baiterek Launch Complex at Baikonur,” Azernews, August 22, 2018, 
azernews.az/region/136542.html.
223 “Safir,” Gunter’s Space Page, 2019, Thérèse Delpech, “Nuclear Deterrence in the 21st Centu-
ry: Lessons from the Cold War for a New Era of Strategic Piracy” (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2012), 147, 
pubs/monographs/MG1103.html.
224 Ali Akbar Dareini, “Iran’s space monkey business: A plausible explanation?” Christian Science Monitor, February 4, 2013, 
csmonitor.com/Science/2013/0204/Iran-s-space-monkey-business-A-plausible-explanation.
225 Jeffrey Lewis, Twitter post, January 9, 2019, 2:20 p.m., 
226 Stephen Clark, “Iran Admits Failure in Satellite Launch Attempt,” January 16, 2019, 
failure-in-satellite-launch-attempt/.
227 Note: The Simorgh launch vehicle is also known as the Safir-2; “Simorgh (Safir-2),” Gunter’s Space Page, 2019, 
doc_lau/simorgh.htm; Missile Defense Project, “Simorgh,” CSIS Missile Threat, Center for Strategic and International Studies, September
28, 2017, 
228 Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community, Daniel R. Coats, 2019, 10.
229 Jon Gambrell, “Images suggest Iran has attempted second satellite launch,” Times of Israel, February 7, 2019, 
com/images-suggest-iran-launched-satellite-despite-us-criticism/.
230 Carol Morello, “U.S. warns Iran against satellite launches it says could advance missile technology,” Washington Post, January 3, 2019,

11e9-84fc-d58c33d6c8c7_story.html?.
231 Sarah Lewin, “Satellite Photos Show Evidence of Iranian Rocket Launch. But Did It Fail?,” Space.com, February 7, 2019, 
com/43260-iran-second-satellite-launch-possible-failure.html.
232 Geoff Brumfiel, “Satellite Imagery Suggests 2nd Iranian Space Launch Has Failed,” National Public Radio, February 6, 2019, 
npr.org/2019/02/06/692071812/satellite-imagery-suggests-second-iranian-space-launch-has-failed.
233 Jon Gambrell, “Images suggest Iran has attempted second satellite launch,” Washington Post, February 7, 2019, 
tonpost.com/world/middle_east/images-suggest-iran-launched-2nd-satellite-over-us-criticism/2019/02/06/88e603fa-2a7d-11e9-906e-
9d55b6451eb4_story.html?.
234 Brumfiel, “Satellite Imagery Suggests 2nd Iranian Space Launch Has Failed.”
235 Mike Wall, “Iran claims to open space tracking center,” Space.com, June 11, 2013, 
center.html.
236 William J. Broad and David E. Sanger, “Iran joins the space club, but why?” New York Times, April 4, 2006, 
com/2006/04/04/science/space/04rock.html.
237 “Iranian Space Agency,” Iran Watch, Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control, August 31, 2009, 
ties/iranian-space-agency.
238 “ناریا ییاضف نامزاس,» Iranian Space Agency, July 9, 2016, 
239 Lambakis, “Foreign Space Capabilities: Implications for U.S. National Security,” 31.
240 Jennifer Chandler, “Decoding Iran’s defence spending: pitfalls and new pointers,” International Institute for Strategic Studies, November
13, 2018, 
241 “Gulf Security after 2020: Iran’s Missile Priorities after the Nuclear Deal,” International Institute for Strategic Studies, December 19, 2017,

242 Missile Defense Project, “Shahab-3,” CSIS Missile Threat, August 9, 2016, 
243 Missile Defense Project, “Safir,” CSIS Missile Threat, October 16, 2017, 
244 Max Fisher, “Deep in the Desert, Iran Quietly Advances missile Technology,” New York Times, May 23, 2011, 
com/2018/05/23/world/middleeast/iran-missiles.html.
245 Ibid.
246 Chase Winter, “Iran’s military power: What you need to know,” DW, August 6, 2018, 
you-need-to-know/a-43756843.
247 Missile Defense Project, “Missiles of Iran,” CSIS Missile Threat, June 14, 2018, National Coordi-
nation Office for Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing,“Control Segment,” , accessed February 25, 2019, /
gov/multimedia/images/GPS-control-segment-map.pdf.
248 Scott Peterson and Payam Faramarzi, “Exclusive: Iran hijacked U.S. drone, says Iranian engineer,” Christian Science Monitor, December 15,
2011, 
249 Steve Lambakis, “Foreign Space Capabilities: Implications for U.S. National Security,” 33.
250 Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community, Daniel R. Coats, 2017, 7.
251 Micah Zenko, “Dangerous Space Incidents” (New York, NY: Council on Foreign Relations, 2014), 3, 

files/pdf/2014/04/CPA_ContingencyMemo_21.pdf.
252 Safa Haeri, “Cuba blows the whistle on Iranian jamming,” Asia Times, August 22, 2003, 
EH22Ak03.html.
253 Small Media Foundation, Satellite Jamming in Iran: A War Over Airwaves (London, UK: Small Media Foundation, 2012), 21, https://
smallmedia.org.uk/sites/default/files/Satellite%20Jamming.pdf.
254 Michel de Rosen, “Letter to Eutelsat regarding Iranian Government’s jamming of satellite broadcasts,” Human Rights Watch, June 25, 2010,

255 Peterson and Faramarzi, “Exclusive: Iran hijacked U.S. drone, says Iranian engineer.”
256 Regan Doherty, “Iran Jamming Al Jazeera Broadcasts: Document,” Reuters, January 10, 2012, 
zeera/iran-jamming-al-jazeera-broadcasts-document-idUSTRE80918520120110.
257 Robert Briel, “Syria in Frame on Eutelsat Jamming,” Broadband TV News, October 22, 2012, 
com/2012/10/22/syria-believed-to-jam-eutelsat/.
258 Michael Eisenstadt, “Iran’s Lengthening Cyber Shadow,” Research Notes 34 (Washington, DC: Washington Institute for Near East Policy,
2016), 
259 James A. Lewis, “Reconsidering Deterrence for Space and Cyberspace,” in Anti-Satellite Weapons, Deterrence and Sino-American Space Re-
lations, ed. Michael Krepon and Julia Thompson (Washington, DC: Stimson Center, 2013), 142, 
file-attachments/Anti-satellite Weapons -The Stimson Center.pdf.
260 Collin Anderson and Karim Sadjadpour, Iran’s Cyber Threat: Espionage, Sabotage, and Revenge (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace, January 4, 2018) 47, 
NORTH KOREA
261 Roberts, Spaceports of the World.
262 Alex Lockie, “North Korea Looks to Be Preparing a Launch That Could Torpedo Talks and Bring a Full-on War with the US,” Business Insider,
April 3, 2018, 
263 Missile Defense Project, “Taepodong-2 (Unha-3),” CSIS Missile Threat, June 15, 2018, 
264 Robert E. Mccoy, “What are the real purposes of Pyongyang’s new satellites?,” Asia Times, December 19, 2017, 
cle/real-purposes-pyongyangs-new-satellites/.
265 Gordon G. Chang, “Did North Korea Just Launch a Chinese Missile?,” National Interest, February 15, 2017, 
ture/did-north-korea-just-launch-chinese-missile-19459; Krishnadev Calamur, “How did North Korea’s missile and nuclear tech get so good
so fast?,” The Atlantic, September 6, 2017, 
266 Roberts, Spaceports of the World.
267 Donald J. Trump, “Press Conference by President Trump” (press conference, Capella Hotel, Singapore, June 12, 2018), 
house.gov/briefings-statements/press-conference-president-trump/.
268 Donald J. Trump and Kim Jong Un, “Joint Statement of President Donald J. Trump of the United States of America and Chairman Kim Jong
Un of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea at the Singapore Summit,” press release, June 12, 2018, The White House, 
whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/joint-statement-president-donald-j-trump-united-states-america-chairman-kim-jong-un-democrat-
ic-peoples-republic-korea-singapore-summit/.
269 Joseph Bermudez and Victor Cha, “After Hanoi Summit: Rebuilding of Sohae Launch Facility,” CSIS Beyond Parallel, March 5, 2019, https://
beyondparallel.csis.org/hanoi-summit-rebuilding-sohae-launch-facility/.
270 Joseph Bermudez and Victor Cha, “North Korea Reportedly Renews Commitment to Dismantle the Sohae Launch Facility,” CSIS Beyond
Parallel, January 30, 2019, 
271 Bermudez and Cha, “After Hanoi Summit.”
272 Roberts, Spaceports of the World.
273 Steven Lee Myers, “U.S. Calls North Korean Rocket a Failed Satellite,” New York Times, September 15, 1998, 
com/1998/09/15/world/us-calls-north-korean-rocket-a-failed-satellite.html.
274 Damian Grammaticas, “North Korea Rocket Launch Fails,” BBC News, April 13, 2012, 
275 Missile Defense Project, “Taepodong-2 (Unha-3).”
276 “North Korea says it plans to launch many more satellites,” Taiwan News, October 18, 2017, 
news/3276934.
277 “Pyongyang Readies to Launch Satellite,” Korea JoongAng Daily, December 27, 2017, 
article.aspx?aid=3042529&cloc=joongangdaily.
278 Missile Defense Project, “Taepodong-2 (Unha-3).”
279 Missile Defense Project, “North Korean Missile Launches & Nuclear Tests: 1984-Present,” CSIS Missile Threat, November 29, 2017, https://
missilethreat.csis.org/north-korea-missile-launches-1984-present/; Alexander Smith, “North Korea launched no missiles in 2018. But that
isn’t necessarily due to Trump,” NBCNews.com, December 27, 2018, 
missiles-2018-isn-t-necessarily-due-n949971.
280 Missile Defense Project, “Hwasong-15 (KN-22),” CSIS Missile Threat, June 15, 2018, 
kn-22/; Thomas G. Roberts, “Popular Orbits 101,” CSIS Aerospace Security, November 30, 2017, 
popular-orbits-101/.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

281 Weeden and Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities, 5–1.
282 “KCNA Report on DPRK’s Accession to International Space Treaty and Convention,” KCNA, March 12, 2009.
283 “Seventh Session of 12th SPA of DPRK Held,” KCNA, April 1, 2013.
284 First Committee, “Stronger Rules Must Guarantee Outer Space Remains Conflict-Free, First Committee Delegates Stress, Calling for New
Laws to Hold Perpetrators Accountable,” United Nations, October 17, 2017, 
285 Weeden and Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities, 5–1.
286 Joseph Bermudez, Victor Cha, and Lisa Collins, “Undeclared North Korea: Missile Operating Bases Revealed,” CSIS Beyond Parallel, Novem-
ber 12, 2018, 
287 Joseph Bermudez, Victor Cha, and Lisa Collins, “Undeclared North Korea: The Sino-ri Missile Operating Base and Strategic Force Fa-
cilities,” CSIS Beyond Parallel, January 21, 2019, 
ing-base-and-strategic-force-facilities/.
288 Missile Defense Project, “No Dong 1,” CSIS Missile Threat, June 15, 2018, David Wright, et
al., The Physics of Space Security, 77.
289 National Coordination Office for Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, “Control Segment.”
290 Missile Defense Project,”Missiles of North Korea,” CSIS Missile Threat, June 14, 2018, 
291 David Wright et al., The Physics of Space Security, 125-130.
292 U.S. Congress, House, Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee on Oversight and Management Efficiency, Empty Threat or
Serious Danger: Assessing North Korea’s Risk to the Homeland, written statement of William R. Graham and Peter Vincent Pry, October 12,
2017, 1, 
293 U.S. Congress, Empty Threat or Serious Danger, 3.
294 Mun Dong Hui, “North Korean Propaganda Promotes EMP Attacks Using Nuclear Weapons,” DailyNK, November 26, 2018, 
dailynk.com/english/north-korean-propaganda-promotes-emp-attacks-using-nuclear-weapons/.
295 Joby Warrick, Ellen Nakashima, and Anna Fifield, “North Korea Now Making Missile-ready Nuclear Weapons, U.S. Analysts Say,” Washington
Post, August 8, 2017, 
ons-us-analysts-say/2017/08/08/e14b882a-7b6b-11e7-9d08-b79f191668ed_story.html.
296 Lambakis, “Foreign Space Capabilities: Implications for U.S. National Security,” 35.
297 U.S. Congress, Empty Threat or Serious Danger, 4.
298 Bureau of Arms Control, Verification and Compliance, “Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under
Water,” U.S. Department of State, 
299 “N. Korea’s jamming of GPS signals poses new threat: defense minister,” Yonhap News Agency, October 5, 2010, 
news.co.kr/national/2010/10/05/67/0301000000AEN20101005005900315F.HTML.
300 Ibid.
301 Choe Sang-Hun, “South Korea: North accused of sending jamming signals to disrupt GPS,” New York Times, May 3, 2012, 
times.com/2012/05/03/world/asia/south-korea-accused-north-accused-of-jamming-signals.html.
302 Ian Wood and Stella Kim, “North Korea Jams GPS Signals to Fishing Boats: South,” NBC News, April 1, 2016, 
news/world/north-korea-jams-gps-signals-fishing-boats-south-n548986.
303 “South Korea tells U.N. that North Korea GPS jamming threatens boats, planes,” Reuters, April 11, 2016, 
us-northkorea-southkorea-gps/south-korea-tells-u-n-that-north-korea-gps-jamming-threatens-boats-planes-idUSKCN0X81SN.
304 “Massive GPS Jamming Attack by North Korea,” GPS World, May 8, 2012, 
rea/.
305 “South Korea tells U.N. that North Korea GPS jamming threatens boats, planes,” Reuters, April 11, 2016, 
us-northkorea-southkorea-gps/south-korea-tells-u-n-that-north-korea-gps-jamming-threatens-boats-planes-idUSKCN0X81SN.
306 Lambakis, “Foreign Space Capabilities: Implications for U.S. National Security,” 37.
307 Julian Ryall, “North Korea Doubles Its Cyber Warfare Team to 6,000 Troops,” Telegraph, January 7, 2015, 
news/worldnews/asia/northkorea/11329480/North-Korea-doubles-its-cyber-warfare-team-to-6000-troops.html.
308 Michael S. Schmidt, Nicole Perlroth, and Matthew Goldstein, “F.B.I. says little doubt North Korea hit Sony,” New York Times, January 7,
2015, 
309 Hyeong-wook Boo, “An Assessment of North Korean Cyber Threats” (presentation, 17th International Symposium on Security Affairs,
Tokyo, Japan, July 25, 2016), 24, 
310 Demetri Sevastopulo, “US Accuses North Korea over Global Cyber Crime Wave,” Financial Times, September 6, 2018, 
content/91453da8-b1de-11e8-99ca-68cf89602132.
OTHERS
311 Note: This figure corresponds to all space-faring nations other than the United States, China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea; Roberts, Space-
ports of the World.
312 Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment, 115th Cong. (March 6, 2018) (testimony of LTG Robert Ashley).
313 Note: Prior to 2018, Egyptian space activity had been lead by two state organizations: the National Authority for Remote Sensing and Space
Science (NARSS) and the Academy of Scientific Research & Technology (ASRT). Both organizations were civil-focused; “Egypt,” Space Gen-

eration Advisory Council, 
314 Al-Masry Al-Youm, “Sisi Passes Law Establishing Egyptian Space Agency,” Egypt Independent, January 18, 2018, 
ent.com/sisi-passes-law-establishing-egyptian-space-agency/.
315 Stephen Clark, “Egyptian observation satellite launched by Russian rocket,” Spaceflight Now, February 21, 2019, 
com/2019/02/21/egyptian-observation-satellite-successfully-launched-by-russian-rocket/.
316 “EgyptSat-A,” Gunter’s Space Page, 2019, 
317 Lisa O’Carroll, “Egypt accused of jamming al-Jazeera”, Guardian, September 2, 2013, 
egypt-accused-jamming-al-jazeera.
318 “Egypt jamming Al Jazeera’s satellite signals,” Al Jazeera, September 4, 2013, 
st/2013/09/201393183256834226.html.
319 CSIS Aerospace Security, “Space Environment.”
320 “Missions,” Arianespace, accessed February 22, 2019, 
321 “France Joins 21st Century Space Race Fearing Future Conflict,” Bloomberg, September 7, 2018, 
cles/2018-09-07/france-suspects-russian-space-attack-targeted-military-satellite.
322 Launchspace is a U.S.-based company and Astroscale is based in Japan. Jeff Foust, “Orbital debris removal company Astroscale raises $50
million,” “Orbital Debris Solutions,” Launchspace Technologies Corporation, 
tions/; Space News, October 31, 2018, 
323 Note: Other partners include Airbus, Innovative Solutions in Space (ISIS), the Swiss Center for Electronics and Microtechnology (CSEM),
National Institute for Research in Computer Science and Automation (INRIA), and Stellenbosch University; “RemoveDEBRIS,” University of
Surrey, Jonathon Amos, “Space harpoon skewers ‘orbital debris’,”
BBC, February 15, 2019, 
324 “Net successfully snares space debris,” University of Surrey, September 19, 2018, 
ly-snares-space-debris.
325 “RemoveDEBRIS,” University of Surrey.
326 “Snap and Tsinghua,” Surrey Space Centre, 
327 Dave Klingler, “Satellite-jamming becoming a big problem in the Middle East and North Africa,” Ars Technica, March 28, 2012, 
technica.com/science/2012/03/satellite-jamming-becoming-a-big-problem-in-the-middle-east/.
328 “Mango and Tango’s Space Dance,” Toulouse Cité de l’espace, September 15, 2010, 
space-dance/.
329 Joe McGauley, “NASA Is Going to Knock an Asteroid Out of Orbit in First-Ever Planetary Defense Test,” Thrillist, February 5, 2019, https://
 A. F. Cheng1 , A. S. Rivkin, and N. L. Chabot, “The Dou-
ble Asteroid Redirection Test (Dart): New Developments,” 50th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference 2019, 
meetings/lpsc2019/pdf/2424.pdf.
330 Hemant Singh, “Milestones in Indian Space Programmes,” Jagranjosh.com, February 1, 2016, 
edge/milestones-in-indian-space-programmes-1454322798-1.
331 “2015 Space Pioneer Award Was Presented to ISRO for Mars Orbiter Mission,” ISRO, 
332 Weeden and Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities, 6-4.
333 Note: Data limited to total launches from 1980 to 2018; Roberts, Spaceports of the World.
334 Doug Tsuruoka, “China Wants Missile Defenses To Stop India (And Kill Satellites),” National Interest, January 19, 2018, 
est.org/blog/the-buzz/china-wants-missile-defenses-stop-india-kill-satellites-24132.
335 Franz-Stefan Gady, “India Test Fires Agni-V Nuclear-Capable ICBM,” Diplomat, December 10, 2018, 
test-fires-agni-v-nuclear-capable-icbm/.
336 Victoria Samson, “India’s missile defense/anti-satellite nexus,” The Space Review, May 10, 2010, 
cle/1621/1.
337 Weeden and Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities, 5–1.
338 Missile Defense Project, “Missiles of India,” CSIS Missile Threat, 
339 Rajat Pandit, “After Agni-V Launch, DRDO’s New Target Is Anti-satellite Weapons,” Times of India, April 20, 2012, 
times.com/india/After-Agni-V-launch-DRDOs-new-target-is-anti-satellite-weapons/articleshow/12763074.cms.
340 India Ministry of Defence, “Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR),” Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff, , 6-7
and 32-33, 
341 India Ministry of Defence, “Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR) - 2018,” Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff, 2018,
21-22, 
342 Ibid., 63.
343 Ibid., 64.
344 Israel Ministry of Science and Technology, “About the Israel Space Agency,” Israel Space Agency, undated, accessed March 6, 2019, https://

345 Isaac Ben-Israel and Zvi Kaplan, “New Frontiers,” From Modest Beginning to a Vibrant State, Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
gov.il/MFA_Graphics/MFA%20Gallery/Israel60/ch7-6.pdf.
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2019

346 “Israel flying to moon for first lunar landing after SpaceX launch,” NBC News, February 22, 2019, 
israel-flying-moon-first-lunar-landing-after-spacex-launch-ncna974456.
347 As of March 9, 2019, Beresheet is estimated to land on the Moon on April 12, 2019.
348 John Horack, “First Private Lunar Spacecraft Shoots for the Moon,” Space.com, February 2, 2019, 
vate-spacecraft-shoots-for-the-moon.html.
349 Barbara Opall-Rome, “US-Israel Arrow-3 Intercepts Target in Space,” Defense News, December 10, 2015, 
air/2015/12/10/us-israel-arrow-3-intercepts-target-in-space/.
350 Isaac Ben-Israel and Zvi Kaplan, “New Frontiers.”
351 Japan, Basic Space Law (Law No.43 of 2008), Japan, May 28, 2008, 
352 Japan Ministry of Defense, National Defense Program Guidelines for FY 2019 and beyond (provisional translation), Japan Ministry of Defense,
December 18, 2018, 
353 Toru Kasai, Mitsushuge Oda, and Takashi Suzuki, Results of the ETS-7 Mission - Rendezvous Docking and Space Robotics Experiments (Sen-
gen, Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki-ken, Japan: National Space Development Agency of Japan, 1999).
354 Charles Q. Choi, “Libya pinpointed as source of months-long satellite jamming in 2006,” Space.com, April 9, 2007, 
com/3666-libya-pinpointed-source-months-long-satellite-jamming-2006.html.
355 “Thuraya Telecom Services affected by intentional jamming in Libya,” Thuraya, February 25, 2011, 
thuraya-telecom-services-affected-intentional-jamming-libya.
356 “Libya Source of Jamming of Lebanese News Channels: TRA,” Daily Star Newspaper, February 23, 2011, 
News/Lebanon-News/2011/Feb-23/61826-libya-source-of-jamming-of-lebanese-news-channels-tra.ashx.
357 David Hencke and Owen Gibson, “Protest to Libya after Satellites Jammed,” Guardian, December 3, 2005, 
uk/2005/dec/03/politics.libya.
358 “Jazeera Tracks Jamming Signal to Libya Spy Building,” Reuters, February 21, 2011, 
idAFLDE71K2CV20110221.
359 Kalbe Ali, “Rs4.7bn Allotted for Suparco Projects,” DAWN, April 29, 2018, 
360 “Space Race With India? Pakistan Plans Manned Mission With China’s Help in 2022,” News18, October 25, 2018, 
news/world/pakistan-to-send-its-first-astronaut-into-space-in-2022-with-help-from-china-1920005.html.
361 Missile Defense Project, “Shaheen 3,” CSIS Missile Threat, 
362 Bill Gertz, “Moscow Accuses Ukraine of Electronic Attack on Satellite,” Washington Free Beacon, March 17, 2014, 
national-security/moscow-accuses-ukraine-of-electronic-attack-on-satellite/.
363 Pavel Polityuk and Natalia Zinets, “Ukraine readies project to jam separatist broadcasting,” Reuters, April 27, 2017, 
com/article/us-ukraine-crisis-propaganda/ukraine-readies-project-to-jam-separatist-broadcasting-idUSKBN17T1ST.
364 Tom Shales, “Cable’s ‘Captain Midnight’ Apprehended,” Washington Post, July 23, 1986, 
style/1986/07/23/cables-captain-midnight-apprehended/5d61712e-60c7-4351-8697-823761120593/.
365 Philip P. Pan, “Banned Falun Gong movement jammed Chinese satellite signal,” Washington Post, July 9, 2002, 
tonpost.com/archive/politics/2002/07/09/banned-falun-gong-movement-jammed-chinese-satellite-signal/03fa9526-83a7-4ceb-9d5f-
545fcd7e75a5/?utm_term=.d058f5edf7fc.
366 “Intelsat vows to stop piracy by Sri Lanka separatist group,” Space News, April 18, 2007, 
cy-sri-lanka-separatist-group/.
367 JJ McCoy, “Intelsat shuts down transponder hijacked by terrorists,” Via Satellite, April 26, 2007, 
rized/2007/04/26/intelsat-shuts-down-transponder-hijacked-by-terrorists/.
368 Margaret Coker and Charles Levinson, “Rebels Hijack Gadhafi’s Phone Network,” Wall Street Journal, April 13, 2011, 
articles/SB10001424052748703841904576256512991215284.
369 Hank Rausch, “Jamming Commercial Satellite Communications During Wartime: An Empirical Study,” Proceedings of the Fourth IEEE Inter-
national Workshop on Information Assurance, , 
370 Craig Whitlock and Barton Gellman, “U.S. documents detail al-Qaeda’s efforts to fight back against drones,” Washington Post, Septem-
ber 3, 2013, 
drones/2013/09/03/b83e7654-11c0-11e3-b630-36617ca6640f_story.html.
371 Ben Farmer, “British hacker admits stealing Pentagon satellite data,” Telegraph, June 16, 2017, 
news/2017/06/16/british-hacker-admits-stealing-pentagon-satellite-data/.
372 J.M. Porup, “It’s surprisingly simple to hack a satellite,” Motherboard, August 21, 2015, 
jq5a/its-surprisingly-simple-to-hack-a-satellite.
373 “Mexican truckers fight highway robbery with armoured semis,” Malay Mail, January 17, 2019, 
life/2019/01/17/mexican-truckers-fight-highway-robbery-with-armored-semis/1713494.

1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202 887 0200 |