Figure 1. Key statistics
Climate change TAJIKISTAN
ND-GAIN Country Index (Afghanistan) TURKMENISTAN
Average mean surface air temperature 14.24°C
2039 projection (CMIP6, SSP1-2.6) 13.63°C The ND-GAIN Country Index captures a country’s vulnerability to climate
change and other global challenges, and its readiness to improve
resilience. It is a score out of 100; the higher the score, the less
Average precipitation 355.05 mm vulnerable and more ready the country.
2039 projection (CMIP6, SSP1-2.6) 373.39 mm
40.0
AFGHANISTAN
35.0
IRAN
30.0 Afghanistan
PAKISTAN
25.0
1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 20202023
Note: Climate change projections are based on the Sixth Phase of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP6) and a set of Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs).
Sources: World Bank, Climate Change Knowledge Portal, ‘Afghanistan’, accessed 27 Feb. 2026; UN Population Fund, ‘World Population Dashboard: Afghanistan’, accessed 27 Feb.
2026; Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC), ‘Afghanistan: Acute Food Insecurity Situation. Projection for May—’, 4 ; and Notre Dame Global
Adaptation Initiative (ND-GAIN), ‘ND-GAIN Index country rankings 2023’, accessed 27 Feb. 2026.
eikliW-awgnaK
apmaS/AMANU
:otohP

Climate, Peace and Security Fact Sheet
Afghanistan*
Afghanistan faces severe climate vulnerability while being more RECOMMENDED ACTIONS:
exposed to extreme weather events and natural hazards (including
droughts and floods) than the global average. This has been ▶ The international community should advance the
compounded by environmental degradation caused by prolonged established preliminary principled engagement on
conflict, poor natural resource management and limited resilient climate governance that strengthens the resilience
infrastructure. Together with complex humanitarian and economic of Afghanistan’s population. UN member states
crises and mass returns of Afghans from Iran and Pakistan, all these and donors should invest in climate adaptation and
factors deepen the population’s vulnerability to overlapping crises. resilience projects that are gender-responsive and
• target the most vulnerable groups. The UN Assistance
Climate change, environmental degradation and water scarcity are
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the UN Resident
undermining agriculture-based livelihoods, which is aggravating
Coordinator’s Office in Afghanistan and their partners
food security and poverty. The impacts are highly gendered,
should continue to work with local communities to
as Taliban restrictions and sociocultural norms limit women’s
strengthen the resilience of agricultural livelihoods.
mobility, income and access to assistance, further increasing their
climate vulnerability. ▶ The UN, its member states and its implementing
partners should work with local communities to
•
Climate change-related hazards and declining access to natural enhance investments in anticipatory climate adaptation
resources are key drivers of internal displacement and migration
and disaster management and preparedness.
and contribute to forced immobility. Meanwhile forced mass
Programming should explicitly address the specific
returns are placing additional pressure on receiving communities
needs faced by vulnerable groups such as internally
and on scarce water resources and basic services.
displaced people (IDPs), returnees and climate-affected
• The impacts of climate change increase pressure on natural host communities to prevent resource competition and
resources, sometimes intensifying water and land disputes that social tensions.
have been further complicated by Taliban involvement in farmer– ▶ The UN and its member states should support and
herder conflicts. Growing water scarcity, combined with poor expand initiatives that aim to strengthen regional
resource management, heightens risks of regional instability. environmental cooperation—particularly over water and
• disaster preparedness in the transboundary river basins.
Economic crises, sanctions-related constraints, governance
UNAMA and the UN Regional Centre for Preventive
challenges and limited climate finance impede effective
Diplomacy for Central Asia (UNRCCA) can play a role in
adaptation and resource management, which increases risks of
facilitating platforms that engage relevant regional and
social tensions, livelihood loss and instability.
local stakeholders in constructive dialogue on climate,
International engagement with the de facto, Taliban-led authorities peace and security.
remains complex and sensitive. However, without sustained
▶ Beyond humanitarian and basic human needs, UN
international support to improve climate governance, natural resources
member states and donors should support medium- to
management and infrastructure, Afghanistan’s ability to cope with
long-term resilience, including by integrating conflict
climate impacts will remain severely limited. The international
sensitivity and environmental peacebuilding into
community should explore avenues for the Afghan population’s
programming. This entails improved aid-coordination
representation in UNFCCC mechanisms and access to climate finance
mechanisms on climate change, developing a joint
in line with principled approaches. The United Nations and its member
strategy on climate resilience and clear priorities for
states should implement the recommendations of the independent
action. UNAMA and the UN Resident Coordinator’s
assessment on Afghanistan mandated by Security Council Resolution
Office should continue efforts to coordinate donors
2679 (2023), including expanding technical assistance on climate
and implementers and facilitate exchanges of lessons
adaptation, water management, environmental security and
learned and knowledge-sharing.
transboundary resource management.
ND-GAIN Country Index
Population
Total population 43.8 million (2025)
Internally displaced population 5.5 million (2024)
Population in moderate or severe
9.5 million (2025)
food insecurity
* This is an updated version of the fact sheets on Afghanistan published in and .

2 Climate, Peace and Security Fact Sheet: Afghanistan
Climate exposure: Trends and projections Decades of conflict-driven deforestation have increased exposure to
flash floods in the east, north and west, causing significant asset loss.14
Afghanistan is landlocked with a semi-arid to dry climate. The
topographies are diverse, ranging from mountainous regions in the Rapid urbanization in the 2000s led millions to abandon traditional
north-eastern, eastern and central parts of the country, arid desert farming and seek jobs in the construction and service sectors.
lands in the south-west and plains in the north-west. Afghanistan’s The further urban expansion, slow economic growth and financial
climate also varies across regions and topographies.1 Extreme weather collapse that followed the 2021 Taliban takeover led to rising urban
events such as droughts and flooding are influenced by changing unemployment, increasing food insecurity and poverty. Alongside
temperatures, snowmelt and rainfall, but patterns differ across agricultural sector decline, climatic shocks, restrictive policies and
ecological zones.2 The frequency and intensity of extreme weather human rights violations, this has exacerbated the humanitarian
events in the country are increasing, and the projected effects of situation.15 In 2025 an estimated 2.8 million people returned to
climate change are anticipated to increase it further.3 Afghanistan from Iran and Pakistan, leading to a loss of remittances
that has further aggravated the economic situation and increased
The mean annual temperature in Afghanistan has increased from pressure on scarce resources and limited services, thereby heightening
12.23°C in 1960 to 14.24°C in 2024.4 Climate models project a further people’s climate vulnerability.16 As of , 21.9 million
increase of 1.5–3°C by 2050, depending on global greenhouse gas people (45 per cent of the population) were projected to require
emission rates, with the Central Highlands at particular risk.5 Given humanitarian assistance in 2026.17
Afghanistan’s complex topography, this change will vary significantly
across regions.6 Climate-related peace and security risks
Average annual precipitation between 1961 and 2022 was 327 Climate change is rarely the main driver of conflict, but it can
millimetres, with substantial regional variation.7 No significant long- undermine development gains, exacerbate the dynamics of ongoing
term change in precipitation has been registered over the past century, violence, amplify existing tensions and disrupt fragile peace processes.
although seasonal variability and precipitation intensity have increased Violent conflict and political instability can also weaken community
in some regions.8 Future precipitation projections remain uncertain, resilience to the effects of climate change. This fact sheet uses four
but suggest slightly lower average daily rainfall and more intense interrelated pathways to navigate the relationship between climate
extreme weather events, with projected annual precipitation in the change, peace and security: (a) livelihood impacts, (b) migration and
range 260–499 mm by 2039.9 In most years since 1997 there has mobility, (c) armed actors and security, and (d) political and economic
been drought in parts of Afghanistan, with the frequency and intensity grievances.
increasing in recent decades. By 2030 local droughts are likely to
become the norm, rather than temporary and cyclical events.10 Livelihood impacts
Socioecological vulnerabilities Climate change, environmental degradation and conflict have had
negative impacts on natural resource-dependent livelihoods in
Afghanistan faces multiple interconnected challenges that weaken its Afghanistan. The population’s high exposure to climate shocks is
population’s resilience to climate change and socioeconomic shocks. compounded by factors such as poor water management, ineffective
Prolonged conflict, mismanagement, unsustainable land-use practices government mechanisms and inadequate infrastructure.18
and natural hazards have driven environmental degradation, while
Recurring droughts, irregular patterns of rainfall and snowfall in
economic hardship, widespread poverty and poor governance heighten
some regions, and rising temperatures have severely affected both
exposure to climate risk.11
surface water and groundwater resources in Afghanistan. They
Nearly 80 per cent of Afghanistan’s population is directly or indirectly have also led to a rise of pests and disease in herds and crops. All
dependent on agriculture.12 Rising temperatures and shifting these factors cause significant degradation and loss of traditional
precipitation have intensified recurring droughts; combined with farming-based livelihoods in rural areas. This has contributed to
low adaptive capacity, this has led to crop failure, pasture loss and an overall decline in the agricultural sector, which has worsened
desertification. The intensity and frequency of droughts have increased health, nutrition and food security and deepened overall economic
in recent decades, and provinces in central, north and north-west decline.19 Environmental degradation and drought can also drive
Afghanistan are most prone to agricultural drought due to limited competition over access to water and land, exacerbating inter- and
coping capacity and high socioeconomic and ecological fragility.13 intracommunal socioeconomic tensions and weakening social
1 Rahimi, S. T. et al., ‘Spatiotemporal changes in future precipitation of Afghanistan for 10 Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO), ‘Afghanistan drought risk
shared economic pathways’, Helyon, vol. 10, no. 7 (2024). management strategy 2019’, Feb. 2020.
2 Baizayee, B. (ed.), Building Adaptive Capacity and Resilience to Climate Change in 11 Gautam, Y. et al., Examining Poverty and Food Insecurity in the Context of Long-term
Afghanistan (LDCF): Baseline Assessment Report, Technical Report no. 2014/001 (UN Socio-ecological changes in Kabul, Afghanistan Christian Michelsen Institute (CMI)
Environment Programme: Kabul, Sep. 2014); Qutbudin, I. et al., ‘Seasonal drought Report no. 1 (CMI: Bergen, ); Islamic Development Bank (IsDB), 2025
pattern changes due to climate variability: Case study in Afghanistan’, Water, vol. 11, Resilience Report: Climate, Conflict and Resilience: Pathways to Sustainable and
no. 5 (), p. 1096. Inclusive Solutions (IsDB: Jeddah, ); and D’Souza, S. M., ‘Climate crisis in
3 Qutbudin et al. (note 2); Oskorouchi, H. R. and Sousa-Pouza, A., ‘Floods, food security, Taliban ruled Afghanistan: The need for an alternate approach’, eds J. Vesterlund
and coping strategies: Evidence from Afghanistan’, Agricultural Economics, vol. 52, Mathiesen and D. Vestenskov, Still Here—Understanding and Engaging with
no. 1 (Jan. 2020); and Afghan National Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA), Afghanistan after (Scandinavian Military Studies Press: Copenhagen,
Second National Communication under the United Nations Framework Convention on 2024).
Climate Change (UNFCCC) (NEPA: Kabul, Dec. 2017). 12 International Federation of Red Cross Societies (IFRC), ‘Operation update:
4 World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal, Historical climate, Observed Afghanistan’, 4 Nov. 2024.
timeseries of annual average mean surface air temperature, Afghanistan, 13 Assessment Capacities Project (ACAPS), ‘Afghanistan: Understanding drought’,
1901–2024. 3 ; and Jamalzi, A. R. et al., ‘Drought risk assessment for agriculture in
5 Brown, O., Climate-fragility Risk Brief: Afghanistan, Climate Diplomacy (Adelphi Afghanistan’, Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment, vol. 40,
Research: Berlin, 30 Oct. 2019); and Afghan National Environmental Protection no. 34 (2026).
Agency (NEPA), ‘Afghanistan’s National Inventory Report (NIR) 2019 submission 14 Amini, M., ‘War, deforestation and flooding: in Afghanistan they are all linked’, The
under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)’, Guardian, 14 Sep. 2024.
2019. 15 Gautam et al. (note 11); Norwegian Afghanistan Committee (NAC), Joining Forces
6 These projections are based on the 6th phase of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Against the Impact of Climate Change in Afghanistan, NAC Climate Symposium (NAC:
Project (CMIP6) and Shared Socio-economic Pathway (SSP) 1-2.6. See World Bank Oslo, 2024); and Wafa, S. et al., ‘The impacts of climate change on agriculture in
Climate Change Knowledge Portal (note 4), Future climates, Projected timeseries Afghanistan: A review’, Journal of Natural Science Review, vol. 2, special no. (2024).
anomaly of average mean surface air temperature. 16 Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), ‘Afghanistan situation:
7 World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal (note 4), Historical climate, Observed Afghan returns emergency update #17’, 19 Dec. 2025; Assessment Capacities Project
timeseries of annual precipitation, Afghanistan; and World Bank Data, Average (ACAPS), ‘Afghanistan: Forced displacement from Iran’, Briefing note, 8 Sep. 2025.
precipitation in depth (mm per year), Afghanistan. 17 UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), ‘Afghanistan:
8 Afghan National Environmental Protection Agency (note 3); and World Bank and Asian Humanitarian needs and response plan 2026’, 16 Dec. 2025.
Development Bank (ADB), Climate Risk Country Profile: Afghanistan (World Bank/ 18 Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Climate Impacts, Return
ADB: Washington, DC/Manilla, 2021). and Displacement in Afghanistan (UNHCR: ).
9 See World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal (note 4), Future climates, 19 Gautam et al. (note 11); and UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Projected timeseries anomaly of precipitation; and World Bank and Asian (OCHA), ‘Afghanistan: The alarming effects of climate change’, 1 Aug. 2023.
Development Bank (note 8). 20 Assessment Capacities Project (note 13); and Assessment Capacities Project

 3
cohesion and resilience. Such competition is likely to
Figure 2. Climate change risks and displacement
increase as limited water availability is further reduced
by poor water management of irrigation systems and
Numbers of IDPs and returnees
climate stressors.20 As of Mar.–
200 000
Livelihood insecurity in Afghanistan remains 100 000
highly gendered, with women and girls being 20 000
disproportionately affected. The Taliban’s restrictions on
IDPs Returnees
women’s and girls’ rights, combined with sociocultural
norms, impose barriers to women’s participation in
public spaces and increase their financial and social
dependence on men. This heightens their vulnerability
KABUL
to climate change and reduces their adaptive capacity.
For example, many Afghan women face barriers
accessing disaster assistance due to their reliance
on men as intermediaries, putting female-headed
households particularly at risk.21 The Taliban’s restrictive
Risk from climate change
policies on women initially pushed more rural women Nov.–Dec. 2024
into agriculture and family businesses to cope with Very high
economic hardship, albeit in short-term, seasonal High
and low-paid roles. However, as agriculture is highly Medium
Low
vulnerable to and affected by droughts and floods,
many women and men have been forced to seek
alternative livelihoods. Despite the Taliban’s restrictive
IDP = Internally displaced person.
policies, this has led tens of thousands of women to Notes: IDPs and returnees circles are independent in size and represent distinct populations. High risk to climate
start small businesses and become entrepreneurs.22 change shows geographical areas identified as being vulnerable and at risk to climate change impacts.
Sources: International Organization for Migration (IOM), Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM), ‘Afghanistan: Climate vulnerability assessment round 2 (Q1 2025)’, accessed 12 Feb. 2026;
and IOM, ‘Map 6: Districts considered at very high risk to climate change’, Afghanistan: Climate Risk Index data collection: November– , Mar. 2025, p. 8.
The UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
the UN Resident Coordinator’s Office, donors and their implementing for example, 75 per cent of returnees in Herat and Kandahar provinces
partners should continue working with local communities to report difficulty or great difficulty accessing clean water.30 Resource
strengthen the resilience of agricultural livelihoods, improve scarcity is also prone to politicization, with returnees becoming
disaster preparedness, and gender-responsive and conflict-sensitive scapegoats for perceived shortages.31 Ongoing displacement and
environmental peacebuilding approaches. return movements, combined with climate hazards and pressure
on already overextracted local resources, risk exacerbating social
Migration and mobility tensions and resource competition in communities.32 At the same
Displacement and migration patterns in Afghanistan are driven by a time, some communities experience forced immobility, where physical
complex interplay of causes. From April to , nearly barriers (e.g. floods and heavy rainfall, animal pests, and diseases) or
675 500 Afghans migrated to neighbouring countries due to climate socioeconomic barriers restrict people’s ability to relocate in response
impacts, particularly from Faryab, Ghor, Badghis and Balkh provinces, to climate-related crises. People who have stayed in their climate-
which have been heavily affected by drought.23 As of 2024, there were affected places of origin (e.g. in Balkh province) are facing risks such as
5.5 million IDPs in Afghanistan, of which 1.3 million had been displaced damaged and destroyed houses due to flooding and heightened food
by natural disasters.24 Climate-related hazards and extreme weather insecurity because of reduced livelihood opportunities and rising food
prices driven by drought. People with disabilities are at particular risk
have been the main drivers of new displacement since 2022.25 In the
first quarter of 2025, 79 per cent of new displacements were climate-
of facing barriers to accessing essential services.33
related, with water scarcity increasingly reported as a key factor for The UN, including donors and implementing partners should address
people’s decision to leave.26 the specific needs of IDPs and returnees, while also supporting local
dispute-resolution mechanisms to prevent and manage natural
Climate-related displacement is often a last resort when other
resource conflicts. They should also invest in climate-sensitive
adaptation strategies are no longer available. In recent years, there
resettlement programmes in high-return areas to respond to specific
has been a decline in Afghans’ ability to adapt to climate change
needs arising in these communities.
due to limited physical, financial and social capital, compounded by
lack of government support.27 IDPs often face heightened risks of
Armed actors and security
marginalization and restricted access to basic services and economic
opportunities, and many remain exposed to climate hazards even after Climate and the environment have serious implications for livelihood
relocating.28 The recent influx of returnees from Iran and Pakistan has security in Afghanistan and any change in them can intensify existing
further complicated these pressures. Without adequate support from disputes over resource sharing.34 Such disputes can be further
the authorities for reintegration, the returnees face heightened climate worsened by the involvement of armed actors. Since the Taliban
vulnerability due to lack of information and preparedness, as well as seized power in 2021, tensions over pastureland and water points
exclusion from community-based decision-making and protection between sedentary farmers and Kuchi nomads in central and northern
mechanisms, undermining their resilience.29 Amid severe water crises Afghanistan have intensified, eroding intercommunal trust. The Taliban
across many communities, returnees bear a disproportionate burden; has tended to favour Kuchis, while particularly Hazara communities
(ACAPS), ‘Afghanistan—Land conflicts and humanitarian action: A conflict sensitivity 14 Aug. 2025; and Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (note 18).
perspective’, Thematic report, 26 . 28 Spink, P., Climate Change Drives Migration in Conflict-ridden Afghanistan (ActionAid
21 International Organization for Migration (IOM), Afghanistan: Climate Vulnerability International: Johannesburg, 2020); and Assessment Capacities Project (note 27).
Assessment (IOM: Kabul, Feb. 2025). 29 Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (note 18); and UN Development
22 World Bank, Afghanistan Gender Monitoring Survey: Baseline Report (World Bank: Programme (UNDP), ‘From return to rebuild for Afghan returnees and host
Washington, DC, Feb. 2023); and International Crisis Group (ICG), A Precarious communities’, Nov. 2025.
Lifeline? Women-led Business in Afghanistan (ICG: Brussels, 17 Dec. 2025). 30 Mercy Corps, Crisis Compounded: Afghanistan’s Returnees Face an Escalating Water
23 International Organization for Migration (IOM), Afghanistan Climate Vulnerability Emergency (Mercy Corps: Portland, OR, Oct. 2025).
Assessment, Population and Mobility, Round 3 (IOM: Kabul, Dec. 2025). 31 Alimia, S., ‘Water, climate and refuge across Afghanistan and the sub-region’, Asia
24 Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IMDC), GRID 2025: Global Report on Displacement Solutions Platform (ADSP), Oct. 2024.
Internal Displacement (IMDC: Geneva, 2025). 32 Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (note 18); Assessment Capacities
25 Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (note 18). Project (note 27); and Alimia (note 31).
26 International Organization for Migration (IOM), Afghanistan: Climate Vulnerability 33 International Organization for Migration (note 26); and Assessment Capacities
Assessment, Round 2 Quarter 1 2025 (IOM: 2025); and Office of the UN High Project (note 27).
Commissioner for Refugees (note 18). 34 Assessment Capacities Project (note 20); and Madadi, S., The Political Economy
27 Assessment Capacities Project (ACAPS), ‘Afghanistan—No place to stay, no place to of Climate Governance in Afghanistan: An Analysis of the Context and Challenges
go: Perspectives from climate-affected areas of Balkh Province’, Thematic report, (Middle East Institute: Washington, DC, Feb. 2024).

4 Climate, Peace and Security Fact Sheet: Afghanistan
have experienced arbitrary land deprivation, forced
displacements and other human rights violations, Figure 3. Water and food insecurity
which have amplified their sense of insecurity.35 Loss of
livelihoods in communities highly affected by climate Projected acute food insecurity status
Jan. 2026
change has also increased interest in recruitment to the
Stressed (IPC phase 2)
Taliban’s police and military forces.36 Crisis (IPC phase 3)
Escalating water scarcity combined with prolonged
state mismanagement of water heightens the risk
of regional instability.37 Afghanistan is home to four
transboundary basins and five connecting regional
rivers, several of which are under severe climate
stress.38 To meet domestic agricultural and food security KABUL
needs and to consolidate public support, the Taliban
has pledged to construct dams and irrigation canals.
Afghanistan’s climate-affected downstream neighbours
view these pledges as threats to water availability,
which in turn can create tensions that challenge Water stress

regional transboundary water cooperation.39 This is
Extremely high
particularly evident in relations with Iran, where border High
clashes in 2023 linked to disputes over water use in Medium
Helmand River resulted in three casualties.40 With few, Low
Very low
weak transboundary mechanisms in place, climate
Arid
change impacts combined with political instability risk
further escalating regional tensions over shared water Notes: The different phases of acute food insecurity are used to reflect the severity
of food insecurity in a given area. Water stress measures the ratio of total water demand to
resources.41 At the same time, water cooperation can available renewable surface and groundwater supplies.
serve as an entry point for dialogue. It can further lay S an o d u r W ce o s r : l F d a R m e i s n o e u E rc a e rl s y I W ns a ti r t n u i t n e g , ‘ S A y q s u t e e d m u s c t N : e W tw at o e r r k r ( i F sk E W atl S a s N ’, E a T c ) c , e ‘A ss fg ed h a 1 n 6 i s F t e a b n . a 2 c 0 u 2 t 6 e . food insecurity area level classifications, ’, accessed 12 Feb. 2026;
the ground for inclusive peace by bringing diverse
need for resilience measures.46 International sanctions and economic
actors together around shared environmental objectives.42
decline have prompted the de facto authorities to turn to mineral
UNAMA and the UN Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for resources to generate revenue, leading to expanded mining activity and
Central Asia (UNRCCA) should facilitate and support transboundary increased involvement of external contractors. Unregulated mining and
environmental cooperation, particularly over water and disaster associated environmental degradation have triggered local protests,
preparedness. in some cases resulting in violent clashes between miners and local
residents—most recently in Takhar province in , where
Political and economic grievances four people were killed.47
Since the Taliban seized power in 2021, Afghanistan has faced a Governance challenges, the political context and international donor
deep economic crisis, driven by factors including sanctions and hesitancy pose significant impediments to advancing climate, peace
frozen assets, declining international aid, restrictions on women’s and security efforts and implementing effective climate-adaptation
employment, skilled workers leaving government jobs and poor strategies.48 Without adequate climate finance, international
governance.43 Prolonged drought since 2021, combined with support and demonstrated commitment by the Taliban to improve
underdeveloped water infrastructure and a severe water crisis, has climate governance, climate change is likely to exacerbate existing
further aggravated the humanitarian crisis and widespread poverty.44 vulnerabilities. It will thus contribute to displacement, livelihood loss
and conflict and will undermine long-term stability and efforts to
The Taliban continues to enforce repressive policies, leaving little
improve human security.49
space for public dissent. Women protestors, journalists, and
former government and security officials have been particularly UN member states and donors should support UNAMA in multi-
subjected to detentions, violence and arrests.45 Rural protests over stakeholder, coherent engagement with the de facto authorities to
economic grievances are more likely to be heeded. Both the central advance relevant and inclusive climate and environment governance
administration and provincial authorities face sustained pressure from mechanisms.
local communities over water access, economic hardship and urgent
35 Moradi, K., “Throwing Dust in Our Eyes”: Nomadic–Sedentary Land Conflict in 43 D’Souza (note 11); Human Rights Watch (HRW), ‘Economic causes of Afghanistan’s
Hazarajat under the Taliban and its Human Rights Impacts (Raoul Wallenberg humanitarian crisis’, 4 Aug. 2022; and Mayar, A., ‘Afghanistan’s climate crisis: A call
Institute of Human Rights and Humanitarian Law: Lund, 2025). for decentralised and inclusive finance’, Policy Brief no. 221, Toda Peace Institute,
36 UN Assistance Mission to Afghanistan (UNAMA), Interview with author, 26 Jan. 21 .
2026. 44 Human Rights Watch (note 43); and Reda, D., Entry Points for Climate Finance and
37 Faizee, M. and Schmeier, S., ‘Navigating water (in)security in Taliban’s Afghanistan: Peacebuilding in Afghanistan (Berghof Foundation: Berlin, 2025).
Insights into local, national and regional water security challenges’, Water, Peace and 45 George, P. et al., ‘Asia-Pacific overview’, Armed Conflict Location and Event Data
Security (WPS) Partnership, Aug. 2023. (ACLED), Sep. 2025; and Karaçalti, A. and Bynum, E., ‘Two years of repression:
38 Mansfield, D. and Aclis, Digging an Ever-deeper Hole: The Response to Climate Mapping Taliban violence targeting civilians in Afghanistan’, Armed Conflict Location
Change in the Helmand River Basin (Alcis and XCEPT: 2025); and Akhundzadah, N. A., and Event Data (ACLED), 11 Aug, 2023.
‘Analyzing temperature, precipitation, and river discharge trends in Afghanistan’s 46 UN Assistance Mission to Afghanistan (UNAMA), Interview with author, 26 Jan.
main river basins using innovative trend analysis, Mann-Kendall and Sen’s slope 2026.
methods’, Climate, vol. 12, no. 12 (2024). 47 Hunter, M. and Ginn, P., ‘Treasure hunt: Why is Afghanistan part of the great
39 UN Assistance Mission to Afghanistan (UNAMA), Interview with author, 26 Jan. extractives race?’, Global Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime, 8 Jan.
2026; and Faizee and Schmeier (note 37). 2025; Hakimi, A. H., ‘Taliban gold rush turns deadly, putting spotlight on Chinese-
40 Mansfield and Aclis (note 38); and Kumar, R., ‘On the Afghanistan–Iran border, backed mining’, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, 11 Jan. 2026; and UN Assistance
climate change fuels fight over water’, Science, 2023. Mission to Afghanistan (UNAMA), Interview with author, 26 Jan. 2026.
41 Faizee and Schmeier (note 37); Barry, S. et al., Climate, Peace and Environmental 48 Reda (note 44); D’Souza (note 11); and Kluijver, R., ‘Is it time to recognise the Taliban
Resilience in the Asia-Pacific Region (Adelphi: Berlin, ); and Kumar government in Afghanistan?’, The Conversation, 29 Dec. 2024.
(note 40). 49 Mayar (note 43); D’Souza (note 11); and UN Assistance Mission to Afghanistan
42 Klimes, M. and Yaari, E. A., ‘Water diplomacy: Facilitating dialogues’, Stockholm (UNAMA), Interview with author, 26 Jan. 2026.
International Water Institute (SIWI), 2019.
Climate, Peace and Security Fact Sheets are a joint product by the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs (NUPI) and the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), with
funding from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Norway and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark. The information in this fact sheet does not necessarily reflect the views of these
partners.
The Climate, Peace and Security Fact Sheets aim to generate reliable, relevant, timely and actionable information and analysis on climate-related peace and security risks in selected
countries and regions on the United Nations Security Council agenda.
Series editors: Dr Cedric de Coning (NUPI) and Dr Florian Krampe (SIPRI)
Contributors: Ingvild Brox Brotkorb (NUPI), Kheira Tarif (SIPRI), Katongo Seyuba (SIPRI) and Dr Thor Olav Iversen (NUPI)
Visuals: Jules Duhamel