Issue Brief
China’s

Embodied AI
A Path to AGI
Authors

William C. Hannas

Huey-Meei Chang

Valentin Weber
Daniel H. Chou

Executive Summary
This report examines China’s embrace of embodied AI—artificial intelligence
integrated with physical systems (robots, drones, vehicles, etc.)—as a critical pathway
toward artificial general intelligence (AGI).
In the United States and Europe, large language models (LLMs) and their multimodal
variants are regarded by many AI scientists and major AI companies as the most
promising path to AGI, despite known issues with abstraction and reasoning.
By contrast, in China there is a broader vision of how AGI can be achieved, most
recently expressed in a nationwide move toward AI embodiment—namely, intelligence
developed through interaction between body, brain, and environment, in both physical
and virtual forms.
This trend toward embodied AI is backed by policy support at the national and local
government levels, which has led to large embodied AI innovation centers linked to
top universities and tech firms being established in coastal cities and provinces.
The upshot is China is on a path to accomplish two goals simultaneously: enriching the
nation by integrating AI into the economy and achieving AGI that is more aligned with
the totality of human expression.
The report recommends that the United States and its allies ramp up their monitoring
of China’s AI progress, benchmark its claims, and consider broader approaches to AGI
beyond scaling up LLMs.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 1

Table of Contents
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ 1
Introduction: AI Embodiment .............................................................................................................. 3
Embodiment in Chinese AI Policy ...................................................................................................... 6
China’s Concept of Embodiment ..................................................................................................... 10
Major Chinese Research Centers .................................................................................................... 14
The Academic Dimension .................................................................................................................. 17
Recommendations ............................................................................................................................... 21
Authors .................................................................................................................................................... 23
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................................ 23
Appendices ............................................................................................................................................ 24
Embodied AI Conference Panels ................................................................................................ 24
Selected Chinese Embodied AI Companies ............................................................................ 25
Endnotes ................................................................................................................................................. 27
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2

Introduction: AI Embodiment
Embedding or “embodying” (具身) artificial intelligence in agents that act in the
physical world (or in digital simulations) is increasingly seen by Western1 and Chinese2
AI scientists as a promising successor to today’s disembodied AI programs, which in
essence are abstractions of abstractions. The logic is both simple and compelling.
Today’s large language models and multimodal LLMs, such as ChatGPT, Google
Gemini, and Anthropic’s Claude, ingest vast quantities of data––text, images, video and
audio––and analyze their relationships as a basis for answering queries, summarizing
information, and translating languages.
The success of these models in the uses for which they are intended has encouraged
their developers, and much of the AI community, to believe that more data and greater
processing power will lead to the “holy grail” of artificial general intelligence (AGI), a
hypothetical state in which the AI has the same cognitive abilities as a human. Other
specialists argue that no number of enhancements to these statistical models will
achieve human-level intelligence, especially if understood fully to include social,
affective, and motivational intelligences.3
Meanwhile, the shortcomings of LLMs become evident as their popularity grows. They
tend to “hallucinate” (provide false information or nonsense that appears plausible)
while showing limited reasoning ability and severe deficits in generalizing, modeling
time and space, managing ambiguous expressions, and grasping nuance.4 These issues
persist alongside the costs and environmental impacts associated with hosting and
training LLMs.
Part of the problem is that these models are based on depictions of the world. They
are derivative representations of reality, an imperfect amalgam of how people have
imperfectly characterized things. While powerful, they have limitations. Human (level)
intelligence, by contrast, is a product of brain-body-environmental interaction—a
continuous, self-learning process grounded in reality and subject to its constraints. As
one Google researcher succinctly put it, “In essence, environment and agent cannot be
subtracted from the definition of intelligence.”5 Or as Max Riesenhuber, the co-director
of Georgetown’s Center for Neuroengineering, stated:
“The problem is that, in LLMs, words (symbols) are not grounded in experiences
of the real world, so any meaning of words needs to be inferred from the
relations of words to each other, floating in some abstract space and being
prone to misinterpretation, let alone hallucinations.”6
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3

The present paper investigates how top influential Chinese AI scientists and the PRC
government approach the issue of AI embodiment, not just in terms of the practical
benefits AI diffusion yields to society but also as a remedy for the limitations of large
statistical models in the quest for AGI. In so doing, we follow the definition of
embodied intelligence provided by Chinese researchers Lu Cewu (卢策吾) and Wang
He (王鹤):7
“Embodied intelligence refers to an intelligent system that perceives and acts
based on the physical body. It obtains information, understands problems,
makes decisions and takes actions through the interaction between the
intelligent agent and the environment, thereby generating intelligent behavior
and adaptability.”
Another paper by Chinese AI scientists, echoes this description of the enterprise:8
“Embodied Artificial Intelligence (AI) is an intelligent system paradigm for
achieving Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), serving as the cornerstone for
various applications and driving the evolution from cyberspace to physical
systems.”
Embodied AI, also called “physical AI,” is a type of agentic AI that is “a class of artificial
intelligence that focuses on autonomous systems that can make decisions and perform
tasks with or without human intervention.”9 The main distinction between the
embodied AI and agentic AI is that agentic AI is more commonly associated with action
in virtual environments.10 As we will see, the Chinese use “embodiment” to refer to
both physical and virtual implementations.
“Agents” implementing embodied AI are robots, autonomous drones, self-driving
automobiles, common household appliances, and in the limiting case, any physical
substrate small or large,11 such as the Chinese government’s formal rollout of a “large
social simulator” in Wuhan intended to realize AGI while “optimizing” production and
social interaction.12
One example of embodied AI is a collection of AI-enabled factory robots on an
automotive assembly line. Unlike current factory robots that are fixed in place and do a
single task, these robots are mobile and can do a variety of tasks, say, building a sports
car and then an SUV and then a light truck. They not only “know” what to do for
whatever model is coming down the line, but they can easily recognize and adapt to
changes, or move to different positions in the assembly line. All the while, they are
collecting data on all the interactions they are having with physical objects as well as
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4

humans, sharing all the data with each other (and a central AI “line director”), and
learning and improving their own behaviors as they work.
Another example is the Xialan (夏澜) S02 humanoid robot, developed by the
Shenzhen-based company Digit (数字华夏). Suitable for deployment in convention
centers, office buildings, and malls, the robot is capable of multimodal perception,13
has facial recognition capabilities, and reportedly recognizes emotions based on an in-
house model that tracks lip movements. Xialan S02 can memorize an individual’s age
and where they were last seen. Users choose the LLM provider running Xialan S02
independently.14
All of these represent actual examples of embodied AI that China has developed or is
pursuing. The theoretical advantages of embodied AI are:
• Being based on sensory inputs and real constraints, embodied agents are less
prone to hallucinate.
• Learning while interacting with humans facilitates acquisition of emotional,
motivational, and social intelligence.15
• Data available to AI-embodied agents is “limited” only by the size, complexity,
and variety of the universe in which they operate.16
• As the embodied AI learns, it becomes more adept at manipulating the
environment in an expanding, virtuous cycle.
• The evolving code can be shared among networked agents in real time, each
sampling unique data, thereby shortening the path to AGI.17
The following Section 2 offers a chronology of policy announcements and events that
showcase China’s embrace of embodiment as a—perhaps the—next big phase of AI
development.18 In Section 3 we explore perspectives from Chinese scientists on the
role of embodiment in AI and their efforts to define the project. Section 4 names the
major centers where embodiment research is taking place as a prelude to Section 5, a
bibliometric analysis of publications issued by these and other institutions. In Section 6
we offer recommendations for how the United States, Germany, and allied nations can
meet this challenge. Data on China’s conceptualization of AI embodiment and leading
companies executing these projects are provided in the paper’s two appendices.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5

Embodiment in Chinese AI Policy
“Embodied AI” (具身人工智能) as a complement or alternative to large AI models has
been backed by China’s state and municipal governments since at least 2023.19 It is
now fully part of China’s AI mainstream, as shown in the following timeline of events.
May 30, 2023: The Beijing city government, within whose jurisdiction much of China’s
AGI research takes place,20 issued “Several Measures for Promoting the Innovation and
Development of General Artificial Intelligence in Beijing.”21 Under “exploring new
paths,” the notice named “general agents, embodied intelligence, and brain-like
intelligence” and called for promoting “research and application of embodied
intelligent systems.”
July 7, 2023: “Embodiment” was first acknowledged as a major theme of Chinese AI
research at the World Artificial Intelligence Conference (世界人工智能大会) hosted by
the Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute (上海期智研究院).22 The institute bears the name of its
founder, Turing Award laureate Yao Qizhi (姚期智, a.k.a. Andrew Chi-Chih Yao), who
claimed “embodied AGI is the next step of large language models.”23
November 2, 2023: The Beijing Humanoid Robot Innovation Center (北京人形机器人创
新中心) was established,24 and was subsequently upgraded to the National and Local
Co-constructed Embodied Intelligent Robot Innovation Center (国家地方共建具身智能
机器人创新中心) in . The center has both a general robotic platform and
“intelligent body” platform made up of an embodied brain (the AI software) for “task
planning driven by AI large models.”25
November 3, 2023: China’s Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT)
elaborated on its “Guiding Opinion on the Innovation and Development of Humanoid
Robots” (人形机器人创新发展指导意见).26 Under “What key technologies should we
focus on breaking through?,” it states: “First, develop a humanoid robot ‘brain’ based
on large artificial intelligence models to enhance environmental perception, behavioral
control, and human-machine interaction.”
March 30, 2024: The 1st China Embodied AI Conference (中国具身智能大会) convened
in Shanghai, sponsored by the Chinese Association for Artificial Intelligence’s (中国人
工智能学会, CAAI) “Embodied Intelligence Professional Committee” (具身智能专业委员
会), and attended by a host of Chinese AI luminaries (see Appendix 1 for more
details).27
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6

Box 1. Embodied AI as a framework for AGI28
“Embodied AI represents a crucial step towards achieving Artificial General
Intelligence (AGI). The next paradigm of Embodied AI involves physical
embodiment, enhanced perception capabilities, and adaptive automation. This
advances the field significantly, paving the way for broader expansion.”
April 27, 2024: Beijing’s Haidian District government made public a three-year (2024-
2026) plan to facilitate research in embodied AI. The plan defines “embodiment” as
“the ability of an intelligent system or machine to interact with [physical and virtual]
environments in real time through perception and interaction” and is meant to serve as
a platform for nationwide (全国) development.29 In , the district launched
China’s first “embodied intelligence innovation industrial park.”30
July 31, 2024: MIIT released its “2024 Project Application Guidelines for 16 Key
Projects.”31 Item 4 on “Intelligent Robot Key Projects” has multiple references to
“embodied intelligence” applied to exploration of unknown environments, and
transferring intelligence from artificial circuits to “life-intrinsic closed loops” (生命本征
闭环),” i.e., feedback mechanisms for adaptation and self-regulation, etc.32
October 25, 2024: China’s National Library of Standards (国家标准馆) issued
“Embodied Intelligence: A Guide to Grading the Stages of Intelligent Development.”
The notice reads in part, “This document mainly defines the grading standards for
embodied intelligence… It aims to provide a systematic framework covering the
progress of embodied intelligence in perception, cognition, decision-making, autonomy
and generalization.” 33 Its final “G5” stage is AGI.
December 18, 2024: The Beijing Economic-Technological Development Area
Administrative Committee (北京经济技术开发区管理委员会), located in Beijing E-Town
(北京亦庄), issued an “Action Plan for Building a World-Class Embodied Intelligent
Robot Industrial New City in Beijing Economic-Technological Development Area
(2024–2026).”34 Among other propositions, the plan aims at a “full-chain layout and
full-stack autonomy” for embodied AI robots by 2030.
January 20, 2025: An “Interdisciplinary Strategic Seminar on Embodied Intelligence”
was held in Hong Kong, supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (NSFC) and attended by prominent AI figures. Topics covered embodied
perception and cognition, ontological issues, and control of embodied AI. The keynote
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7

speech highlighted the “self-evolution” (自我进化) of embodied systems through
interaction with the physical world.35
January 24, 2025: The NSFC issued “2025 Project Guidelines for Major Research
Programs on Explainable, Generalizable Next-Generation AI” to “explore humanlike
cognitive learning; improve system intelligence through the active perception and
interaction of intelligent agents, autonomous learning, and iterative updating of models;
and solve the interactive decision-making problems of embodied intelligent agents in
complex physical environments.”36
February 28, 2025: Beijing Municipality released a “Beijing Embodied Intelligent
Technology Innovation and Industry Cultivation Action Plan (2025–2027).” The plan
calls for developing over 100 key technologies, producing internationally leading
products, deploying some 10,000 embodied intelligent robots, and cultivating an
industrial cluster worth 100 billion yuan ($13.8 billion). The goal is to “lead the frontier
of embodied intelligence” via:
• breakthroughs in multimodal fusion sensing technology
• developing a large model of an embodied intelligent “brain”
• improving the ability of the embodied intelligent “cerebellum” skill model37
• improving robot motion control performance, and
• developing domestic high-performance embodied smart chips.38
March 5, 2025: At the Third Session of China’s 14th National People’s Congress,
Premier Li Qiang (李强) unveiled the 2025 Government Work Report (政府工作报告),
which included for the first time embodied intelligence and intelligent robots among a
handful of technologies selected for development.39 Follow-up reporting indicated
some ten provinces and municipalities had written “embodied intelligence, robots, or
intelligent robots” into their local government work reports.40
March 29, 2025: The “2nd China Embodied AI Conference,” held this time in Beijing,
issued the “Chinese Association for Artificial Intelligence Embodied Intelligence White
Paper” representing China’s first effort to “sort out a development roadmap of
embodied intelligent technology.” 41 An “Embodied Intelligence Collaborative
Innovation Matrix” was also activated. Attendees concluded that embodied intelligence
is “an important technical path to achieve AGI.” 42
April 21, 2025: The Shanghai Municipal Commission of Economy and Information
Technology launched its “2025 New Generation AGI Innovation Tasks.” Item 1 calls for
building “an embodied intelligence training computing infrastructure centered around
autonomous operations in real-world scenarios, heterogeneous humanoid robots,
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8

high-quality embodied intelligence datasets, and embodied intelligence model
libraries.” 43
August 6, 2025: Shanghai Municipality issued an “Action Plan for the Development of
the Embodied Intelligence Industry 2025–2028” aimed at making “algorithmic and
technological breakthroughs in embodied models,” fostering a local concentration of
related industries, and building “internationally leading products.”44 Research priorities
are perception, decision making, and motion control.
October 23, 2025: Embodied intelligence was included along with brain-computer
interfaces and a handful of other advanced technologies as targets for accelerated
development at the Fourth Plenum of the 20th Central Committee of the Chinese
Communist Party (中国共产党第二十届中央委员会第四次全体会议), underscoring its
importance in central leadership planning.45
What we see looking across these official announcements and events is the following:
• A growing number of formal announcements from the Chinese central and
municipal government bodies prioritizing research on AI embodiment.
• An increasing series of academic engagements on embodied AI confirming that
the field is getting growing attention from Chinese researchers.
• The establishment of dedicated institutes and centers showing that significant
resources are being committed to these research endeavors.
• The setting of standards to facilitate progress, ensure diverse efforts are
synchronized, and set the foundations for transition to actual applications.
• Actual plans for industrial applications.
Collectively these depict a sustained national effort by China that is moving quickly
from research to actual real-world applications in a manner consistent with other
examples of PRC-driven efforts to accelerate technology from research to full
production.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9

China’s Concept of Embodiment
China’s embrace and understanding of embodied AI is also evidenced in public
statements by the country’s top AI scientists. The following is a sample:
HUANG Tiejun (黄铁军) founded the Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (北京智
源人工智能研究院, BAAI) and is vice dean of Peking University’s Institute for Artificial
Intelligence. Huang names three paths to AGI: “information models” based on big data
and big compute, embodied models, and brain emulation.46 Huang believes AGI can be
achieved by integrating large models with the physical world.47
LIU Yang (刘阳) et al. in a “Comprehensive Survey on Embodied AI” point out that
“embodied artificial intelligence is crucial for achieving artificial general intelligence
(AGI) and serves as a foundation for various applications,”48 underscoring a point made
by the present study’s authors about the compatibility of the two goals.49 Liu et al.
identify “four main targets” of embodied AI: perception, interaction, agentive, and sim-
to-real adaptation.
LIU Yunhao (刘云浩), Tsinghua University, is the author of a recent, comprehensive
volume on embodied AI.50 Liu argues, “We have reason to believe that in the near
future, embodied agents will have the ability to perform general tasks and strong
learning capabilities. They will be able to understand our world more deeply and
participate in it in unprecedented ways.”
LU Cewu (卢策吾), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and WANG He (王鹤), Peking
University, stated, “In recent years, the academic research frontier of artificial
intelligence has gradually shifted from ‘Internet AI’ driven by static big data to
‘embodied AI’ centered on the interaction between intelligent agents and the
environment.” In their view, this lack of physical interaction in large-scale models “has
become a bottleneck on the path to AGI.”51
PU Muming (蒲慕明, a.k.a. Mu-ming Poo), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)
academician who heads a major neuroscience consortium, asserts, “An LLM is a piece
of software. It is only when that software is integrated into a physical system that it
can truly interact with the environment. I believe that humanoid robots with high-level
embodied AI will be the most active field in the next 5 to 10 years…. The LLM can
serve as the brain of the robot.”52
TAN Tieniu (谭铁牛), CAS academician at the 2025 Interdisciplinary Strategic Seminar
of Embodied Intelligence, stated his belief that “embodied intelligence represents a
new frontier in interdisciplinary research and a strategic high ground for the
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10

development of intelligent technology.”53 He later claimed that embodied intelligence
is “the only way for the sustainable development of artificial intelligence.”54
WANG Yequan (王业全), Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, and Sun Aixin (孙爱
欣), NTU Singapore, in a paper titled “Toward Embodied AGI: A Review of Embodied
AI and the Road Ahead,” claim, “It is widely recognized that embodied AI is either an
essential pathway to achieving AGI—reflecting the indispensable role of the human
body in cognition —or should even form part of AGI’s definition itself.”55
WU Zhaohui (吴朝晖), CAS academician and former vice minister of China’s science
ministry, stated, “Natural language big models represented by ChatGPT are not the
final form of AI big models. More advanced than it is multimodal embodied
intelligence.”56 Wu believes China must “explore the development of AGI in multiple
ways,” including “embodied intelligence, distributed group intelligence, human-
machine hybrid intelligence, and enhanced intelligence.57
ZHANG Bo (张钹), CAS academician and Tsinghua professor, in an article titled
“Embodied Intelligence Drives the Realization of AGI” wrote, “Human intelligent
behavior not only relies on the brain’s thinking, but also needs to learn and make
decisions through interaction with the physical environment… The idea of embodied
intelligence, unlike traditional artificial intelligence, will push artificial intelligence to a
higher level—artificial general intelligence.58
ZHANG Yaqin (张亚勤, a.k.a. Ya-Qin Zhang) co-founder of Microsoft Research Asia and
dean of Tsinghua’s Institute for AI Industry Research, cites three problems with LLMs:
low computational efficiency, inability to “truly understand the physical world,” and
tokenization. Zhang believes that “we need to explore how to combine large
generative probabilistic models with existing ‘first principles’ [of the physical world] or
real models and knowledge graphs.”59
These endorsements by AI scientists reflect a broad consensus about the role of
embodiment in China’s AI development program in principle. What specifically do they
care about? How is the discipline conceptualized?
Liu Yang et al.’s “Comprehensive Survey” (see above) identifies four classes of
embodiment across the physical and virtual worlds, with examples as follows:60
• Robots—fixed, mobile, biomimetic.
• Simulators—digital replicas of a physical environment.61
• Perception—visual language navigation, 3D visual grounding.
• Interaction—question answering, grasping.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11

Box 2. Alibaba Group CEO on the future of AI62
“As AI permeates more physical scenarios and understands more physical data,
we believe the capabilities of AI models and agents will continue to grow….
Future models will continuously interact with the real world, acquiring new data
and receiving real-time feedback…. After countless scenarios executed and
feedback loops with real-world results, AI will self-iterate to achieve intelligence
capabilities that surpass humans, and an early-stage ASI AI system will emerge.”
The “2nd China Embodied AI Conference” (Section 2 above) in its “Chinese Association
for Artificial Intelligence Embodied Intelligence White Paper” (中国人工智能学会具身智
能白皮书) goes on to identify 15 key areas:63
• multimodal embodied perception (多模态具身感知)
• embodied autonomous learning (具身自主学习)
• embodied large models (具身大模型)
• embodied world model construction (具身世界模型构建)
• embodied operation (具身操作)
• embodied navigation and path planning (具身导航与路径规划)
• embodied human-machine collaboration (具身人机协同)
• swarm embodied intelligence (群体具身智能)
• embodied knowledge inference (具身知识推理)
• embodied intelligent simulation platform (具身智能仿真平台)
• migration and generalization of embodied intelligent simulation to real
environments (具身智能仿真到真实环境的迁移与泛化)
• embodied intelligence safety and security (具身智能安全)
• embodied dialogue and interaction (具身对话与交互)
• embodied reinforcement learning and adaptive control (具身强化学习与自适应控
制)
• embodied consciousness and emotion (具身意识与情感)
Other indications of where things are headed are found in government-issued “action
plans.” Here are the “key tasks” listed in Beijing’s “Industry Cultivation” plan:64
1. Lead the frontier of embodied intelligence software and hardware technology.
• Make breakthroughs in multimodal fusion sensing technology.
• Develop a large model of an embodied intelligent “brain.”
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12

• Improve the ability of the embodied intelligent “cerebellum” skill model.
• Improve robot motion control performance.
• Strengthen technological innovation and supply capabilities of core components.
• Develop domestic high-performance embodied smart chips.
2. Accelerate the construction of new research and innovation platforms.
• Build an embodied intelligent world model simulation platform.
• Jointly build a high-quality multimodal universal embodied data collection
platform.
• Build a pilot verification platform for embodied intelligent robots.
• Build an open testing platform for real scenarios.
3. Promote a multi-scenario demonstration application of embodied intelligence.
• Expand the scale of scientific research and education implementation.
• Accelerate the large-scale implementation of industrial and commercial
scenarios.
• Prospectively explore personalized application services.
4. Optimize the embodied intelligent industry ecology.
• Build a full-stack talent echelon.
• Carry out high-level open cooperation.
• Strengthen enterprise gradient cultivation services.
• Create an embodied intelligent industry cluster.
Finally, a detailed sense of what Chinese specialists regard as embodied AI’s salient
features can be gleaned from the names of the panels into which the 2024 and 2025
China Embodied AI Conferences were divided, listed below in Appendix A.
These expert statements, ontologies, and state plans reflect a comprehensive
approach to AI embodiment that satisfies China’s two goals of practical AI
implementations and a plausible path to AGI. The following sections explore the
research and academic infrastructures that “ground” these projections in reality.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 13

Major Chinese Research Centers
The following is a list of top Chinese research centers “embodying” AI, in the robotics
field especially. Embodied AI “innovation centers” (创新中心) first appeared in 2023 in
Beijing and Shanghai and are taking root in other Chinese cities.
Beijing — The National and Local Co-constructed Embodied Intelligent Robot
Innovation Center was founded in 2023 and upgraded to a state-sponsored entity in
2024 (see Section 2 above). Major companies driving the hub are Xiaomi (小米), Beijing
Jingcheng Machinery Electric Holding Co., Ltd. (北京京城机电控股有限责任公司), and
Ubtech Robotics (优必选).65 The key focus areas of the Beijing center are standards
setting, policy advising, and regulations. Besides developing the robotic and embodied
intelligent platforms Tiangong (天工) and Huisi Kaiwu (慧思开物), the center also
assembled a large standardized universal embodied intelligence dataset, RoboMIND.66
This innovation allows for cross-platform compatibility and deploying one brain on
multiple machines.67 Beijing also hosts a National Robot Standardization Technical
Committee (全国机器人标准化技术委员会).68
Shanghai — The Shanghai Foundation Model Innovation Center (上海 “模速空间” 创新
生态社区) in Xuhui District (徐汇区) aims to become the “world’s largest artificial
intelligence incubator,” a place where disembodied AI “brains” and physical
embodiment meet.69 As of , the center hosted some 255 LLM companies.70
The city also plays host to a Shanghai National and Local Co-constructed Humanoid
Robotics Innovation Center (上海国家地方共建人形机器人创新中心), which like its
Beijing counterpart was established in 2023 and upgraded to a national center in 2024.
The center has an embodied AI simulation platform—Ge Wu (格物)—designed for
robot development, which can train 100 different kinds of robots with a single
codebase. Its goal is to collect 10 million physical data entries by the end of 2025. 71
The center is located within the Zhangjiang Robot Valley (张江机器人谷), whose goals
include building a “three brain integration” (三脑融合) system made up of a
“cerebellum” (小脑) for motor control, a “cerebral” (大脑) component for decision-
making, and “cloud-brain swarm intelligence” (云脑集群智能).72
Ningbo and Hangzhou — By 2024, Ningbo hosted 50 robotics companies with a total
output of 8 billion yuan (USD 1.12 billion).73 Its Zhejiang Humanoid Robot Innovation
Center Co., Ltd. (浙江人形机器人创新中心有限公司) was launched in by
the city government and Zhejiang University.74 The center has a “universal embodied
intelligent humanoid robot” called NAVIAI-i2 capable of 0.1 mm precision and
humanoid navigation.75 The university also operates the Haichuang Humanoid Robot
Innovation Center (海创人形机器人创新中心), a robotics integrator.76
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 14

Shenzhen — The city hosts several embodied AI “innovation centers,” making it a
major AI robotics hub. The Guangdong Embodied Intelligent Robotics Innovation
Center (广东省具身智能机器人创新中心) was launched in to merge AI and
robotics.77 In the Huawei (Shenzhen) Global Embodied AI Industry
Innovation Center (华为（深圳）全球具身智能产业创新中心) opened, aimed at creating
an embodied AI “ecosystem” in Shenzhen’s Bao’an district.78 Huawei followed in with its Cloud Embodied Intelligence Industry Joint Innovation Center (华为云具
身智能产业联合创新中心), also in Bao’an,79 hosting some nine companies, including a
Singularity Factory (奇点工厂).80 In , the Humanoid Robotics Innovation
Center of the Guangdong Academy of Sciences (广东省科学院人形机器人创新中心)
was established to manufacture human-like robots.81
Hefei — The city, a major hub for China’s military-civil fusion strategy, harbors some
150 embodied intelligence companies and a number of centers.82 The latter include the
Jianghuai Advanced Technology Center (江淮前沿技术协同创新中心), made up of three
institutes focused on intelligent robots, components, and evaluation.83 Its goal is to
develop autonomous robots supported by “intelligent cerebrums” (智慧大脑) and “agile
cerebellums” (敏捷小脑). The Jianghuai Center released its Qijiang-2 humanoid robot in
late 2024, able to make autonomous decisions and build on an embodied framework
for multimodal interaction.84 Meanwhile, iFLYTEK (科大讯飞), the University of Science
and Technology of China’s Institute of Advanced Technology (中国科学技术大学先进技
术研究院), and other entities established an Anhui Humanoid Robot Industry
Innovation Center (安徽省人形机器人产业创新中心) in 2024 to improve brain (cerebrum)
and cerebellum technologies and multimodal sensory fusion.85
Nanjing — The Nanjing Embodied Intelligent Robot Application Center (南京具身智能
机器人应用中心) launched in the city’s Software Valley (软件谷) in ,86 led
by Huaxia Robot Nanjing (华夏机器人南京), a leading producer of humanoid robots and
subsidiary of Digit (see Introduction). The center’s niche is large-scale data collection
for embodied intelligence.87 The city also hosts the Jiangsu Embodied Intelligent Robot
Innovation Center Co., Ltd. (江苏具身智能机器人创新中心有限公司).88
Wuhan — In , HEC (东阳光), Shanghai AgiBot Innovation Technology Co.,
Ltd. (上海智元新创技术有限公司, also called Zhiyuan Robotics [智元机器人]), and the
Wuhan East Lake High-tech Development Zone (武汉东湖新技术开发区, also known as
China Optics Valley [中国光谷]) created what will be “China’s largest embodied
intelligent robot data collection center” (全国规模最大的具身智能机器人数据采集中
心).89 By , a Hubei Humanoid Robot Innovation Center (湖北人形机器人创新
中心) was fully operational in Optics Valley.90 Wuhan is also the starting point for
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 15

China’s effort to build a nationwide “social simulator” based on embodied AI, to
“optimize” most aspects of human interaction.91
Chengdu — The Chengdu Humanoid Robot Innovation Center (成都人形机器人创新中
心) was founded in , the first of its kind in western China.92 Its “Raydiculous-
1” humanoid emulation is powered by a series of small models for perception and
execution that allow for on-device reasoning, in contrast to single end-to-end models
(vision-language-action), which require heavy cloud computing.93 In line with its
emphasis on achieving more with less, it released China’s first lightweight humanoid
robot Konka-1 (贡嘎一号), weighing 25 kg, in .94 A Sichuan Robot Brain
Innovation Center (四川机器人大脑创新中心) was opened there on September 28,
2024.95
Embodied AI research in robotics and other applications has its roots in China’s major
eastern metropolises and is carrying through to provincial hubs as the meme gains
momentum. A similar transition is observed in China’s academic writings, discussed
below.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 16

The Academic Dimension
Additional evidence of the focus on embodied AI comes from the academic literature.
Figure 1 (below) plots the number of papers by PRC-affiliated scholars found in
CSET’s Merged Corpus and the CNKI database96 from to .97
Figure 1. China-affiliated embodied AI publications — 2022 to 2025
The figure shows a temporary rise in the number of embodied AI papers published in
Q1 2023, which coincides with the appearance of embodied AI centers in Beijing and
Shanghai. The subsequent quarter evinces the start of a continuous rise in publication
volume, spiking in Q2 2025 as the theme moved into the broader AI mainstream.
The following table lists the top dozen China-based institutions producing these
embodied AI papers.98
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 17

Table 1. Top 12 China-affiliated institutions
Affiliation Papers Location
Tsinghua University 43 Beijing
Peking University 26 Beijing
Chinese Academy of Sciences 15 Beijing
Zhejiang University 17 Hangzhou
Beijing University of Aeronautics and
Astronautics* 16 Beijing
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 15 Shanghai
University of Science and Technology of China 15 Hefei
Beijing Institute of Technology* 13 Beijing
Tongji University 13 Shanghai
China Unicom 11 Beijing
Sun Yat-sen University 8 Guangzhou
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 7 Beijing
(* indicates “Seven Sons” universities with ties to the PLA)
These institutions are all located in areas identified by other Chinese sources (above)
as foci of embodied AI development. Nine of the 12 institutions are in Beijing or
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 18

Shanghai, which are also the main hubs for China’s AGI99 and brain-inspired AI100
research.
Beijing’s standout role in China’s embodied AI ecosystem can be traced back to 1988,
when China’s State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems (智能技术与
系统国家重点实验室) was launched at Tsinghua University, “planting the first seeds for
embodied intelligence in China.” By 2025, Tsinghua alumni had helped found 18
embodied AI companies, earning for the university its informal title as the “Whampoa
Military Academy” of Chinese embodied intelligence.101
Tsinghua University’s contribution to this sector of China’s AI development is mirrored
by its position at the top of Table 1. At the end of 2024, the Beijing Municipal Science
and Technology Commission and Zhongguancun Administrative Committee invested
five Beijing-based institutes with embodied intelligence “key laboratory” status,
including Tsinghua, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing University of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Beijing University of Technology, and Beijing Jiaotong
University.102 The city’s Haidian District alone hosts 297 embodied intelligence
companies.103
Chinese higher education’s embrace of “embodied intelligence” is further evidenced in
recently announced plans by eight top universities to offer a major in the discipline,
including Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing University of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Northeastern University, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Zhejiang University, and Xi’an Jiaotong University.104
The appearance of China Unicom—a Chinese state-owned telecommunications
enterprise—is an anomaly as it is the only Chinese “company” among the top 25
contributors to the embodied AI academic literature (top 12 shown in Table 1), the
remainder all being universities. A quote from Qin Yang (秦洋), Unicom’s deputy
general manager, explains, “Our 5G-A networks currently serve users, and we’re
upgrading them to support embodied AI as well.”105 Unicom’s work in embodied AI
was also referenced by company director Chen Zhongyue (陈忠岳), who stated that
Unicom will promote the “integrated development of embodied intelligence and
humanoid robots (具身智能、人形机器人融合发展).”106
The acceptance of “embodied AI” as a major theme by Chinese AI scientists,
institutional support and guidance by China’s national and local governments, the
diffusion of embodied AI centers in the capital area and throughout China, and the
rapid expansion of dedicated companies are indications of how seriously China takes
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 19

this approach. The scope of research named in government “action plans” and
professional forums, endorsements by top Chinese scientists with world-class
reputations, and China’s expressed intent to integrate “embodiment” with emerging
trends in AI and neuroscience107 suggest a level of dedication and expertise that is on
track to deliver game-changing commercial applications and advances in AI’s
capabilities overall.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 20

Recommendations
AI practitioners, pundits, and policymakers in the United States and Europe debate the
benefits, costs, and dangers of AI development, motivated by the headlong rush of U.S.
companies toward artificial general intelligence (AGI). Embraced by some as
humankind’s salvation,108 others predict AGI will lead to mass unemployment, loss of
control, accidents—or human extinction.109 Still others see AGI, presently conceived, as
dubious in principle and a waste of resources.110
These debates occur against the backdrop of China’s own AI development and are
influenced by it. U.S. advocates of stepped-up AGI research point to China’s private
and state-backed programs as a challenge needing a response in kind. Others cite
China’s lead in commercial applications as a sign that U.S. companies’ single-minded
investment in AGI-oriented models is misguided.111 In our opinion, both arguments
miss the point.
As shown in this study, influential Chinese AI scientists and policymakers see no
contradiction between practical AI applications and the pursuit of AGI as national
goals.112 Indeed, a chorus of China’s top AI scientists believe that embodying AI in the
physical world is the best and, perhaps, only way to get there. In China’s view, it’s not
a case of backing one approach or the other—the one entails the other and resides in
the concept.113
By the same token, arguments for engaging in an “AGI race” typically conflate winning
with pumping ever-expanding resources into large AI models and their infrastructures,
while leaving other potential AGI venues, including those founded in neuroscience, to
fend for themselves. As we have demonstrated, here and elsewhere, Chinese
government and research institutions are investing in multiple approaches to AGI and
appreciate that insights in one venue can catalyze others.114
Underlying this analysis is the assumption that we understand what is really
happening in China. Forays into the open literature by a few language-capable
analysts, punctuated by goodwill visits to China, offer a fractional view of China’s AI
progress. While China’s momentum in embodied AI is undeniable, challenges remain
in ascertaining Chinese success in transferring capabilities from simulation to real-
world environments,115 and in determining how much of this embodied AI research will
accelerate AGI development—or simply lead to greater functionality for robots and
other applications—since embodiment per se will not lead automatically to AGI.116
What’s needed is a broad monitoring effort—modeled, perhaps, on China’s own
prodigious efforts to mine data on foreign technology117—that can digest the terabytes
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 21

of information needed to grasp China’s AI developments in detail, compare China’s
work with efforts outside China, and benchmark the country’s claimed achievements to
avoid being led down blind alleys.
China’s AI progress challenges all nations in equal measure. While the value of global
AI safety coalitions is widely accepted, allied collaboration in monitoring China’s AI
progress as a basis for engagement and mitigation should also be promptly pursued.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 22

Authors
William C. Hannas is CSET’s lead analyst and formerly the CIA’s senior expert for
China open-source analysis. He is currently focused on U.S.-China technology
competition, data discovery, and community outreach.
Huey-Meei Chang is CSET’s senior China S&T specialist, co-editor of Chinese Power
and Artificial Intelligence: Perspectives and Challenges (Routledge, 2023), and co-
author of several papers on China’s AI development.
Valentin Weber is a senior research fellow at the German Council on Foreign
Relations (DGAP). His research covers the intersection of cybersecurity, AI, quantum
technologies, and technological spheres of influence.
Daniel H. Chou is a data scientist at CSET. He has collected, enhanced, and analyzed
data for multiple studies on China AI and technology development while supporting
government and private sector projects.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank CSET’s Helen Toner, Igor Mikolic-Torreira, Catherine Aiken, and
Owen Daniels for editing the paper and providing valuable insights, and also LJ Eads of
Parallax Advanced Research, Max Riesenhuber of Georgetown University’s
Department of Neuroscience, and Michael Laha of the German Council on Foreign
Relations for reading the manuscript and offering helpful suggestions. In addition, the
authors are grateful to Lauren Lassiter, Matthew Mahoney, Shelton Fitch, Jason Ly, Ben
Murphy, and Susan Moynihan for their generous support during the review and
publication process
© 2025 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit 
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20250010
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 23

Appendices
Embodied AI Conference Panels
Panels from the First China Conference on Embodied Intelligence (CEAI 2024)118
• Embodied Multimodal Large Models (具身多模态大模型)
• Intelligent System Perception and Decision-making (智能系统感知与决策)
• Intelligent Sensing and Control Collaborative Technology (智能感控协同技术)
• Large Models and Intelligent Systems (大模型与智能系统)
• Multimodal Interaction and Virtual-real Migration: Exploring Cutting-edge
Technologies in Embodied Intelligence (多模态交互与虚实迁移: 具身智能前沿技
术探索)
• Multimodal Learning and Embodied Intelligence (多模态学习与具身只能)
• Universal Movement and Universal Operation of Robots (机器人通用移动与通用
操作)
• Embodied Intelligence—The Future of Intelligent Vehicles (具身智能—智能汽车
的未来)
• Embodied Intelligence Driven by Both Knowledge and Data (知识和数据双轮驱
动的具身智能)
• General Embodied Intelligence in Real and Virtual Open Worlds (真实与虚拟开
放世界中的通用具身智能)
• Embodied Intelligence and Medical AI (具身智能与医疗 AI)
• Embodied Touch (具身触觉)
• Intelligent Perception and Interaction for Open Environments (面向开放环境的智
能感知与交互)
• The Past, Present, and Future of Humanoid Robots (人形机器人的过去, 现在与未
来)
Panels from the 2nd China Conference on Embodied Intelligence (CEAI 2025)119
• Embodied Large Models (具身大模型)
• Embodied Touch (具身触觉)
• Urban Embodied Intelligence (城市具身智能)
• Innovation Through Integration of Embodied Intelligence and Robotics (具身智能
与机器人技术融合创新)
• Trusted Embodied Visual Computing (可信具身视觉计算)
• Embodied Operation and Continuous Learning (具身操作与持续学习)
• Discussing the Blueprint for Embodied Intelligent Data (共话具身智能数据蓝图)
• Embodied Agent Vision-Language Navigation (具身智能体视觉语言导航)
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 24

• Pattern Recognition and Robotics (模式识别与机器人)
• General Embodied Intelligence in Real and Virtual Open Worlds (真实与虚拟开
放世界中的通用具身智能)
• Automotive Embodied Intelligence Technology (汽车具身智能技术)
• Bio-Inspired Embodied Intelligent Robots (生物启发的具身智能机器人)
• Generative AI and Embodied Intelligence (生成式 AI 与具身智能)
• Humanoid Robots (人形机器人)
• Embodied Intelligence in Unstructured Environments (非结构化环境具身智能)
• Security of Embodied Intelligent Systems (具身智能系统安全)
• Deep Space Exploration Embodied Intelligence (深空探测具身智能)
• World Models (世界模型)
Selected Chinese Embodied AI Companies
Huawei (华为), Shenzhen. It aims to transform any physical entity into “an embodied
intelligent agent.”120 Huawei developed the CloudRobo embodied intelligence platform,
which provides services such as “data synthesis, annotation, model development,
simulation testing, edge-cloud deployment, and security governance”121
Hubei Optics Valley Dongzhi Embodied Intelligence Technology Co., Ltd. (湖北光谷东
智具身智能技术有限公司), Wuhan.122 In , Optics Valley Dongzhi launched
“Photon 光子,” a large model-powered humanoid robot meant to advance the
development of a universal foundation model of embodied intelligence.123
Shanghai National and Local Co-constructed Humanoid Robotics Innovation Center,
Shanghai. It released the world’s first generative humanoid robot motion large model
Longyue (龙跃, MindLoongGPT) at the end of . Longyue is able to generate
“high-fidelity motion actions from multimodal inputs…enabling more flexible and
natural robot movements....”124
iFLYTEK (科大讯飞), Hefei. iFLYTEK has invested into the LindenBot (安徽聆动通用机器
人科技有限公司) start-up.125 LindenBot’s goal is to use iFLYTEK’s Spark LLM and to
fuse embodied LLMs and robotics.126 In , LindenBot stated that it received
a third round of financing worth several hundred million yuan.127
UBTECH Robotics (优必选科技), Shenzhen. UBTECH uses the embodied intelligent
body platform Huisi Kaiwu (慧思开物, see Section 4—Beijing) to deploy a collective
brain network called BrainNet (群脑网络), which allows humanoid robots to engage in
swarm intelligence.128 BrainNet partly integrates DeepSeek-R1 technology.129
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 25

AgiBot/Zhiyuan Robotics (智元机器人), Shanghai. The AgiBot Data Collection
Megafactory (数据采集超级工厂) harbors over 100 human-operated robots.130 The
company announced the first universal embodied foundation model in China AgiBot
GO-1 (Genie-Operator-1) in .131 AgiBot open-sourced AgiBot World, the
first large-scale robotic learning dataset.132
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 26

Endnotes
1 Ben Goertzel and Gabriel Axel Montes, “Toward Democratized, Decentralized, Distributed AGI,” in The
Consciousness Explosion (Humanity+ Press, 2024), 552–617.
2 Lu Cewu (卢策吾) and Wang He (王鹤), “Embodied Artificial Intelligence,” in “Embodied Intelligence |
CCF Experts Discuss Terminology” (具身智能 | CCF 专家谈术语), China Computer Federation (中国计算
机学会), July 22, 2023, 
3 For example, Gary Marcus, Yann LeCun, Franҫois Chollet, Richard S. Sutton, and Ben Goertzel on the
Western side, and Tang Jie (唐杰), Huang Tiejun (黄铁军), Song-Chun Zhu (朱松纯), and Zeng Yi (曾毅)
on the Chinese side. See William C. Hannas, Huey-Meei Chang, Maximilian Riesenhuber, and Daniel H.
Chou, “Chinese Critiques of Large Language Models” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology,
), 
4 Hannas and Chang et al., “Chinese Critiques,” 5.
5 Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, “Embodiment Is Indispensable for AGI,” Keerthanapg Blog, June 7, 2022,

6 Max Riesenhuber, personal communication, October 31, 2025.
7 Lu and Wang, “Embodied Artificial Intelligence.”
8 Tongtong Feng, Xin Wang, Yu-Gang Jiang, and Wenwu Zhu, “Embodied AI: From LLMs to World
Models,” IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine, , 
9 “Agentic AI,” Wikipedia, 
10 For a principled treatment of robotics by type, see John VerWey, “RFI Response: Section 232 National
Security Investigation of Imports of Robotics and Industrial Machinery” (Center for Security and
Emerging Technology, ), 
232-national-security-investigation-of-imports-of-robotics-and-industrial-machinery/.
11 See Liu Cixin (刘慈欣), The Three-Body Problem (三体) (Chongqing: Chongqing Publishing House,
2008) V 2, for realistic albeit fictionalized examples.
12 William C. Hannas, Huey-Meei Chang, Daniel H. Chou, “Wuhan’s AI Development: China’s Alternative
Springboard to Artificial General Intelligence (AGI)” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, ), 
13 Huang Nan, 36Kr, “Shenzhen’s Digit Raises Funding to Scale Humanoid Robots Built for Both Charm
and Chores,” KrASIA, June 11, 2025, 
humanoid-robots-built-for-both-charm-and-chores.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 27

14 Digit, “Bionic Humanoid Robot Xia Lan S02” (仿生人形机器人夏澜S02), accessed October 6, 2025,

15 Lifeng Fan, Manjie Xu, Zhihao Cao, Yixin Zhu et al., “Artificial Social Intelligence: A Comparative and
Holistic View,” CAAI Artificial Intelligence Research 1, no. 2 (2022),
 Lifeng Fan (Fan Lifeng, 范丽凤) is with the National Key
Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI).
16 Nicholas Wright, “The Global Race for Humanoid Robots Heats Up,” Foreign Policy, January 30, 2025,

17 Hongxin Zhang, Zeyuan Wang, Qiushi Lyu, Zheyuan Zhang et al., “COMBO: Compositional World
Models for Embodied Multi-Agenct Cooperation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10775v3 (2025),

18 See Liu Yunhao (刘云浩), Embodied Intelligence: The Next Wave of Artificial Intelligence (具身智能: 人
工智能的下一个浪潮), (Beijing: CITIC Press (中信出版社), 2025).
19 The year coincides with the publication of a multi-authored paper, including AI luminaries Yoshua
Bengio and Yann LeCun, in a prominent British journal advocating an embodied approach to advanced
AI. The authors state that “the bulk of the work in developing general AI can be achieved by building
systems that match the perceptual and motor abilities of animals and that the subsequent step to
human-level intelligence would be considerably smaller.” See: Anthony Zador, Sean Escola, Blake
Richards, Bence Ölveczky et al., “Catalyzing Next-generation Artificial Intelligence Through NeuroAI,”
Nature Communications 14, 1597 (2023), 
20 William C. Hannas, Huey-Meei Chang, Max Riesenhuber, and Daniel H. Chou, “China’s Cognitive AI
Research” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, ), 12,

21 Beijing Municipality, “Several Measures for Promoting the Innovation and Development of General
Artificial Intelligence in Beijing” (北京市促进通用人工智能创新发展的若干措施), May 30, 2023,

22 “Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute Held the First 2023 WAIC General Artificial Intelligence Forum,”
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, 2023-08-01, 
23 Chen Yilin, “Exclusive Interview with Turing Award Laureate Chi-Chih Yao,” CGTN, July 8, 2023,

Yao-1lh0OhYz7bO/index.html. Yao later stated that “future AGI needs to have embodied entities that
interact with the real physical world,” August 25, 2023, 
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 28

24 Zheng Zaojin (郑灶金), “China’s First Provincial Humanoid Robot Innovation Center Was Officially
Established in Beijing Economic-Technological Development Area” (国内首家省级人形机器人创新中心在
北京经开区正式成立), Securities Times (证券时报网), November 4, 2023,

u_asig=bbbf3. The center has also been called the Beijing Embodied Intelligent Robot Innovation Center
(北京具身智能机器人创新中心). The name “national and local” reflects its dual status as municipal and
countrywide hub.
25 Liu Ningxin (柳宁馨), “Building on the Shoulders of Giants: Humanoid Robot Innovation Centers Are
Being Established in Multiple Locations to Explore Standardization and Industrialization” (做巨人的肩膀:
多地设立人形机器人创新中心探路标准化产业化), 21st Century Business Herald (21 世纪经济报道),
November 16, 2024,

26 See 

27 “Countdown! The Schedule for the First China Conference on Embodied Intelligence (CEAI 2024) Has
Been Released!” (倒计时! 首届中国具身智能大会 (CEAI 2024) 日程重磅发布!), CAAI (中国人工智能学会),
March 28, 2024, 
28 Dongxiao Hu, Dapeng Lan, Yu Liu, Jiaohong Ning, Jia Wang, Yun Yang, and Zhibo Pang, “Embodied AI
Through Cloud-Fog Computing: A Framework for Everywhere Intelligence,” 2024 IEEE 33rd
International Symposium on Industrial Electronics (ISIE), 
Zhibo PANG (庞智博), a famous roboticist, made headlines recently by transitioning from Sweden’s ABB
Corporate Research Center to Peking University. Shi Huang, “ABB’s Top Industrial Chip and Robotics
Expert Pang Zhibo Leaves Sweden for China,” South China Morning Post, October 31, 2025,

expert-pang-zhibo-leaves-sweden-china?module=perpetual_scroll_0&pgtype=article.
29 Sun Ying (孙颖) and Wang Haixin (王海欣), “Beijing Releases Three-year Plan and Lays Out Six Major
Actions to Create a National Bastion of Embodied Intelligence Innovation” (发布三年计划、布局六大行动,
北京打造全国具身智能创新高地), Beijing Daily (北京日报), April 27, 2024,

30 “Zhongguancun (Haidian) Embodied Intelligence Innovation Industrial Park Unveiled” (中关村(海淀) 具
身智能创新产业园揭牌), Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Commission (北京市科委), March 18,
2025,

31 MIIT, “Notice on the Release of the 2024 Project Application Guidelines for 16 Key Projects Including
the National Key R&D Program ‘High-Performance Manufacturing Technology and Major Equipment’”
(关于发布国家重点研发计划 “高性能制造技术与重大装备” 等 16 个重点专项 2024 年度项目申报指南的通
知), July 31, 2024, 
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 29

32 See “2024 Project Application Guide for the Key Project ‘Intelligent Robots,’”

8%83%BD%E6%9C%BA%E5%99%A8%E4%BA%BA%E2%80%9D%E9%87%8D%E7%82%B9%E4
%B8%93%E9%A1%B92024%E5%B9%B4%E5%BA%A6%E9%A1%B9%E7%9B%AE%E7%94%B3
%E6%8A%A5%E6%8C%87%E5%8D%97.pdf.
33 “Embodied Intelligence: A Guide to Grading the Stages of Intelligent Development” (具身智能智能化发
展阶段分级指南), National Library of Standards, National Digital Library of Standards (国家标准馆∙国家
数字标准馆), October 25, 2024,

34 Beijing Economic-Technological Development Area Administrative Committee (北京经济技术开发区管
理委员会), “Beijing Economic-Technological Development Area Action Plan for Building a World-Class
Embodied Intelligent Robot Industrial New City” (北京经济技术开发区建设全球一流具身智能机器人产业
新城行动计划), December 18, 2024,

35 “The Interdisciplinary Strategic Seminar on Embodied Intelligence Was Successfully Held” (具身智能
学科交叉战略研讨会顺利召开), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Institute of Automation (中国科学院自动化
研究所), February 6, 2025, 
36 National Natural Science Foundation of China (国家自然科学基金委员会), “Guide to the 2025 Annual
Projects for the Major Research Program on Explainable and Generalizable Next-Generation Artificial
Intelligence Methods” (可解释、可通用的下一代人工智能方法重大研究计划 2025 年度项目指南), January
24, 2025, See full-text CSET English
translation at 
37 The reference to cerebellum (Chinese: 小脑 or “small brain”) means the ability to “perform precise
whole-body coordinated operations.” Brian Wang, “China Ministry Pushes for Humanoid Robot Mass
Production by 2025 and $100+ Billion Market by 2030,” Nextbigfuture Blog, November 6, 2023,

by-2025-and-100-billion-market-by-2030.html.
38 Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Commission et al. (北京市科学技术委员会), “Beijing
Embodied Intelligence Technology Innovation and Industry Cultivation Action Plan (2025–2027)” (北京
具身智能科技创新与产业培育行动计划 (2025-2027年)), February 28, 2025,

39 Li Qiang, “Government Work Report—State Council, Delivered at the Third Session of the 14th
National People’s Congress” (政府工作报告—2025年3月5日在第十四届全国人民代表大会第三次会议
上国务院), March 5, 2025, 
40Qin Sheng (秦盛), “In-depth Reading of the Government Work Report: What Signals Does the First
Mention of ‘Embodied Intelligence’ and ‘Intelligent Robots’ Convey?” (政府工作报告深读丨首提”具身智
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 30

能”和”智能机器人,” 传递了哪些信号?), The Paper (澎湃新闻), March 5, 2025,

41 Li Mingming (李明明) and Wu Xuguang (吴旭光), “Authoritative! The Key Direction of Embodied
Intelligence Is Here” (权威！具身智能重点方向来了), STAR Market Daily (科创板日报), March 30, 2025,

42 Yue Pinyu (岳品瑜) and Dong Hanxuan (董晗萱), “Beijing Embodied Intelligence Collaborative
Innovation Matrix Officially Activated” (北京具身智能协同创新矩阵正式激活), Beijing Business Today (北
京商报), March 31, 2025, 
43 See “Notice on the Announcement of the 2025 Next-Generation General Artificial Intelligence
Innovation Tasks” 2025 (2025 年 新一代通用人工智能创新任务揭榜挂帅工作的通知), April 21, 2025,

44 Shanghai Municipal Government, “Shanghai Embodied Intelligence Industry Development
Implementation Plan 2025–2028” (上海市具身智能产业发展实施方案 2025-2028), August 6, 2025,

45 “Proposal of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party on Formulating the 15th Five-
Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development” (中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十五
个五年规划的建议), Xinhua (新华社), October 28, 2025,

46 Liu Yangnan (刘杨楠), “Before Achieving AGI, Global AI Leaders Are Arguing Over These 4 Key
Issues” (实现AGI之前，全球AI大佬在这4 个关键问题上吵起来了), Sohu.com (搜狐), June 13, 2023,

47 “Huang Tiejun, the Earliest Promoter of Chinese Large Models: The World May Only Need Three
Large Model Ecosystems” (中国大模型的最早推行者黄铁军：全球可能只需要三个大模型生态), Tencent
Technology (腾讯科技), June 9, 2023, 
48 Yang Liu, Weixing Chen, Yongjie Bai, Xiaodan Liang et al., “Aligning Cyber Space with Physical World:
A Comprehensive Survey on Embodied AI,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.06886v8 (2025),

49 William C. Hannas and Huey-Meei Chang, “China’s Artificial General Intelligence: We’re Still Getting
It Wrong” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, ),

50 Liu, Embodied Intelligence: The Next Wave of Artificial Intelligence. Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang
reportedly used the term “next wave” in 2023 to describe the impact of embodiment on AI’s
development. Roland Legrand, “Embodied AI: The Next Wave of Artificial Intelligence and the
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 31

Metaverse,” MixedRealities, May 19, 2023, 
wave-of-artificial-intelligence-and-the-metaverse/.
51 Lu and Wang, “Embodied Artificial Intelligence.”
52 Huang Haihua (黄海华), “Mu-ming Poo: The Scientists Most Needed Today Are Those Who Are
‘Driven to Catch Big Fish,’ Not Those Who Only Care about ‘Fishing for the Joy of It’” (视频|蒲慕明: 目前
最需要的科学家，不是只顾 ‘钓鱼之乐,’ 而是 ‘要钓大鱼’), Shanghai Observer (上观新闻), February 27,
2025. See full-text CSET English translation at 
interview-deepseek/.
53 Chinese Academy of Sciences, “The Interdisciplinary Strategic Seminar.”
54 Li and Wu, “Authoritative! The Key Direction.”
55 Yequan Wang and Aixin Sun, “Toward Embodied AGI: A Review of Embodied AI and the Road
Ahead,” arXiv preprint arXiv/2505.14235v1 (2025), 
56 Yu Taoran (俞陶然), “The Era of ‘Embodied Intelligence’ Is Coming” (“具身智能” 时代要来了!), Shanghai
Observer (上观新闻), July 6, 2023, 
57 Jiao Yifei (缴翼飞), “Wu Zhaohui, Vice Minister of the Ministry of Science and Technology: Big Models
Push Artificial Intelligence toward the 3.0 Stage, and We Need to Explore the Development of General
Artificial Intelligence through Multiple Paths” (科技部副部长吴朝晖：大模型推动人工智能迈向 3.0 阶段
要多路径探索通用人工智能发展), 21st Century Business Herald (21 世纪经济报道), March 24, 2024,

58 Zhang Bo (张钹), “Embodied Intelligence Drives the Realization of General Artificial Intelligence” (具身
智能推动实现通用人工智能), People’s Daily Overseas Edition (人民日报海外版), June 9, 2025,

59 Li Anqi (李安琪), “Kai-Fu Lee and Ya-Qin Zhang Fireside Chat: China’s Large Models Have More
Opportunities on the C-end, and Technology Will Not Bring Permanent Leadership” (李开复、张亚勤炉
边谈话: 中国大模型在 C 端的机会更多, 技术不会带来永久领先), Tencent Technology (腾讯科技), June 14,
2024, 
60 Liu Yang et al., “Aligning Cyber Space.”
61 E.g., Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence’s “Tong Tong” (通通), an experimental AI “child”
that learns autonomously and progresses through developmental stages by interacting with her
environment. See “Civilization in the Making: From AGI Agent to AGI Society,” Science, September 4,
2025, 
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 32

62 Eddie Wu Yongming (吴泳铭), “Three Phases on the Road to ASI and Two Key Insights on AI
Transformation” (通往 ASI 的3 大阶段与AI变革的2大判断), speech at the Apsara Foresight Forum (云
栖前瞻主论坛), September 24, 2025,

63 Li and Wu, “Authoritative! The Key Direction.”
64 Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Commission, “Beijing Embodied Intelligence.”
65 Jiang Ruojing (蒋若静), “Beijing Will Release the First Generation of Universal Open Humanoid Robot
Bodies” (北京将发布第一代通用开放人形机器人本体), Beijing Youth Daily (北京青年报), March 18, 2024,

66 “Tiangong Body 01” (天工本体01), X-HUMANOID (北京人形机器人创新中心), accessed September 12,
2025, 
67 “The World’s First Full-scale, Fully Electric Humanoid Robot Capable of Running Like a Human” (全球
首个纯电驱全尺寸实现拟人奔跑的人形机器人), X-HUMANOID (北京人形机器人创新中心), accessed
September 12, 2025, “Creating a Large Embodied Intelligence Model to
Achieve a Closed Loop of Embodied Intelligence Data” (打造具身智能大模型 实现全链路具身智能数据闭
环), X-HUMANOID (北京人形机器人创新中心), accessed September 12, 2025, 
humanoid.com/jszndmx.html.
68 “TC591 National Technical Committee for Robot Standardization” (TC591 全国机器人标准化技术委员
会), accessed September 12, 2025, 
69 Shu Shu (舒抒), “What Kind of Space Is the Shanghai ‘Mosu Space’ Visited by the General Secretary?”
(总书记考察的上海 “模速空间”，是一个怎样的空间？), Liberation Daily (解放日报), April 29, 2025,
 The center is located in the
same Shanghai district as Shanghai Jiao Tong University (上海交通大学).
70 Shu, “What Kind of Space is the Shanghai ‘Mosu Space’.”
71 Zhang Weilan, “Shanghai Rolls out Embodied AI Platform, Pursues International Standardization for
Humanoid Robots,” Global Times, March 21, 2025,

72 “The Future Is Here! Zhangjiang, Home to a ‘Pioneering Zone,’ Is Rapidly Expanding into the Red-Hot
AI Industry (“未来已来”！人工智能产业浪潮来袭，拥有 “先导区” 的张江迅速布局), Pudong Observer (浦
东观察), August 7, 2025, 
73 Ningbo Science and Technology Bureau (宁波市科技局), “Zhejiang Humanoid Robot Innovation Center
Launched in Ningbo” (浙江人形机器人创新中心在宁波启动), March 28, 2024,

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 33

74 “Reshaping Cognition and Action with AI” (以AI重塑认知与行动), Zhejiang Humanoid Robot
Innovation Center Co., Ltd. (浙江人形机器人创新中心有限公司), accessed September 12, 2025,
 Ningbo Science and Technology Bureau, “Zhejiang Humanoid
Robot.”
75 “NAVIAI-i2,” Zhejiang Humanoid Robot Innovation Center Co., Ltd. (浙江人形机器人创新中心有限公司),
accessed September 12, 2025, 
76 “Intelligent Robot Industry Base Unveiled and Put into Use” (智能机器人产业基地揭牌启用), Yuhang
Times (余杭时报), March 17, 2025,
 “Yuhang District Robotics
Industry High-Quality Development Conference Held” (余杭区机器人产业高质量发展大会举行), The
Paper (澎湃新闻), August 27, 2024, 
77 Guangdong Provincial Department of Industry and Information Technology (广东省工业和信息化厅),
“Guangdong Provincial Embodied Intelligent Robot Innovation Center Officially Starts Operations” (广东
省具身智能机器人创新中心正式启动运营), April 19, 2024,

78 Qiao Xinyi (乔心怡), “Huawei Establishes a Global Embodied Intelligence Industry Innovation Center,
Becoming a ‘Shovel Seller’ Again” (“成立全球具身智能产业创新中心, 华为再做 ‘卖铲人’”), Yicai (第一财经),
November 15, 2024, 
79 Pan Yingyu (潘莹瑜), “China’s First Joint Innovation Center for the Embodied Intelligence Industry
Opens in Bao’an” (全国首个具身智能产业联合创新中心宝安启用), Southern Metropolis Daily (南方都市报),
July 16, 2025, 
80 “A New Landmark for Shenzhen’s Artificial Intelligence Industry Has Emerged! Bao’an + Huawei +
Embodied Intelligence = ?” (深圳人工智能产业新地标诞生！宝安+华为+具身智能=?), Bao’an Daily (宝安日
报), July 14, 2025,

961b07c1571aae9815dd2&chksm=bc207f47225bffd33067399928f7c9ecbb87fda9b0f31392e3c412
e4cdf684b8bfddb1309894&scene=27.
81 Intelligent Manufacturing Institute, Guangdong Academy of Sciences (广东省科学院智能制造研究所),
“Humanoid Robotics Innovation Center” (人形机器人创新中心), accessed September 12, 2025,

82 “Anhui’s ‘Iron Man’ Is Here!” (安徽 “钢铁侠”, 来了!), Hefei Announcements (合肥发布), March 19, 2025,

b2258ba590f7f16b7312a&chksm=8a8fcb31e248761abb6738b948a87a84034f5a4f262d22dd26426
b81dc06804abd5150d81264&scene=27.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 34

83 World Robot Expo (世界机器人博览会), “Jianghuai Advanced Technology Center” (江淮前沿技术协同创
新中心), accessed September 12, 2025,

84 Hong Jingpu (洪敬谱), “Humanoid Robot ‘Qijiang No. 2’ Debuts in Hefei” (人形机器人 “启江二号” 亮相
合肥), Science and Technology Daily (科技日报), September 24, 2024,

85 “Anhui Humanoid Robot Innovation Center: Cross-disciplinary Collaboration and Technological
Breakthroughs” (安徽省人形机器人创新中心: 跨领域协作与技术突破), Lifestyle (生活家), June 27, 2024,

86 Yang Wenyue (杨文玥), “Embodied Intelligent Robot Application Center Established in Nanjing” (具身
智能机器人应用中心落户南京), Nanjing Broadcasting System (南京广播电视台), March 19, 2025,

87 Feng Peng (冯芃), “The World’s First Upright Walking Human-face Robot ‘Enters’ Nanjing” (全球首款
直立行走人脸机器人 “走进” 南京), Nanjing Daily (南京日报), March 19, 2025,

88 “Estun and Others Established the Embodied Intelligent Robot Innovation Center in Jiangsu” (埃斯顿等
在江苏成立具身智能机器人创新中心公司), EastMoney.com (东方财富网), June 9, 2025,

89 HEC (东陽光科), “Optics Valley Dongzhi Officially Announced! HEC, AgiBot, and Optics Valley Join
Forces to Empower Embodied Intelligence” (光谷东智官宣! 东阳光&智元&光谷, 携手为具身智能聚势赋能),
March 30, 2025, After this article was published, AgiBot changed its Chinese
name to 智元创新（上海）科技股份有限公司 while retaining its English name “AgiBot.”
90 Li Jia (李佳), “Carrying Forward the Three Spirits and Striving to Build a Fulcrum | With Wuhan as the
Core, Connecting Five Cities and Stretching 150 Kilometers from East to West, the ‘Robot Valley’ Has
Taken Shape” (弘扬三大精神 奋力建成支点 | 以武汉为核心串联五城, 东西绵延 150 公里, “机器人谷” 蔚然
成型), Yangtze Daily (长江日报), June 23, 2025,

91 Hannas and Chang et al., “Wuhan’s AI Development.
92 Su Jun (苏俊) and Xu Yunhao (许芸浩), “The First Team of Experts and Talents from Chengdu
Humanoid Robot Innovation Center Officially Landed on Chengdu Science and Technology Innovation
Ecological Island” (成都人形机器人创新中心首批人才专家团队正式登陆成都科创生态岛), Sichuan
Economic Net News (四川经济网讯), July 1, 2024, 
93 Li Zhe (李哲), “The Robot That Doesn’t Require Remote Control or Photo-ops Is Here! China’s First
3DSG-based Humanoid Robot Planning, Reasoning, and Execution System, Raydiculous-1, Was
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 35

Launched in Chengdu” (不遥控不摆拍的机器人来了! 中国首个基于 3DSGs 的人形机器人规划推理执行系
统Raydiculous—1在成都发布), SC.China.org.cn (中国网中国四川), March 11, 2025,

94 Chengdu Humanoid Robot Innovation Center (成都人形机器人创新中心), “Chengdu-made Humanoid
Robot ‘Konka-1’ Debuts” (成都造人形机器人 “贡嘎一号” 首发面世), October 28, 2024,

95 Wei Jieyi (魏捷仪), “Sichuan’s First Independently Developed Robot Brain Innovation Center Was
Established” (四川首个自主研发机器人大脑创新中心成立), Chengdu Daily (成都日报), September 29,
2024, 
96 The CSET merged corpus of scholarly literature consists of OpenAlex, Semantic Scholar, The Lens,
arXiv, and Papers with Code. The China National Knowledge Infrastructure (中国知网, CNKI) is an
academic research service provider of Chinese academic information that offers digital resources that
include bibliometrics metadata and full text of academic journals, dissertations/theses, e-books,
newspapers, and conference papers.
97 Search terms used were “具身智能,” “具身人工智能,” “embodied intelligence,” “embodied artificial
intelligence,” and “embodied AI.” Searches were done on titles and abstracts only. The results were
filtered to retain only papers that include at least one China-based affiliation. Duplicate papers were
identified and removed, as were duplicate counts in the affiliations table. Q3 2025 data are incomplete
at the time of this writing.
98 The table omits many Chinese companies that each published a small number of papers on embodied
AI.
99 Hannas, Chang et al., “China’s Cognitive AI Research.”
100 Hannas, Chang et al., “China’s Advanced AI Research.”
101 Lei Jing (雷晶), “A Group of Tsinghua Students and 40 Years of Embodied Intelligence” (一群清华人,
与具身智能的四十年), The First New Voice (第一新声), September 1, 2025,
 The reference is to the legendary
1920s institute that was the foundation for China’s modern military.
102 Li and Wu, “Authoritative! The Key Direction of Embodied Intelligence Is Here.”
103 Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Commission et al., “Beijing Embodied Intelligence
Technology Innovation and Industry Cultivation Action Plan (2025–2027).”
104 Lin Jing (林靖), “Eight Double First-Class Universities Have Made Extraordinary Arrangements for
‘Embodied Intelligence’ Majors“ (8 所双一流高校超常布局“具身智能”专业), Yicai (第一财经), November
14, 2025. 
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 36

105 Joe O’Halloran, “China Unicom 5G-A Network Powers World’s First Humanoid Robot Games,”
Computer Weekly, August 18, 2025, 
Unicom-5G-A-network-powers-worlds-first-humanoid-robot-games.
106 “China Unicom Chairman Chen Zhongyue: We will focus on five areas including large models and
intelligent agents, and promote the integrated development of embodied intelligence and humanoid
robots by 2025 (中国联通董事长陈忠岳: 将在大模型, 智能体等五个方面发力 会推动具身智能, 人形机器人
融合发展 2025年)”, EastMoney.com (东方财富网), March 18, 2025,

107 Hannas, Chang et al., “China’s Cognitive AI Research.”
108 E.g., Ben Goertzel, “A Beneficial AGI Manifesto,” Eurykosmotron, November 25, 2023,
 Nick Bostrom, Deep Utopia: Life and Meaning in a
Solved World (Oakton: Ideapress Publishing, 2024); Dario Amodei, “Machines of Loving Grace: How AI
Could Transform the World for the Better,” ,

109 Geoffrey Hinton, Nobel Prize acceptance speech, December 10, 2024,
 ; Eliezer Yudkowsky and Nate Soares, If
Anyone Builds It, Everyone Dies (New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2025).
110 Roger Penrose, “Why Intelligence Is Not a Computational Process,” Breakthrough Discuss, May 22,
2025, Yann LeCun, “Mathematical Obstacles on the
Way to Human-level AI,” Joint Mathematics Meetings, March 21, 2025,

111 Eric Schmidt and Selina Xu, “Silicon Valley Is Drifting Out of Touch with the Rest of America,” The
New York Times, August 19, 2025, 
intelligence-superintelligence.html; Jack Shanahan and Kevin Frazier, “Op-Ed: Stop Obsessing over AGI,”
Opinion, The Center Square, July 30, 2025, 
4af1-4065-8f99-ea0bce2064ba.html.
112 In a state-directed economy, profits from the one sector could pay for the other. China has adopted
this approach for two of its other AGI-oriented projects, namely, the “one body, two wings” (一体两翼)
plan for brain-inspired artificial intelligence (BI-AI) and brain-computer interfaces, in which revenue from
therapeutic applications funds neuroscience projects aimed at advanced AI and BCI-driven cognitive
enhancement. See: William C. Hannas, Huey-Meei Chang, Jennifer Wang, Catherine Aiken, and Daniel
Chou, “China AI-Brain Research” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, ),

113 The Chinese term is 通用人工智能 or “general-use artificial intelligence.” The term as a whole is used
in China to translate English “artificial general intelligence,” bears the English language term's concept
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 37

and values, and is used universally in that sense. Understood literally, the notion of concrete
applications or “uses” is built into it.
114 William C. Hannas, Huey-Meei Chang, Daniel H. Chou, and Brian Fleeger, “China’s Advanced AI
Research” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, ),
 Huang, “Mu-ming Poo: The
Scientists Most Needed.”
115 LJ Eads, personal communication, October 29, 2025.
116 Max Riesenhuber, personal communication, November 6, 2025.
117 William C. Hannas and Huey-Meei Chang, “China’s STI Operations: Monitoring Foreign Science and
Technology Through Open Sources” (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, ),

118 CAAI, “Countdown! The Schedule for the First China Conference.”
119 “Event Preview: The 2nd China Conference on Embodied Intelligence (CEAI 2025) Conference
Schedule Released!” (活动预告丨第二届中国具身智能大会 (CEAI 2025) 会议日程发布!), Chinese
Association for Artificial Intelligence (中国人工智能学会), March 25, 2025,

120 “Huawei Cloud Unveils CloudRobo Platform for Embodied AI, Says It Won’t Build Robot Hardware,”
TMTPOST, June 23, 2025, 
121 TMTPOST, “Huawei Cloud Unveils.”
122 HEC, “Optics Valley Dongzhi Officially Announced.”
123 “550,000 Yuan per Unit! This ‘Hubei-made’ Humanoid Robot Has Impeccable Credentials” (55 万一台!
这家 “湖北造” 人形机器人来头不小), Beijing Leaderobot Intelligent Robot Technology Co., Ltd. (北京立德
共创智能机器人科技有限公司), July 17, 2025,

124 “Global Release of the First Generative Humanoid Robot Motion Large Model, Shanghai Builds an
Intelligent Data Ecosystem,” AIBase, May 30, 2025 Gao Lishan
(高莉珊), “The Shanghai National and Local Co-constructed Humanoid Robotics Innovation Center Is
About to Release its Longyue Large Model, Ushering in an Era of Generative Robot Motion Control” (国
地中心即将发布龙跃大模型, 开启生成式机器人运动控制时代), Yicai (第一财经), May 27, 2025,

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 38

125 “LindenBot Completes Angel Round Financing Worth Hundreds of Millions of Yuan to Accelerate
R&D on General Purpose Robots” (加速通用机器人研发 聆动通用完成数亿元天使轮融资), Jiemian.com (界
面新闻), August 11, 2025, 
126 He Shanshan (何珊珊), “Are Embodied Intelligent Robots Not Smart Enough? Ji Chao, CEO of
LindenBot, Says: ‘Combining the Big and Small Brains’ Is the Key to Success,” (具身智能机器人不够智
能？聆动通用CEO 季超: “大小脑结合” 是破局关键), Time Finance (时代财经), July 28, 2025,

127 Jiemian.com, “LindenBot Completes Angel Round Financing.”
128 “Beijing Humanoid Robotics Innovation Center Officially Launches Universal Embodied Intelligence
Platform ‘Huisi Kaiwu’ (北京人形机器人创新中心正式发布通用具身智能平台 “慧思开物”), X-HUMANOID
(北京人形机器人创新中心), accessed September 12, 2025, 
129 “Swarm Intelligence Multi-Machine Collaboration“ (群体智能 多机协同), Ta Kung Pao (大公报), March
4, 2025, 
130 “A Look Inside a Robotic Data Collection Megafactory: How Does ‘Data + AI’ Enable Robots to
‘Evolve’?” (实探机器人数据采集超级工厂, “数据+AI” 如何让机器人 “进化”?), China Fortune Network (中国
财富网), June 19, 2025, 
131 “Genie Studio,” AgiBot, accessed September 12, 2025, 
“Dialogue with AgiBot Partner Yao Maoqing: Robot Companies That Don’t Make Large Models Have No
Future” (对话智元合伙人姚卯青: 不做大模型的机器人公司没有未来), NetEase Technology (网易科技),
March 11, 2025, 
132 “Genie Operator-1 (GO-1)”, AgiBot, accessed September 12, 2025, 
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 39