Translation
The following document is one example of how Chinese local governments propose to use
AI in their work. The document, from Xiamen City in southeast China, lists over 100 potential
AI use cases for the city government and its subordinate district governments, and includes
contact information for each use case, presumably so that AI companies can more easily
make sales pitches to fulfill these requirements. Most of the use cases involve using large AI
models—a few specifically recommend DeepSeek—to spot patterns and anomalies in bulk
data, mostly for innocuous purposes, such as catching errors and omissions in paperwork or
helping teachers grade assignments. However, several use cases, mainly at the district
government level, aim to use AI technology for China’s surveillance state or for predictive
policing, including incorporating AI into the “Sharp Eyes” mass surveillance camera program
and into aerial surveillance by automated drones.
Title
Notice of the Xiamen City Data Administration on the Announcement of the List of Artificial
Intelligence Application Scenario Opportunities
厦门市数据管理局关于发布人工智能应用场景机会清单的通知
Author
Xiamen City Data Administration (厦门市数据管理局)
Source
Xiamen City Data Administration website. The notice is dated March 18, 2025 and was posted to the
website the following day.
This is a combined translation of the landing page for the list of AI scenarios and the list itself. The
Chinese source text of the landing page and the list are available, respectively, at:
 and

Archived versions of the landing page and the list are available, respectively, at:
 and 
Translation Date Translator Editor
July 8, 2025 Etcetera Language Group, Inc. Ben Murphy, CSET Translation Manager
Notice of the Xiamen City Data Administration on the Announcement of
the List of Artificial Intelligence Application Scenario Opportunities
To all relevant work units (单位) and enterprises:
In order to thoroughly implement the national strategy of promoting the deep

fusion of artificial intelligence (AI) and the real economy, actively explore and cultivate
AI application scenarios, and promote the flourishing development of the AI industry
ecosystem, a total of 110 AI application scenario opportunities from 16 city
departments and 18 district-level departments have been selected following extensive
solicitation, careful review, and rigorous screening, and are hereby officially released.
The list released here focuses on the field of government affairs + AI and provides
detailed information on each scenario, including the requesting units, core
requirements, expected goals, and contact information, providing AI enterprises,
research institutions, investment institutions, and other relevant parties with clear
business development directions and opportunities for cooperation.
Through this list, the aim is to build a bridge linking supply and demand, promote
the precise matching of AI technology with actual business scenarios, accelerate the
conversion of innovation achievements into practical applications, and cultivate new
economic growth points. We sincerely invite all work units and enterprises to actively
participate in the construction and application of AI scenarios in the government sector,
leverage their unique strengths, and work together to create a new landscape for AI
industry development.
Xiamen City Data Administration
March 18, 2025

I. List of AI Application Scenario Opportunities
1) Departments directly under the city government
(i) A total of 16 work units directly under the city government proposed 58
application scenario opportunities
Contact
Division(s) or
Application Person and
No. Work Unit Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
Achieve accurate collection,
Build a dynamic [social] credit
analysis, and real-time
database through intelligentized
updating of credit information,
AI + smart credit (智能化) integrated credit data
1 and provide intelligentized
services from multiple sources such as
credit management for
government, enterprises, and
governments, enterprises, and
financial institutions
individuals
Identify credit risks by analyzing Increase the accuracy of credit
AI + credit data such as administrative assessments, reduce credit
2 monitoring and penalties, contract performance, default risk, and achieve
early warning and judicial litigation, and provide intelligent credit risk early
credit risk early warnings warnings
Promote precise credit
Apply AI credit evaluation in areas
AI + credit granting in finance, optimize
such as lending, transportation,
3 empowerment public services, and increase
and health insurance to achieve
(信用赋能) the convenience of credit use
credit empowerment.
by city residents.
Leverage real-time data to update
credit labeling of entities, match
with differentiated management Build an intelligent credit
AI + graded and
(差异化管理) measures, and supervision platform to
categorized credit
4 City reduce supervision costs. At the achieve precise supervision
Social Credit market
Development same time, monitor the credit data and risk prevention and Yin Yongyao
Promotion supervision
and Reform circumstances of market entities control of market entities. 18705920218
Division
Commission in real time, and use AI to discover
violations and potential risks.
Help entities with poor credit
Based on credit laws and
efficiently complete credit
regulations and case studies, use
AI + credit repair repair, rebuild good credit
5 AI to tailor repair reminders and
guidance images, enhance market trust,
repair indicators for entities with
and promote the healthy
poor credit.
credit market development.
Monitor the status of various city
credit monitoring indicators in real
time to achieve credit status Improve the city’s overall
monitoring of the city, districts, credit status, and do a
AI + city credit
6 and advanced cities, and use AI quantitative evaluation of the
status insight
and big data to automatically effectiveness of policies at the
generate city, regional, and same time.
industry credit status insight
reports and trend reports
Build a dedicated credit
Provide real-time updated
AI + credit “knowledge base” integrating
information on credit
7 decision credit policies and regulations,
regulations and policies to
knowledge base credit assessment standards, and
help decision-makers quickly
regulatory mechanisms, so as to

Contact
Division(s) or
Application Person and
No. Work Unit Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
analyze trends in the credit field obtain relevant legal and
and assess the core direction of policy support
industry development.
Provide comprehensive credit
Based on credit data, establish a information and monitoring
AI + credit comprehensive credit knowledge data to support efficient

knowledge graph graph to support intelligent decision-making and boost
querying and analysis. credit risk prediction and
management capabilities.
City Grain and Oil
Quality Processing and Increase testing efficiency and
Sample pre-processing, handling Yang Yang
9 Monitoring and handling prior to assure the safety of laboratory
of corrosive liquids 15060738896
Military Grain testing personnel.
Supply Center
Intelligently identify the forms
required for various services, link
Raise data collection
to the education database, and
efficiency; reduce burdens and
City Bureau of Intelligent form automatically extract information, Li Chenling
10 Reception Center increase efficiency for
Education filling while also providing intelligent 19959288891
teachers, students and
guidance by proactively
parents.
recommending relevant education
services.
Introduce AI review into the
preliminary review stage of policy
implementation. Relying on data
from city platforms such as the Utilize AI to achieve rapid
City Bureau of Finance’s industrial verification of mandatory
Intelligent review
support fund system and the City criteria and data querying and
11 of policy
Development and Reform filtering during policy
implementation
Commission’s Credit Xiamen implementation, thereby
City Bureau of
platform, utilize AI large models increasing work efficiency.
Industry and All divisions and Chen Kunming
to automatically conduct project
Information offices 13799273196
duplication checks, credit
Technology
inquiries, and other routine tasks.
Achieve real-time data
Deploy a localized economic data
sharing and build an “Industry
knowledge base that is unified
Economic and Information Technology
across the city, and combine it
12 operations large Smart Brain” (工信智脑) to
with AI large models to conduct
model boost decision-making
economic data queries, analysis,
support and analysis
and early warning.
capabilities.
Leveraging AI-related
technologies such as natural
language processing and
Improve the quality and efficiency
intelligent speech recognition
of emergency call response
from large models like
through voice transcription,
City Public Command and AI-assisted DeepSeek, combined with
element extraction, incident Song Wen
13 Security Intelligence emergency call real-world public security
location identification, intelligent 13859916709
Bureau Center response data and business rules,
form filling assistance, real-time
provide the call reception and
Chinese-English voice translation,
handling system with smart
and call quality inspection.
services including voice
transcription, element
extraction, incident location

Contact
Division(s) or
Application Person and
No. Work Unit Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
identification, intelligent form
filling assistance, real-time
Chinese-English voice
translation, and call quality
inspection. This will promote
the automatic comparison and
identification of emergency
call information and the
association of related data,
thereby improving the level of
automation of emergency
response command and
handling.
Real-time online digital avatars
combined with large-scale
models provide residence permit
(户籍) policy-related question
answering and interactive
services. Challenges faced by the
Intelligent
public in accessing,
household Improve public satisfaction
understanding, and applying Luo Yang
14 Haicang Branch registration policy and provide 24-hour
household registration policies are 13459038407
consultation uninterrupted service.
resolved by means of AI and
services
virtual reality (VR) technology.
The convenience of policy services
is enhanced through real-time
online digital avatars combined
with large-scale models for
question answering services.
Improve call reception
efficiency and accuracy,
Intelligent optimize police resource
Efficient emergency call response,
emergency call allocation, and increase the
15 precise dispatching, and real-time
reception and quality and public satisfaction
command and monitoring.
dispatching level of emergency call
response and handling Chen Zhang
Siming Branch
services. 18250756712
Perception and monitoring for Improve control efficiency and
comprehensive perception accuracy, optimize resource
Smart coastal
coverage, intelligent target allocation and collaborative
16 defense
identification, intelligent operations, and strengthen
management
command dispatching, and rapid basic information
interception and handling management and services.
Coordinate material allocation
Based on emergency response
and improve emergency
Emergency requirements and emergency
response capabilities based
17 response material reserve conditions,
on requirements for
Police Assurance assurance respond quickly and assist in
emergency response Wu Junyu
Department (警保 emergency material supply plans.
materials. 18695627090
部)
Optimize resource allocation
Processing of vast quantities of and assist in the formulation,
18 Data analysis
equipment and vehicle data updating, or scrapping of
plans.

Contact
Division(s) or
Application Person and
No. Work Unit Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
Provide multilingual services, Increase satisfaction level:
Intelligent
especially for less commonly Improve service experience
customer service
encountered languages (such as through multilingual support
with real-time Lin Ling
19 Korean, French, Arabic, etc.), and and intelligent real-time
multilingual 13515965650
culturally adapted communication feedback mechanisms (e.g.,
communication
Entry and Exit methods, and reduce progress inquiries, intelligent
and translation
Management communication costs. reminders).
Detachment Increase public satisfaction,
Smart Build a knowledge graph provide 24-hour uninterrupted
government repository, enrich the government service, and expand online Lin Wenqiang

affairs service service terminology database, and and offline application 15980546165
agent create a chat-based service model scenarios through various
vehicles.
Based on vital sign and behavioral
data from relevant Internet of
Things (IoT) devices installed in
elderly people’s homes, such as Analyze the physical health of
vital sign analyzers and fall elderly people, and give them
Health and vital
21 detection devices (e.g., breathing, precision geriatric disease
sign analysis
heart rate, sleep quality), produce prevention, treatment, and
disease risk prediction, health rehabilitation guidance.
condition analysis, and other data
through large model training and
analysis.
For elderly individuals who have
chronic diseases or require
rehabilitation training, the AI
system can develop personalized
rehabilitation training plans based Increase the effectiveness and
on their medical condition and efficiency of rehabilitation
Intelligent
physical status. By collecting training, help elderly
22 rehabilitation Wang Zhenlin
Civil Affairs Elder Care movement data from elderly individuals recover physical
training guidance 0592-
Bureau Division individuals through smart functions faster, and enhance

wearable devices and sensors, the their quality of life.
AI system monitors training
effectiveness in real time and
adjusts training plans based on
feedback.
Use VR and augmented reality
(AR) technology to create realistic Provide chatting voice robots
virtual companions for the elderly. for the elderly according to
These avatars can be customized their needs, keep elderly
according to the preferences and individuals company through
needs of the elderly, with various means of expression,
Virtual
23 personalized appearances, and provide them livelihood-
companions
personalities, and behavioral related information, chat,
characteristics. The elderly can emotional support, fraud
communicate and interact face- prevention information, and
to-face with the avatars and enjoyment of preferential
participate in various policies.
entertainment activities together.

Contact
Division(s) or
Application Person and
No. Work Unit Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
Use AI technology to help elderly
individuals record important
Provide support for elderly
information (e.g., contact
individuals with cognitive
Cognitive information of friends and
impairments, and give the
24 impairment relatives, schedule arrangements),
elderly personalized
support and provide family-friendly
information recall, reminders,
applications to help them exercise
and other capabilities.
their memory, attention, and
logical thinking abilities.
Using AI and VR technology,
provide intelligent explanation of AI will automatically explain
the conditions in various nursing the functions, services, and
homes, enabling nursing home features of each area of a
25 AI tour guide
promotion and display, as well as nursing home, and will
intelligent customer service, so as support switching between
to better serve the elderly and multiple languages.
their families.
A specialized AI large model
trained on various civil affairs
policies, regulations, preferential For civil affairs services,
measures, procedures, and increase user satisfaction
AI intelligent
26 government services, will provide levels and speed of
customer service
unified AI large model services for understanding, and provide
all smart civil affairs business, 24-hour uninterrupted service.
such as elder care, financial
assistance, and funeral services.
Carry out AI large model-based
analysis and logical reasoning on
data related to various fees, Achieve comprehensive and
payments, and financial subsidies efficient supervision of all Wu Huiwang
27 Funds supervision
Offices in civil affairs management to kinds of civil affairs funds to 0592-
discover unreasonable fund usage prevent errors and omissions. 2892051
and provide early warning
information.
Carry out analysis and reasoning
on various kinds of information, For civil affairs services such
such as behavior and call records, as elder care, financial
of personnel, service institutions, assistance, and funeral
Service and call center staff involved in services, achieve intelligent

supervision civil affairs services such as elder supervision of the entire
care, financial assistance, and service process, and the
funeral services, so as to evaluate evaluation and improvement
the quality and effectiveness of of service efficiency.
those services.
By subsequently enriching the
smart finance business
knowledge base, and exploring Improve question answering
Financial Smart finance Tong Changxu
City Finance linking with large models, it will accuracy, enhance customer
29 Information intelligent 0592-
Bureau quickly respond to and learn satisfaction, and provide 24-
Center customer service 2858310
answers to frequently asked hour uninterrupted service
questions, and effectively improve
question answering accuracy.

Contact
Division(s) or
Application Person and
No. Work Unit Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
Based on corporate archives and
personnel records, and starting by
describing policy conditions, use
the semantic recognition and
reasoning capabilities of large
models to intelligently calculate
relevant data indicators and use
precision computation to form a
list of enterprises affected by
various policies (政策找企业名单).
Accurate matching of policies
Based on policy documents, Wu Dong
Government [to eligible parties] and
30 policy application guidelines, and 0592-
services intelligent breakdown of
other textual materials, use the 5398236
policies
document interpretation and
knowledge reasoning capabilities
of large language models to
quickly break down policy
conditions and clauses, and
automatically recommend
application forms and review
process templates, thereby
achieving intelligent policy
breakdown and rapid issuance.
Through service-based
question answering, business
processing, data analysis, and
Intelligent question-answering
customized training of large
assistant, counseling on
models, make use of
admissions, orientation,
lightweight 3D rendering and
employment, academic and
driving, voice interaction,
student affairs, and logistics; one
multi-round dialogue of large
network for everything (一网通办)
language models, function
and getting it done in one
calls, and other technologies,
City Human sentence (一句话办事); course and
load the campus knowledge
Resources Smart campus grade querying, Chat-BI
Xiamen Technical base, link to one network for Ma Zanwei
31 and Social intelligent intelligent summarization, and
College everything services, 13959213230
Security assistant data inference; academic data
orientation, student affairs,
Bureau analysis, teaching effectiveness
academic affairs, employment,
analysis, and campus activity
and other business scenarios,
participation analysis; lesson plan
and accelerate the
generation and homework
transformation of education
correction; textbook key point
digitalization by integrating
generation, question answering;
NLP, agents, TTS, SR, and
exam paper generation,
other technical capabilities
personalized makeup exams
into the entire process and all
aspects of education
management.
Utilize large models to accurately The expert database will be
profile experts, achieve precise precise and efficient,
Ecological
City matching between business centralized and unified,
environment
Ecological General Affairs requirements and subject matter dynamically managed, Liu Yin 0592-
32 expert database
Environment Division (综合处) experts, two-way intelligent standardized, secure, reliable, 5182618
(专家库)
Bureau recommendations, open, and shared, and the
management
recommendations on experts to decision-making support role
participate in decision-making and of the expert database will be

Contact
Division(s) or
Application Person and
No. Work Unit Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
consultation work, and full- fully exploited, enhancing the
process management. willingness of experts to fulfill
their duties.
City Housing Achieve AR housing search for Assist tenants and transaction
and Transaction and Smart housing real scenarios, policy parties in quickly finding Zheng Qingyun

Construction Leasing Division search interpretation, and intelligent listings and mediating 18060488024
Bureau dispute mediation disputes online
Fully leveraging the
“Fuxiaobao” (福晓宝) digital
assistant within the
Minzhengtong (闽政通) smart
customer service app,
iXiamen, and other service
portals, and selecting the
domestically developed
DeepSeek AI large language
model as the technical
support, the system will
deeply embed key service
aspects such as consultation,
situational guidance, and form
filling into the public user chat
Jointly with the City Data interface by means of in-depth
Bureau Approval Administration, push technology integration.
Chen Yubin,
Service Window, implementation of the “chat-and- Members of the public only
Intelligent Hong Yiyong
34 City Traffic process” (边聊边办) smart need to naturally express their
customer service 7703908,
Monitoring application for the issuance of requirements in their

Command Center rideshare vehicle (网约车) conversations with the
operation permits. intelligent system, and the
City system will then guide them
Transport- through the relevant
ation Bureau procedures based on the
conversation content, creating
an innovative “chat-and-
process” service model that
will solve problems such as
people being unable to find
the right entry point for
handling their affairs and
being unclear on the handling
procedures, thereby improving
the efficiency of government
services that are convenient,
beneficial, and helpful.
Raise road maintenance and
inspection efficiency, promptly
Maintenance and Accurately identify road surface
identify existing road surface
35 roving cracks, pothole problems, and
Xiamen City and facility problems, and
inspections roadside facility defects
Highway automatically send out Xiao Jie
Development notifications for rectification. 15705957929
Center Through intelligent monitoring
Dynamically monitor and analyze
of slopes, achieve early
36 Slope monitoring slope displacement and strain to
warning and emergency
promptly identify slope risks
response decision-making

Contact
Division(s) or
Application Person and
No. Work Unit Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
guidance, thereby enhancing
road safety levels.
Provide integrated
Accurately identify residents’ transportation solutions for
Public
travel requirements, collect and city residents, and increase
37 transportation
process vast amounts of origin- the proportion of public
smart travel
destination (OD) data transportation in city travel as
a whole.
Enhance passenger service
Multilingual understanding and satisfaction on the Xiamen
replying (Mandarin and Southern Metro, and provide 24-hour
Xiamen Rail Metro intelligent
38 Min dialects), rapid response, and uninterrupted service; compile Zhi Chenghai
Transit Group customer service
learning; answering of common a categorized list of passenger 18150395078
Co., Ltd.
questions, etc. inquiries to precisely improve
service quality.
Utilize AI video analysis Improve the efficiency of
technology to accurately identify subway protection risk
Intelligent roving
various safety hazards within identification, resolve roving
inspections for
39 subway protection zones (地铁保 inspection risk problems,
subway
护区) that endanger subway reduce response times, and
protection
operations, such as prohibited enhance subway protection
operations and behaviors. standards.
Specialized information search on
Assist in disaster prevention,
water and drought disasters for
facilitate grassroots work, and
water conservancy practitioners,
improve response quality and
monitoring of data queries,
40 efficiency; facilitate public
recommendations, and analysis;
understanding of relevant
and popular science education for
information on flood control
the public on flood control and
and water conservancy.
water conservancy knowledge.
Based on real-time and historical
information such as river basin
meteorology, rainfall and water
conditions, video monitoring, etc.,
Water
and dynamic information such as
City Bureau of conservancy (水
City Flood reservoir gate and dam conditions Zhang Xiang
Agriculture 利) knowledge Increase the efficiency of
Warning and and flash flood risk warnings, 0592-
and Rural intelligent flood, drought, and flash
Reporting Center achieve real-time forecasting of 5766803
Affairs question flooding disaster prevention
rainfall and water conditions, data
answering and control, and achieve real-
quality verification, risk warning
time intelligent monitoring,
41 for key sections and protected
analysis, and management of
units in the basin, flood control
the “air-space-ground-water-
dispatching rehearsal and flood
engineering” (“空天地水工”)
situation analysis, contingency
perception network for water
plan generation and assessment,
conservancy.
and other functions, and be able
to generate flood control
decision-making support
information, thereby improving
the decision-making efficiency of
flood control consultations.

Contact
Division(s) or
Application Person and
No. Work Unit Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
More intelligent (智慧化)
cultivation of crops such as
Increase the accuracy of
papaya, passion fruit, and
routine field management,
Syzygium samarangense,
boost product quality, and
42 Smart orchard achieving intelligentized water
implement roving robot
and fertilizer management,
inspections, diagnosis, and
intelligentized diagnosis and
City Agricultural management.
control of pests and diseases, and Huang Yongxiu
Technology
standardized ripe fruit picking. 13338368063
Promotion Center
Intelligentized cultivation of Prevent tomato pests and
tomatoes, achieving precise water diseases in advance to reduce
and fertilizer control in routine pesticide usage; standardize
Smart tomato
43 field management, early warning harvesting to resolve
cultivation
for common pests and diseases, problems related to labor
and standardized harvesting of costs and differing harvesting
fruit at maturity. standards.
Identify production and
construction projects that are
Preliminarily assess whether
legally required to prepare soil
soil and water conservation
and water conservation plans,
facilities for production and
verify whether such plans were
construction projects have
City Agricultural Water submitted before construction
legal violation issues such as Dai Mingwei
Comprehensive conservancy law was initiated, whether soil and
44 “construction before approval” 0592-
Law Enforcement enforcement water conservation compensation
or “operation before 5993736
Detachment assistance fees have been paid in full and on
inspection,” and enhance the
time, and whether self-inspection
efficiency of water
of soil and water conservation
administration law
facilities was conducted before
enforcement.
they were put into production or
use.
Achieve the digitization of
wholesale transaction data,
visualization of transaction
Wholesale Market transactions will be
City Market processes, and agricultural
agricultural informatized (信息化) and data Fan Yi 0592-
45 Commerce Operations product traceability for
product market will be used as a reference for 2855793
Bureau Division agricultural products such as
transactions market controls (市场调控).
vegetables and aquatic products
(水产品) in wholesale agricultural
product markets.
Using patients’ main
complaints, basic vital signs,
and an AI question answering
system, patients are
automatically assigned to the
Intelligent triage Optimize patient flow and reduce
appropriate department or
46 Planning and and guided wait times in emergency rooms
priority level. – Triage
City Health Information diagnosis and outpatient clinics. Zheng Wenjie
accuracy will be improved to
Commission Technology 13215918518
over 90%, and the proportion
Division (规信处)
of non-emergency patients
occupying emergency
resources will be reduced.
Extract key information from Provide intelligent diagnosis
Assisted clinical
47 medical records and provide and treatment
diagnosis
intelligent diagnosis and recommendations.

Contact
Division(s) or
Application Person and
No. Work Unit Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
treatment recommendations to
assist physicians in making
decisions.
Utilize AI technology to carry out
real-time monitoring and analysis
of vast amounts of public health
Public health data, including data on infectious Increase public health incident
48 monitoring and disease outbreaks, chronic disease early warning ability and
early warning incidence rates, environmental response speed.
factors, etc., to provide timely
early warnings of potential health
risks.
When responding to emergencies
such as forest fires, urban
flooding, and production safety
accidents, AI models will be
utilized to access weather
forecasts, surveillance videos,
population heat maps, traffic
networks, social media sentiment,
and other data in real time in a
multimodal manner through
multi-source data integration,
real-time analysis abilities, and
intelligent decision support
systems. This data will be
combined with static data such as
emergency response plans for
emergencies, analysis of nearby
areas, rescue supplies, teams, and
historical disaster databases to
City form comprehensive situational
Emergency Assisted awareness. Real-time inference Improve emergency response Yang Jie
49 Command Center
Management decision-making and prediction of event trends speed and accuracy. 13600928185
Bureau (such as fire spread paths and
crowd evacuation directions) will
be conducted to generate early
warning signals in advance.
Emergency response
recommendations will be made:
First, emergency response level
recommendations will be made;
second, based on the type of
incident, rescue teams will be
paired with rescue resources, and
rescue command
recommendations will be made;
third, linkage will be made to the
intelligent transportation system
to divert traffic and reduce
congestion; fourth, based on
population heat map data, the
optimal escape routes will be
pushed through a mobile phone

Contact
Division(s) or
Application Person and
No. Work Unit Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
SMS targeted notification
platform.
Input historical data on the
number of accidents across all
Early warnings of potential
Production Safety industries and types in the city,
production safety risks will be Hong Zehua
50 Coordination Production safety along with their causes, for AI to
issued and corresponding risk 15927077119
Division analyze and predict future trends
control measures proposed.
in accident occurrence across all
industries city-wide.
Process earthquake data, provide
responses to questions on the
latest earthquake information,
generate earthquake report
Improve earthquake
Earthquake templates, and provide Q&A
emergency response
Earthquake disaster responses on earthquake Pan Zhenyu
51 efficiency and provide city
Bureau mitigation avoidance and protection (e.g., 15392038139
residents with earthquake
assistant informing and guiding people on
emergency services
the nearest earthquake shelters
and how to take emergency
measures), and answer common
questions about earthquakes
Front-line intellectual property
supervision and law enforcement Increase front-line intellectual
Intellectual staff face questions (issues raised) property law enforcement and
Property from regulatory targets (service supervision personnel’s
Protection Front-line law recipients). They must promptly familiarity with, and ability to
Chen Liming
52 Division enforcement and and quickly respond with relevant apply, laws, regulations, and

(Trademark supervision laws, regulations, policies, and policies, integrate supervision
Supervision compliance standards. After into service, and raise
Division) verification, front-line staff can regulatory target satisfaction
provide warnings and relevant levels.
guidance to regulatory targets.
Conduct batch data cleaning,
Provide multimodal large
categorization, summarization,
City Market models, as well as batch
and verification of non-standard
Supervision analysis and processing
information (including images)
and functions for tabular data, to
such as news sentiment analysis,
Administra- facilitate meeting
Intelligent complaints and reports, consumer
tion Bureau requirements such as for
identification and reviews, supervision inspections,
53 categorization analysis of
analysis of non- and penalties, using functions
issues reported in complaints
standard data such as image understanding,
Food and and reports, verification of Song Tianyou
semantic recognition, and content
Beverage Division whether photos uploaded by 13950063994
extraction, thereby improving
restaurants for rectification
regulatory quality and
correspond to the issues
strengthening food safety risk
reported, etc.
assessment and control.
Generate multimedia science
Food Safety
Intelligent generation of images, popularization propaganda
Science
54 audio, short videos, and other based on designated themes
Popularization
multimedia functions in formats such as images,
Propaganda
audio, and short videos.
Skill level Accurately identify the relevant Zhao Yiming
City Sports Mass Sports Raise administrative approval
55 certification for application requirements for 0592-
Bureau Division efficiency.
second-level technical level certification of 5339330

Contact
Division(s) or
Application Person and
No. Work Unit Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
(volunteer) social second-level social sports
sports coaches coaches for city residents.
Powered by solar energy, and
Currently, water surface cleaning
adopting advanced sensor
is done manually, which poses
Water surface technologies (such as infrared,
certain safety hazards.
cleaning ultrasonic, or machine vision),
Garden Additionally, due to time
equipment for the equipment would
Management constraints, some areas may be Li Zhaowen
Wanshi Lake, automatically identify the
56 Section of the overlooked. It is recommended to 0592-
Shishan types of debris on the water
City Botanical consider introducing intelligent 2039759
City Bureau of Reservoir, and surface and capture them
Garden equipment integrating multiple
Government Dongzhaikeng using robotic arms, nets, or
technologies including
Facilities and Reservoir suction devices. Automatically
mechanical, electronic, and
Landscaping transport collected debris to
automatic control technologies.
internal storage containers.
City Government Utilize existing Sharp Eyes project
Significantly improve roving
Environmental (雪亮工程) surveillance video to
inspection efficiency and
Science and Intelligent roving identify abnormalities such as Luo Ronghui
57 enable continuous monitoring
Drainage inspections pipeline damage, leaks, illegal 13600976272
of road and pipeline network
Management Co., construction, and unauthorized
facilities.
Ltd. discharges.
For innovative application
scenarios such as smart
government affairs review,
intelligent roving inspections,
intelligent law enforcement,
intelligent evaluation, intelligent
task assignment, intelligent early
warning, intelligent analysis,
intelligent decision-making,
intelligent command and
dispatching, digital human
Use AI to make city
broadcasting, intelligent
governance more scientific,
Smart city assistants, etc., analyze issues in
City Urban refined (精细化), and
All relevant management, urban management such as the
Management intelligentized, increase the Lin Chao
divisions and government division of responsibilities,
58 and Law efficiency of smart office 0592-
offices of the office operations, establishment of management
Enforcement operations for government 5379322
Bureau smart law standards, and business process
Bureau affairs, and achieve effective
enforcement optimization. Through analysis of
urban management and law
data on city operation monitoring,
enforcement.
cross-departmental collaboration,
emergency response, etc.,
gradually explore the use of big
data to gain insights into
underlying patterns of city
operation, put forward scientific
and rational decision-making
recommendations, raise execution
efficiency, and provide
comprehensive technical support
for city governance.

Contact
Division(s) or
Application Person and
No. Work Unit Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
Deeply integrating AI with
petition operations can
promote a shift from “reactive
Automatically parse petition texts, response” to “proactive
analyze and identify the emotional governance,” helping to build
state of petitioners, automatically a more efficient and precise
Reception
link to relevant laws and social contradiction (社会矛盾)
Division (Petition
regulations, assist staff in resolution system. Applying
Service Center),
identifying the basis for AI technology can effectively
Petition Handling
petitioning, generate standardized boost the efficiency and
Division,
City Petition Office responses, and enhance quality of petition work, Zou Shumeng
59 Supervision and
(信访) Bureau applications authoritativeness. Through the optimize service processes, 13850081116
Investigation
automatic collection, data strengthen data analysis, and
Division,
analysis, categorization, and provide strong support for
Reinvestigation
processing of petition information, government decision-making.
and Review
provide accurate handling Promote the elevation of
Division
procedures, shorten processing Xiamen City’s petition work to
times, and optimize service a new level, and make greater
quality. contributions to maintaining
social stability and promoting
social and economic
development.
II. List of AI Application Scenario Opportunities
1) All districts and management committees
(i) A total of 18 district-level departments proposed 52 application scenario
opportunities
Contact
Divisions(s)
Application Person and
No. District Work Unit or Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
Create a new
Leveraging the DeepSeek large
government service
model’s capabilities for deep
experience that
thinking and reasoning
combines virtual and
generation, and through learning
physical and
District government service guidelines
integrates
Bureau of and business service knowledge
District intelligence, drive a
Science, Siming smart materials, combined with digital
Siming Government transformation of Ye Mingxi
1 Technology, government human technology, a smart virtual
District Assurance (政保) government services 15880255038
Industry, and services office government service hall will be
Center from human service
Information constructed within the
to human-computer
Technology government service center,
interaction, and
enabling integrated inquiry and
achieve the goal of
processing, dynamic traffic
“getting things done
routing, and seamless integration
efficiently” (高效办成
with offline physical spaces.
一件事).

Contact
Divisions(s)
Application Person and
No. District Work Unit or Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
Leverage AI technology to achieve
Improve document
efficient official document writing,
writing efficiency,
construct a government-side
optimize data
official document repository,
Industry and Government- statistics and search
integrate policy materials related
Information side knowledge convenience, and Xie Mingcan
2 to bureau work, employ large
Technology base enhance the 18859237332
models to carry out intelligent
Section construction accuracy and
sorting and allocation, elevate
efficiency of external
digital human capabilities, and
consultation
provide precise services for
services.
external consultations.
On the Siming District Integrated
Operations platform, fully utilize
District Urban
Urban the “Sharp Eyes” video resources Achieve rapid
Operation District Urban
management already accessed, and utilize AI identification and Zhang Jiankun
3 Management Management
video recognition technology to handling of urban 13806011218
Command Office
recognition automatically identify urban management issues.
Center
management issues, generate
descriptions, and assign tasks.
Establish a subdistrict knowledge
base, collect various policy
Raise the efficiency
documents issued by higher-level
and quality of
authorities, and make use of AI
subdistrict
assistants to organize and retrieve
operations, optimize
knowledge base content to assist
Lujiang Subdistrict-level official document
Lujiang subdistrict work such as Zeng Qingkai
4 Subdistrict knowledge base writing processes,
Subdistrict Office document drafting and data 18850440040
Office construction assure compliance
provision. Utilize large language
with formatting
models to carry out subdistrict
requirements, and
official document writing and
respond swiftly to
generate relevant materials
requirements.
according to formatting
requirements.
Increase accessibility
Enhance accessibility system
for people with
recognition, discourage uncivilized
District disabilities, enhance
behavior, increase city resident
Landscape Landscape Urban park city resident Cai Zhichuan
5 interaction, and add more
and Greening Section management experience, and 13395059272
warnings of areas separated off
(绿化) Center heighten landscape
for tasks such as sprinkler use and
and greening work
pesticide spraying.
efficiency.
Select class content
based on resources
Use AI assistants to quickly on the platform and
Intelligent
Teacher Training generate lesson plans, automatically
6 lesson
School PowerPoint presentations, and generate
District preparation
Huli other teaching resources. corresponding Wei Licheng
Education
District courseware and 15305929588
Bureau
lesson plans.
Intelligent Automatically generate academic Provide 24-hour
Teacher Training homework performance analysis reports. online tutoring

School review and Provide 24-hour online tutoring services for
tutoring services for students. students.

Contact
Divisions(s)
Application Person and
No. District Work Unit or Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
Provide teachers
Intelligent
Support teachers in conducting with data analysis
Teacher Training education
8 online education research and research
School research
activities. support for scientific
platform
research.
Increase the public’s
satisfaction with
public legal services
Answer users’ legal questions and enhance the
and provide basic legal advice; public’s ability to
automatically generate legal handle matters in
documents such as contracts and accordance with the
Zhang
complaints based on user input; law; improve the
Public legal Huarong
9 District Justice Bureau quickly search for relevant legal efficiency of legal
services 0592-
provisions, cases, and literature, consultation and

and analyze historical cases; legal aid services;
provide free legal consultations raise the efficiency of
for economically disadvantaged dispute resolution,
groups and apply for legal aid. and promote the
intelligentization and
modernization of
legal services.
Identify dangerous fire sources
and fire safety hazards, and be
Safety 24-hour night fire Wang
Huli able to respond quickly and issue
10 Supervision Urban villages patrol services in Haochen
Subdistrict alarms, especially at night, and to
Station urban villages. 13385907589
adapt to the complex conditions
of urban villages.
Use intelligent
robots to solve the
problems of multiple
business promotion
Intelligent policies and high
Accurately refine business
customer service difficulty of
Investment promotion policies, and achieve Lü Jiacheng
11 Xiamen City for business interpretation,
Department customer service readily at hand, 18559026999
Huli District promotion automatically match
with all policies available.
State-Owned policies with industries, and
Asset reduce the difficulty
Investment of policy
Group Co., popularization and
Ltd. extension
Xiamen Huli Intelligent
Improve customer
State-Owned customer service
Multilingual understanding and satisfaction, provide
Asset Investment for the Ye Xin
12 reply, quick response, FAQ 24-hour
Commercial “Houlihui” (“厚 18850042710
answer learning uninterrupted
Management Co., 礼汇”) online
service
Ltd. platform
On the basis of the existing 164 Increase the
Intelligentized sets of monitoring equipment [detection rate] of
District Urban
upgrading of (coverage rate 86.77%), add an AI violation incidents,
Management
Digital Huli construction site video analysis module to and reduce the rate Lin Weijiang
13 Committee
Command Center noise and dust automatically identify violations of complaints from 13599912519
Commission
supervision such as [lack of] covering of loose city residents on
Office
platform dirt and encircling wall damage; platforms such as
introduce vehicle-mounted mobile 12345

Contact
Divisions(s)
Application Person and
No. District Work Unit or Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
monitoring equipment to expand
blind spot coverage
With dump truck GPS data linked Increase the
Full-process to the entrance and exit detection rate of
optimization and monitoring of construction sites, illegal dumping
supervision AI will identify behaviors such as incidents and

platform for unsecured transport and illegal improve the
construction dumping, and automatically compliance rate of
waste generate a chain of evidence for transportation
law enforcement enterprises
Integrate rider usage spike
Dynamic
prediction models, analyze Increase the bicycle
scheduling
parking needs in hot spots such as turnover rate in key
optimization for
business districts and subway areas and shorten
15 bike-share
entrances in real time, and link to the time required to
bicycle
enterprises to automatically handle illegal
management
adjust delivery volume and the parking incidents
platform
range of electronic fences
Add AI thermal imaging cameras
Fire warning to monitor the battery
Improve fire warning
system temperatures of electric vehicle
accuracy and reduce
16 upgrading for charging stations, combine with
the incident
smart urban power load data to establish a fire
occurrence rate
villages risk prediction model, and link to
automatic sprinkler systems
There are more than 10,000
roadside surveillance video feeds,
Increase Improve incident
but algorithm computing power
computing categorization
analysis is limited. Add computing
power for urban accuracy and
power, train multimodal AI
appearance improve the
models, enhance recognition
issues, improve efficiency of urban
17 ability in complex scenarios such
and management squads
as "Three Guarantees Outside the
intelligentize (城管中队) and grid-
Front Door" (“门前三包”)
recognition based community
violations and mobile vendors
algorithm management
blocking the road, and support
iteration officers (网格员)
Southern Min dialect voice
command interaction
Conduct video
analysis of
community urban
management and
Build a supervision platform for roadside
communities in Huli District by environmental
Smart
combining existing Huli sanitation
community
18 population, enterprise, video, conditions, use
supervision
emergency, fire, and emergency fire data
system
neighborhood information, to quickly respond to
building information, etc., emergencies,
introduce AI for
facility maintenance
and community
interaction, and raise

Contact
Divisions(s)
Application Person and
No. District Work Unit or Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
resident
participation levels
Deploy roving patrol drones with
automatic hangars, use AI-based Improve the
flight route planning to achieve discovery of illegal
automatic identification of illegal construction, reduce
buildings and of urban the occurrence of
Low-altitude AI- appearance, coastal defense line, coastal security
19 based roving and urban village issues, problems, and
patrol system automatically identify illegal improve efficiency in
construction, garbage the detection of
accumulation, and other safety hazards such
problems, and establish a as objects falling
handling mechanism featuring air- from heights
ground linkage
Deploy environmental sensors
and video surveillance in public Shorten average
restrooms district-wide, and use wait times for city
AI-based smart
AI to automatically adjust residents using
public restroom
20 ventilation and odor control public restrooms and
management
equipment, monitor restroom improve facility
system
occupancy status, and push real- maintenance request
time availability information via a response times.
mobile app.
Integrate GIS, BIM, and IoT data Reduce pipeline
to build a 3D pipeline network network
Underground
model, use AI to predict pipe maintenance costs
21 pipeline network
aging and leakage risks, and and shorten urban
digital twin
simulate drainage capacity during flooding response
heavy rainfall. times.
Integrate meteorological data,
historical disaster databases, and
Intelligent Provide earlier
video surveillance to build flood
decision-making warning of disaster
prediction models and to
22 system for flood severity and improve
dynamically generate material
and typhoon emergency resource
dispatching plans and evacuation
mitigation allocation efficiency.
route optimization
recommendations.
Integrate public security,
Improve the
transportation, and community
Important accuracy of mass
data to build dynamic trajectory
person behavior incident (群体性事件)
23 models for persons of concern (涉
trajectory early warnings and
稳人员), and use AI to predict
prediction increase incident
increased risks and generate
handling efficiency.
surveillance plans.
Based on school district
population data and school
capacity, dynamically predict Provide enrollment
Intelligent
enrollment gaps, and use AI to predictions and
matching of
24 generate recommendations for improve the fairness
educational
school expansion or new of educational
resources
construction site selection, so as resource allocation.
to optimize the allocation of
educational resources.

Contact
Divisions(s)
Application Person and
No. District Work Unit or Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
Improve the
Build student learning analysis
coverage rate of
models, identify knowledge gaps
personalized
AI-based through homework correction and
learning plans for
25 precision classroom interaction data, and
students and
teaching system dynamically generate tiered
increase the degree
practice questions and micro-
of mastery of key
lesson videos.
knowledge points.
Reduce lab teaching
Develop VR/AR lab systems for accident rates and
Virtual lab subjects such as physics and increase the rate of
26 teaching chemistry, use AI to correct lab classes offered
platform operating errors, and simulate by schools deficient
dangerous experimental scenarios in teaching
resources.
By integrating city brain systems
with shopping district cameras Enhance overall
Shopping
and POS data, AI will identify foot revenue in shopping
district
traffic, consumption hotspots, and districts and improve
27 consumer
customer stay times, and generate merchants’ site
behavior
store layout optimization plans occupancy
analysis
and promotional strategy satisfaction.
recommendations.
Deploy AI visual weighing
systems in large supermarkets to Improve checkout
Intelligent retail identify fresh produce in 0.2 efficiency, increase
visual seconds and automatically shelf turnover rate

management calculate prices, and by 45%, and reduce
system simultaneously analyze shelf manual stocking
display heat maps to optimize costs.
product layout.
Deploy AR glasses in southern
Fujian-style traditional house (闽 Lengthen the
南古厝) conservation areas or average visitor stay
AR historical
other protected areas. Use AI to time and increase
29 district tour
restore the historical appearance cultural
guide system
of buildings, and combine with communication
LBS technology to trigger efficiency.
immersive cultural scenarios.
Use motion capture
technology to record
Use motion capture technology to intangible cultural
record intangible cultural heritage heritage techniques
Intelligent
techniques such as lacquer thread such as lacquer
intangible
30 embossing (漆线雕), and develop thread embossing,
cultural heritage
an AI teaching system to correct and develop an AI
platform
learners’ technique deviations in teaching system to
real time correct learners’
technique deviations
in real time
Predict the
City governance Use AI algorithms combined with Li Yutong
Haicang probability of
31 District Data Administration – emergency data collected from various IoT 0592-
District occurrence and
management sensors to conduct analysis. 6803739
impact range of

Contact
Divisions(s)
Application Person and
No. District Work Unit or Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
natural disasters in
advance; use AI to
assist in formulating
rescue plans and
allocating rescue
resources.
Use AI to analyze hydrological
Improve the
data, meteorological data, and
City governance accuracy and real-
32 data collected from high-altitude
– flood warning time nature of flood
cameras and environment-
warnings.
monitoring IoT sensors.
Provide decision-
making support for
mediators; use
City governance
Use AI to extract and analyze key intelligent chat
– conflict and
33 information from conflict and technology to
dispute
dispute cases. provide conflict and
resolution
dispute mediation
consultation services
to the public.
Intelligent review and approval,
automatic comparison and
verification of standardized Improve review and

materials, and intelligent analysis approval efficiency.
and processing of non-
standardized materials.
Yang Youmei
Intelligent customer service:
Reduce the number 0592-
Achieve automatic updating of
of offline 6803182
policy knowledge bases, and
consultation visits,
Administrative quickly respond to and answer
35 and provide 24-hour
review and common questions; accurately
uninterrupted online
approval match with services based on the
consultation and
service requirements of the public,
guidance services.
and provide intelligent guidance.
Intelligent review and approval:
Online review of pension
Make offices
insurance premium subsidies and
paperless and raise Lin Li
36 applications for unpaid funds for
work efficiency and 18859292577
persons subject to land
service levels.
expropriation, and large-scale
data processing.
Improve diagnostic
Accurate disease identification accuracy, shorten
and diagnosis recommendations, diagnosis times, and
Education and Lin Wei 0592-
37 District Health Bureau processing of vast quantities of help physicians
healthcare 6055002
data, and medical equipment develop
integration. personalized
treatment plans.
Intelligent expedited reporting
reminders for statistical reports: Improve efficiency of
38 Li Chunyan
Livelihood System will intelligently remind expedited reporting.
District Bureau of Statistics 0592-
assurance non-reporting enterprises.

Wholesale enterprises are Materials will be

basically petrochemical-related collected in a

Contact
Divisions(s)
Application Person and
No. District Work Unit or Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
(mostly petroleum trading center standardized
enterprises). The number of manner through the
enterprises included in statistics intelligent system.
increases annually, but the Professional staff
statistical materials entered for will conduct final
such enterprises are largely the reviews after
same. An intelligent system preliminary review
procedure can be configured to by the system,
allow these enterprises to thereby increasing
independently submit materials, review efficiency.
which the system would review
automatically.
Intelligent
customer service
for college
entrance exams, Provide multilingual Improve customer
junior high understanding and replies, satisfaction and You Jingxian
District Education Admissions
40 school entrance respond rapidly, and learn provide 24-hour 0592-
Examination Center
exams, high answers to frequently asked uninterrupted 6800625
school entrance policy questions. service.
exams, and
student financial
aid
Raise screening
Data analysis to identify common effectiveness and
issues and provide schools a basis provide timely
for formulating intervention warnings; assist in
Student mental measures; automated carrying out teacher
health comprehensive assessment and and parent support, Zheng Xiaoling

counseling and early warning; virtual as well as crisis 18030230708
services psychological counseling and intervention
personalized recommendations; emergency
teacher and parent support, and response, and
crisis intervention. streamline
responses.
Provide teachers with AI teaching
assistants to help them with
functions such as homework
Intelligent correction, learning analysis, weak Improve teaching
District Teacher Training School
42 teaching point resource recommendations, efficiency and
assistants intelligent question answering, quality.
personalized learning plans, and
teaching effectiveness
assessment and feedback.
To systematize and intelligentize Yan Boyuan
all aspects of campus 13616030520
management, integrate functions
including information query and
Raise campus
statistics, data entry and analysis,
Smart education management
43 business process handling, review
management efficiency and
and approval of various
standards.
applications, teacher and student
profiling and development
evaluation, academic affairs
management, moral education

Contact
Divisions(s)
Application Person and
No. District Work Unit or Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
management, home-school
interaction, teaching and research
management, and teaching
resource management.
Effectively improve
residents’ civility
literacy; make the
Develop online civility literacy
urban environment
courses to achieve personalized
cleaner and more
District Party teaching in civility cultivation and
Smart civility orderly, efficiently Lin Wenzu
44 Committee Civility improve educational outcomes;
creation advance civility 17750627907
Office (文明办) quickly and accurately identify
creation work, and
issues in civility creation, and raise
significantly improve
the level of urban civility.
the overall civility
image of Tong’an
District.
Generate drafts of
news articles, policy
interpretations,
propaganda copy,
etc., and respond
quickly to hot topics
and policy releases.
Automatically
District Party
proofread and
Committee
optimize language
Propaganda Automated content production;
expression to ensure
Department intelligent editing and
that propaganda
Tong’an News and optimization; multilingual
45 content is accurate,
District propaganda translation and dissemination;
concise, and easy to
fact-checking and source
understand. Real-
Propaganda verification. Li Qingjie
time multilingual
Affairs Center 18605988737
translation to
facilitate
international
dissemination.
Automatically
compare multiple
sources to verify the
accuracy of
propaganda content.
Virtual hosts or
holographic
Press projection
46 Virtual press conferences
conferences technology for
hosting virtual press
conferences.
Examine the development status
District of industries, key areas, and Provide industry
Development Investment Industry production chains district-wide in trend analysis and Lin Yifang

and Reform Section analysis real time, analyze existing issues, targeted industry 18805929276
Bureau and provide development analysis reports.
recommendations.

Contact
Divisions(s)
Application Person and
No. District Work Unit or Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
Quickly query
policies and
historical
Proofreading, information
documents; rapidly
Information retrieval, knowledge base Tong Mingyao
48 generate visual
management construction, and data table 13015747199
statistical tables,
automation
and predict trends
based on historical
data
Through the
Analyze the trends,
provision of
characteristics, strengths, and
economic data and
weaknesses of the region’s
some work Huang Lijuan
Economic current economic operations,
49 materials, prepare 0592-
operations provide work recommendations,
economic operation 7558786
and assist in the preparation of
analysis reports in
economic operation analysis
accordance with
reports
requirements
Carry out functional identification
Achieve intelligent
with regard to the necessity of
processing of
Intelligent construction during prohibited
construction permits
50 review and nighttime and midday hours as
for construction
approval proposed by construction work
during nighttime and
Environmental units, and make review and Wang Rundi
midday hours
Protection Section approval decisions 15980793216
Predict future changes in air Real-time analysis
quality based on existing and prediction of air
Air quality
51 automatic air quality monitoring quality changes in
prediction
Ecological station data in combination with the area of
Environment weather forecasts. jurisdiction.
Bureau Use AI to identify whether
Intelligent sewage outlets are abnormal, Achieve off-site
52 control of remotely trigger automatic supervision and
sewage outlets sampling monitoring functions, precise control
and transmit data
Lin Zhiwen
Ecology Section Intelligent identification of marine
Intelligent 18905922567
Rapid marine debris, real-time transmission of
identification and
debris QR code location photos to the
53 precise, rapid
identification ground, and dispatching of debris
cleanup of marine
and positioning cleanup tasks through Amap work
debris
maps (mapping app)
Quickly determine whether
applicants’ uploaded materials
Quickly compare
Intelligent are complete, whether applicants
materials prior to
54 review and meet the application criteria, and
review and flag any
approval whether uploaded forms have
errors.
been filled out completely and Xiao Yang
District Data Government
correctly. 0592-
Administration Service Center
Add intelligent inspection Conduct rapid 3757076
functions for applicant information inspection and
Intelligent
and materials at each stage of the assessment of
55 review and
business handling system. information such as
approval
Conduct rapid inspection and review and approval
assessment of information before materials and

Contact
Divisions(s)
Application Person and
No. District Work Unit or Office(s) with Core Requirements Expected Results
Scenario Telephone
Requirements
Number
materials are submitted, and applicant eligibility,
provide alerts for possible errors. assess whether
Reduce the likelihood of review approval decisions
errors and shorten review and may be incorrect,
approval times. and provide
reminders of
possible errors.
Assessment decision
accuracy greater
than 80%.