CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 1
CSIS
BRIEFS
The Air Force Digital Century Series
Beyond the Buzzwords
By Morgan Dwyer
THE ISSUE
The United States Air Force’s (USAF) plan to acquire next generation fighter aircraft hinges on three buzzwords: agile development,
open architecture, and digital engineering. Although none of these concepts are new to the acquisition community, their successful
implementation in a large program would be. To move beyond these buzzwords and overcome past barriers to their implementation,
the USAF’s proposed Digital Century Series will need to strictly adhere to a rapid and repeatable schedule. While managing the Digital
Century Series on such a schedule will likely have costs, the potential benefits are worth exploring.
INTRODUCTION the design concept.6,7 Despite this innovation, timelines to
The new USAF strategy for acquiring next generation fighter field new designs were rapid: prototypes sometimes flew
aircraft departs radically from the approach used to field today’s within five years of development start,8 and over 5,000
F-35 and F-22. Change is certainly understandable, since both aircraft were produced in one decade.9
programs experienced substantial cost and schedule growth The Century Series’ speed may have been enabled, at least
during development.1,2 This growth can be attributed, at least in in part, by a willingness to accept failure. At least four new
part, to acquisition strategies that fielded multiple revolutionary designs were developed but never produced,10 and several
capabilities simultaneously instead of in incremental blocks designs that were produced suffered substantial combat and
or on separate aircraft.3,4 Even post-development, today, the accidental losses.11 Yet despite these failures, the original
aircraft are costly to sustain and upgrade, and their high initial Century Series demonstrated that—in the face of technical
development costs represent only a fraction of their total life- and requirements uncertainty—rapid parallel development
cycle cost.5 With its proposed Digital Century Series, the USAF projects offer flexibility and the confidence that at least
seeks to rewrite the F-22 and F-35’s history by drawing on some technology can be used on future systems.12
lessons from the more distant past.
Today, the USAF characterizes the Digital Century Series
In contrast to today’s fighter aircraft, the original 1950s-era in terms of a “holy trinity” of agile development, open
Century Series was characterized by rapid development, architecture, and digital engineering.13 But as was discussed
groundbreaking innovation, and sometimes by failure. The at the Air Force Association’s 2019 National Convention,
original Century Series produced at least 10 new designs the Digital Century Series is more than just a series of
that included the first supersonic fighter, the first tactical buzzwords. My understanding of the USAF’s plan to
aircraft to carry nuclear weapons, and the first aircraft implement and integrate these buzzwords—as well as that
designed to truly integrate radar and weapons systems into plan’s potential—are described in more detail below.

Although this plan shows promise, the Digital Century But concurrency, at least as it was problematically applied in
Series will be challenged to meet its potential. Specifically, the F-22 and F-35 programs, seems to differ from the USAF’s
while none of the buzzwords are new to the Department vision for agile hardware development.20,21 With the Digital
of Defense (DOD), their successful execution together in a Century Series, the USAF appears poised to implement
large program would be. More importantly, moving beyond corrections and upgrades predominately through new
those buzzwords will require more than just overcoming production rather than through retrofits.22
the historic barriers to their implementation. As envisioned
With agile hardware development, it seems that engineers
by the USAF, it will also require integrating the buzzwords
will build off an initial baseline design. As that design
through an acquisition strategy that emphasizes strict
evolves during each sprint, engineers will produce
adherence to program schedule. This strategy depends on
new hardware to replace the old. Although both evolve
rapid and predictable technology development, short design
similarly, agile hardware sprints may not be able to
lives, and a willingness to retire systems from operations
leverage past capabilities in the same way that software
quickly and on schedule. This proposed focus on schedule—
sprints do. Instead, engineers may leverage past designs by
potentially at the expense of cost and performance—is what
reproducing, rather than retrofitting them. Furthermore,
that truly distinguishes the Digital Century Series from the
agile hardware development may also have a higher cost
F-22 and F-35 that preceded it.
of failure if new designs fail to transition into operations.
AGILE DEVELOPMENT In these cases, the USAF may choose to abandon new
capabilities and continue producing replicas of older ones.
Agile development—a strategy characterized by rapid
responsiveness to changing requirements and small, cross-
functional development teams—is most frequently used Although it may be possible to achieve
for software.14 Institutionally, however, the DOD struggles
the same benefits of agile development
with agile software for several reasons.15 First, the DOD’s
on hardware as in software—namely
requirements process is lengthy and typically occurs only
once, at the beginning of a program. Second, agile teams flexibility and speed—the process for
break a system’s development into small chunks and
hardware will look much different.
prioritize the rapid delivery of some capability over the
complete delivery of all capabilities. Third, the capabilities
delivered in each agile “sprint” are often not predicted well Given these potential costs, the USAF should consider
in advance, making it hard for DOD budgeters to allocate mitigation opportunities that shift functionality from
and assess the effectiveness of their investments. Finally, hardware to more easily upgradable software.23 The DOD
agile development tolerates failure by allowing developers and Congress should also recognize that although it may be
to correct and upgrade software in subsequent spirals. This, possible to achieve the same benefits of agile development
too, is at odds with a risk averse DOD acquisition culture. on hardware as in software—namely flexibility and
speed—the process for hardware will look much different.
That said, the USAF recently established multiple agile
Sometimes that process will involve a poor design that fails
software programs,16 and both the DOD and Congress
to transition into operations or a great design, which is
support more widespread use of agile development
hastened into retirement by the onset of a new sprint.
practices.17 But with the Digital Century Series, the USAF
takes agile development a step further and suggests OPEN ARCHITECTURE
developing both software and hardware agilely.18 Agile
Like agile development, open architecture is also not new to
hardware development will require an even more drastic
the DOD; in fact, DOD 5000-series policies mentioned open
departure from traditional DOD norms than software.
architecture as early as 1996.24 More recently, in 2013, the
With agile software development, engineers build off an DOD emphasized open architecture in Better Buying Power
initial baseline code. That original code evolves during each 2.0,25 and in 2015, Congress encouraged the DOD to adopt
sprint, as engineers apply bug fixes to correct deficiencies Modular Open Systems Approaches (MOSA) on all applicable
or upgrade capabilities to meet new requirements. With programs.26 MOSA aims to develop modular systems with
hardware, the concept of concurrency—when production standardized interfaces in order to enable future upgrades. By
begins before completing development and changes are sharing interface standards with a community of potential
phased into future production runs or retrofit—is analogous.19 developers, MOSA “opens” a system up to competition;
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 2

theoretically, that competition will reduce upgrade cost and will be challenged to align incentives between integrator,
incentivize innovation throughout the life of a program.27 platform, and module contractors throughout the series
Openness also theoretically reduces the time and cost to life-cycle. It will also be challenged to ensure that all
design, integrate, and test upgrades, since modules isolate relevant interfaces remain truly open and standardized.
changes within systems and common standards enable To overcome these challenges, the USAF can borrow
processes to be reused across them.28 Unfortunately, although implementation strategies from other programs that have
exemplar cases exist in the private sector (e.g., smart implemented MOSA; Navy submarines, for example, may
phones), fewer success stories exist in the DOD.29 be a useful source of lessons learned.34 Generally though,
the USAF should also recognize that defining and managing
Several cultural and structural barriers hinder the use of MOSA
so many open interfaces will require more technical,
within the DOD. First, to modularize and standardize systems,
acquisition, and IP personnel than has been typical for past
engineers often trade current performance to preserve the
programs that heavily relied on contractors. The DOD and
option for future upgrades and interoperability. This practice
Congress, in turn, should ensure that the USAF allocates a
is at odds with the DOD’s preference for designing systems
sufficient number of government personnel to support the
that are optimized to meet predetermined performance
Digital Century Series’ program office.
requirements. Second, to ensure that interfaces are indeed
standardized, MOSA requires careful intellectual property (IP) DIGITAL ENGINEERING
management—an acknowledged DOD challenge.30,31 It may Although digital engineering is the newest buzzword in the
also require the DOD to take a more active role in defining Digital Century Series’ “holy trinity,” it appears to derive
and managing the subsystem and component interfaces of its from—and apply new technology to—concepts that are
systems—a responsibility that the DOD historically delegates already well established within the DOD. Through digital
to its contractors. engineering, the USAF plans to simulate and optimize the
process of producing, upgrading, operating, and maintaining
Defining and managing so many open new systems.35 In this way, digital engineering applies
modern modeling and simulation (M&S) capabilities to
interfaces will require more technical,
design systems for “-ilities”: characteristics like reliability,
acquisition, and IP personnel than has manufacturability, and upgradability that indirectly relate to
system performance but that can significantly impact life-
been typical for past programs that
cycle cost.36
heavily relied on contractors.
As described above, when the DOD develops systems, it
typically prioritizes performance requirements—which
Finally, projects that implement MOSA may struggle to
provide immediate demonstrable benefit—over “-ilities”
incentivize contractors to develop open architectures in
requirements, whose benefits are not realized until later in
the first place. During operations and sustainment (O&S),
the life-cycle. For example, commonality was an “-ilities”
the government often has few options to work with requirement for the F-35.37 Commonality, the sharing of
contractors other than those that built its original system. common parts across multiple variants, can create cost
As a result, the government loses it bargaining power, savings later in the life-cycle by enabling economies of scale
and contractors lose the incentive to control costs.32 and by allowing multiple systems to share O&S, testing, and
Open architectures, however, enable the government to training infrastructure.38 Despite the program’s mandate
compete contracts for system upgrades and, theoretically, to create three aircraft that were 70-90 percent common,
to get a better deal. The trick to implementing MOSA is the F-35 achieved only 20-25 percent commonality.39,40
incentivizing contractors—which benefit from vendor The DOD’s preference for prioritizing the services’ unique
lock-in during O&S—to design architectures that could performance requirements over an “-ilities” requirement
potentially reduce their life-cycle profits. contributed to the common design’s divergence and
ultimately to the program’s cost growth.41,42
With its plan to compete not only module contracts but
potentially platform and system integration contracts as Although the joint nature of the F-35 certainly exacerbated
well, the Digital Century Series’ proposed open architecture the DOD’s tendency to prioritize performance over “-ilities”
will be even trickier.33 The DOD rarely implements this requirements, the example still provides an important
degree of architectural openness; therefore, the USAF cautionary tale.43 When using digital engineering, the USAF
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 3

The USAF should also use digital process of integrating, producing, and testing new designs.
The USAF expects this process to be so efficient that one
engineering to explore life-cycle cost
squadron worth of planes will be produced in a single year.47
trade-offs, particularly between historic
By strictly adhering to this schedule, the USAF envisions
strategies that fielded large fleets that the Digital Century Series can shift contractor
incentives to favor its acquisition strategy. In this vision,
of common aircraft and the Digital
first, the program will reduce guaranteed O&S profits
Century Series’ alternative plan to field by shortening aircraft design life and by competitively
awarding contracts for each new design. Under such
smaller non-common fleets.
circumstances, contractors may be less incentivized to
develop the propriety “closed” designs that lock-in the
should recognize that no amount of M&S will diminish
DOD to the original manufacturer during O&S. Companies
its institutional tendency to prioritize performance over
may even find that “open” designs enhance their ability to
“-ilities” requirements. Instead, it should use its new M&S
compete for future contracts. Second, the USAF plans to
capabilities to more accurately assess trade-offs between
increase research and development (R&D) and procurement
performance and “-ilities” and to identify options where
profit potential by enlarging the fraction of program budget
those trade-offs are more institutionally palatable. Finally,
that is allocated to these activities.48 This may incentivize
the USAF should also use digital engineering to explore
contractors to prioritize innovation and efficiency during
life-cycle cost trade-offs, particularly between historic
R&D and production over providing prolonged support
strategies that fielded large fleets of common aircraft and
during O&S. In this way, the USAF intends for the Digital
the Digital Century Series’ alternative plan to field smaller
Century Series’ acquisition strategy to fundamentally shift
non-common fleets.
industrial base incentives away from sustaining old systems
and toward developing and delivering new ones.
BEYOND THE BUZZWORDS, A STRICT
ADHERENCE TO SCHEDULE
The USAF intends for the Digital
More significant than the DOD’s tendency to trade “-ilities”
Century Series’ acquisition strategy
for performance is its propensity to sacrifice schedule for
everything else. Schedule requirements, for example, are to fundamentally shift industrial base
not documented as early or as thoroughly as requirements
incentives away from sustaining old
for performance or cost.44 DOD program oversight, which
requires cost to be independently estimated and evaluated systems and toward developing and
during each milestone review, focuses predominately on
delivering new ones.
cost rather than on schedule.45 Congress does the same
with its Nunn-McCurdy Act, which defines thresholds for
The Digital Century Series’ schedule is critical to making and
cost growth, which, if exceeded by an acquisition program,
maintaining this shift. Contractor incentives may align with
trigger a detailed secretary of defense-level review to
the acquisition strategy only if the potential for a lucrative
restructure, reform, or cancel the program.46 Taken together,
contract remains only a few years away. This exists in the
these factors create a culture that focuses on performance
USAF’s proposal, where integrator, platform, and module
and cost rather than on executing programs according to
contractors compete for R&D funding every five years.
rapid, repeatable schedules.
Winners begin full-scale development and aim to transition
To move beyond the Digital Century Series’ buzzwords, new capabilities into production within five years. Losers
its program manager will need to do the opposite, since are awarded some lower level of R&D funding, both to fuel
the program’s rapid and repeatable schedule is what innovation that supports future competition and to sustain
creates the opportunity to finally overcome past barriers the industrial base. After five years, only capabilities that are
to implementation. The USAF envisions developing new fully mature are transitioned into production, a strategy that
designs every five years, making five years the length of the rewards successful companies with production contracts
program’s agile development sprints. Open architecture will and that prevents individual technologies from delaying
make it easier to incorporate capabilities that are developed the entire program’s schedule. As production begins on one
during each sprint, and digital engineering will optimize the variant, R&D begins on the next.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 4

This shift is fragile since the natural state of the industrial How much schedule speed, certainty, and repeatability are
base is one where companies profit significantly during required to execute the Digital Century Series’ acquisition
O&S. To counter that status quo, the Digital Century Series strategy also remains an open question. To further develop
will need to successfully implement agile development, its plan, the USAF should explore how sensitive its strategy
open architecture, and digital engineering, as well as is to competition frequency, design life, production
overcome past barriers to implementation by strictly frequency, contract type, contractor incentives, and
adhering to a rapid and repeatable schedule. Maintaining number of open interfaces per system. It should then assess
that schedule, though, will be costly. feasibility relative to industrial base capacity and the USAF’s
own acquisition and operational capabilities. Finally, it
THE COST OF SPEED
should assess the funding and stability required to maintain
As described above, there are opportunity costs when
the strategy’s rapid and repeatable schedule. Although
technology that is insufficiently mature is “left behind”
that schedule will likely be costly, the integration of agile
when a system transitions, on schedule, into production.
development, open architecture, and digital engineering
There are also R&D and production cost increases that,
shows potential. In the aftermath of the F-35 and F-22, those
despite the USAF’s best efforts, may not be recouped
potential benefits are—at the very least—worth exploring.
through O&S cost savings. Furthermore, O&S itself may cost
more, since small fleets cost more per aircraft than large
ones.49 There may also be a cost to design quality when—as
with the original Century Series—not every new design is Morgan Dwyer is a fellow in the International Security Program
worthy of production or operation. And finally, the Digital and deputy director for policy analysis in the Defense-Industrial
Century Series may also “cost” both the DOD and Congress Initiatives Group at the Center for International and Strategic
by reducing their budget flexibility. Studies (CSIS) in Washington, D.C.
Budget cuts usually lengthen program schedules. Similarly, This brief is made possible by general support to CSIS. No
managing programs according to constant, predictable direct sponsorship contributed to this report. The brief is based
schedules—particularly in the face of technological on discussions at the Air Force Association’s 2019 National
uncertainty—requires budget stability. How much budget and Convention. The concept and acquisition strategy described
stability are required to keep a program on schedule is still above are not attributed to the author, but commentary,
an open question. Pending an answer, the DOD and Congress analysis, and critique are.
should recognize that without some level funding stability,
the Digital Century Series’ schedule may slip. Absent a strict
adherence to schedule, contractor incentives may shift
back toward the status quo, and the program may lose the
momentum necessary to move beyond its buzzwords.
CSIS BRIEFS are produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a private, tax-exempt institution
focusing on international public policy issues. Its research is nonpartisan and nonproprietary. CSIS does not take specific
policy positions. Accordingly, all views, positions, and conclusions expressed in this publication should be understood to be
solely those of the author(s). © 2019 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
Cover Photo: LEE JIN-MAN/AFP via Getty Images
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 5

ENDNOTES
1. For example, see: Obaid Younossi et al., Lessons Learned from the F/A-22 20. GAO, Tactical Aircraft: Concurrency in Development and Production of F-22
and F/A-18E/F (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2005), xvii, https:// Aircraft Should be Reduced (Washington, DC: 1995), 
 gov/content/pkg/GAOREPORTS-NSIAD-95-59/html/GAOREPORTS-NSI-
2. For example, see: United States Government Accountability Office (GAO), AD-95-59.htm.
Report to Congressional Committees, F-35 Joint Strike Fighter: Development 21. GAO, Joint Strike Fighter: DoD Actions Needed to Further Enhance Restruc-
is Nearly Complete, but Deficiencies Found in Testing Need to Be Resolved turing and Address Affordability Risks (Washington, DC: 2012), 1, https://
(Washington, D.C.: 2018), 4, 
3. GAO, Comparison of F-22A and Legacy Fighter Modernization Programs 22. Freedberg, “A New Centurey Series?”
(Washington, DC, 2012), 5, 23. Hunter, Moore, and McQuade, Acquisition of Software-Defined Hard-
4. Mark A. Lorell et al., Do Joint Fighter Programs Save Money? (Santa ware-Based Adaptable Systems, 4-5.
Monica, CA: RAND, 2013), 28. 24. Ronald Fox, Defense Acquisition Reform, 1960-2009, An Elusive Goal
MG1225.html. (Washington, DC: Center for Military History, United States Army, 2011),
5. Gary Jones et al., “Investigation into the Ratio of Operating and Support 174, 
Costs to Life Cycle Costs for DoD Weapon Systems,” Defense Acquisition 3f2d-45bc-9c07-f5b056955e50.pdf.
Research Journal 21, no. 1 (): 449, 25. Frank Kendall, “Implementation Directive for Better Buying Power
tr/fulltext/u2/a600495.pdf. 2.0 – Achieving Greater Efficiency and Productivity in Defense Spending,”
6. Sydney J. Freedberg Jr., “A New Century Series? Will Roper Takes Air Force Department of Defense, April 24, 2013, 
Back to the Future,” Breaking Defense, April 12, 2019, tals/57/Documents/Attachment%209_BBP%202%20Implementation%20
fense.com/2019/04/a-new-century-series-will-roper-takes-air-force-back- Directive.pdf.
to-the-future/ 26. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2015, Pub. L. 113-291,
7. June Lee, “The Century Series,” Air Force Magazine, , http:// 113th Cong. (2014).
 27. Systems Engineering, Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of De-
April%202011/0411century.pdf. fense, “Modular Open Systems Approach,” Department of Defense, https://
8. Marcelle Size Knaack, Encyclopedia of U.S. Air Force Aircraft and Missile 
Systems: Volume 1 (Washington, DC: Office of Air Force History, 1978), 28. Ibid.
113-221, 
29. For example, see: Modular Open Systems Approach (CoP), “MOSA Suc-
AFD-100526-027.pdf.
cesses,” Defense Acquisition University,
9. Ibid.

10. Freedberg, “A New Century Series?”
30. Christopher Berardi and Bruce Cameron, “Intellectual Property and
11. Knaack, Encyclopedia of U.S. Air Force Aircraft and Missile Systems, 113-221. Architecture: New Research on How to Avoid Getting Locked In,” De-
12. L.L. Johnson, The Century Series Fighters: A Study in Research and Devel- fense Acquisition Research Journal 26, no. 1 (): 18, https://
opment (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 1960), 3, web.a.ebscohost.com/abstract?direct=true&profile=ehost&scope=site&-
dam/rand/pubs/research_memoranda/2006/RM2549.pdf. authtype=crawler&jrnl=21568391&AN=136595296&h=qKL0DTOx-
13. Theresa Hitchens, “Roper: Self-Flying Cars for Air Force Special 5eF5ZZBjjScqmp6BvO7pcdA61yb3nyOlgOTLB%2fqMSlyB5vuhCcRqt-
Ops!?” Breaking Defense, September 16, 2019, MMX3liyT0uzTXS%2bSxABUaHwyg%3d%3d&crl=c&resultNs=Ad-
com/2019/09/roper-self-flying-cars-for-air-force-special-ops/. minWebAuth&resultLocal=ErrCrlNotAuth&crlhashurl=login.
aspx%3fdirect%3dtrue%26profile%3dehost%26scope%3dsite%-
14. “What is Agile?” Agile Alliance, 
26authtype%3dcrawler%26jrnl%3d21568391%26AN%3d136595296.
15. For example, see: Andrew Hunter, Schuyler Moore, and Maura Mc-
31. For example, see: Richard Van Atta et al., Department of Defense Access
Quade, Acquisition of Software-Defined Hardware-Based Adaptable Systems
to Intellectual Property for Weapon Systems Sustainment (Alexandria, VA:
(Washington, DC: CSIS, 2019), 13-18, 
Institute for Defense Analyses, 2017), 
tion-software-defined-hardware-based-adaptable-systems.
u2/1038450.pdf.
16. Corrie Polland, “The Air Force is becoming more Agile – one project at
32. Virginia Wydler, Gaining Leverage over Vendor Lock to Improve Acquisition
a time,” Air Force Materiel Command, April 24, 2010, 
Performance and Cost Efficiencies (McLean, VA: MITRE Corporation, 2014),
af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/1823609/the-air-force-is-becoming-
3, 
more-agile-one-project-at-a-time/.
over-vendor-lock-14-1262.pdf.
17. For example, see: “Software Acquisition and Practices (SWAP) Study,”
33. Valerie Insinna, “The Air Force’s radical plan for a future fighter could
Defense Innovation Board, Department of Defense, 
field a jet in 5 years,” Defense News, September 16, 2019, 
defense.gov/software/.
defensenews.com/digital-show-dailies/2019/09/16/the-us-air-forces-radi-
18. Theresa Hitchens, “Roper Unveils PEO for Next Gen Digital Planes; Critics cal-plan-for-a-future-fighter-could-field-a-jet-in-5-years/.
Grumble,” Breaking Defense, October 3, 2019, 
34. Nickolas Guertin, “Emerging Opportunities in Modularity and Open
com/2019/10/roper-unveils-peo-for-next-gen-digital-planes-critics-grumble/.
Systems Architectures – First in a Series,” Carnegie Mellon University Soft-
19. For example, see: Congress of the United States Congressional Budget ware Engineering Institute, October 15, 2018, 
Office, Concurrent Weapons Development and Production (Washington, DC: sei_blog/2018/10/emerging-opportunities-in-modularity-and-open-sys-
Congressional Budget Office, ), tems-architectures.html.
fault/files/100th-congress-1987-1988/reports/doc08b-entire.pdf.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 6

35. Insinna, “The Air Force’s radical plan for a future fighter could field a jet
in 5 years.”
36. Oliver deWeck, Daniel Roos, and Christopher Magee, Engineering Sys-
tems: Meeting Human Needs in a Complex Technology World (Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press, 2011), 65-96.
37. Jeremiah Gertler, F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program (Washington, DC:
Congressional Research Service, 2018), 1, 
RL30563.pdf.
38. For example, see: John Dillard et al., “The Costs of Commonality:
Examination of the JLTV as a Case Study,” Acquisition Research Program
Sponsored Report Series, Naval Post-Graduate School, July 15, 2016, 5-7,

ity-Examination-of-the-JLTV-as-a-Case-Study.pdf
39. Gertler, F-35 Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program, 1.
40. John Tirpak, “All For One and All for All,” Air Force Magazine, March 14,
2016, 
2016/March%2014%202016/All-For-One-and-All-for-All.aspx.
41. Ibid.
42. Lorell et al., Do Joint Fighter Programs Save Money? 17-20.
43. For example, see: Morgan Dwyer, “Examining Increased Costs Asso-
ciated with Joint Government Programs,” Science Trends, February 19,
2019, 
ed-with-joint-government-programs/.
44. Richard Van Atta et al., Assessing Weapon System Acquisition Cycle Times,
Setting Program Schedules (Alexandria, VA: Institute for Defense Analyses,
2015), iv-v, 
45. David Tate, Acquisition Cycle Time: Defining the Problem (Revised) (Alex-
andria, VA: Institute for Defense Analyses, 2016), 6, 
media/feature/publications/a/ac/acquisition-cycle-time-defining-the-prob-
lem-revised/d-5762.ashx.
46. 10 U.S. Code § 2433 and 2433a, 
text/10/2433.
47. Insinna, “The Air Force’s radical plan for a future fighter could field a jet
in 5 years.”
48. Ibid.
49. MITRE Corporation, U.S. Air Force Aircraft Inventory Study Executive
Summary (McLean, VA: ), 5-6, 
DocumentFile/Documents/2019/MITRE-USAF-Aircraft-Inventory-Study.pdf.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 7