Chapter 1:
The Legal Framework

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

What do Constitutions defi ne?
Argentina (1853, Last reform 1994)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: No reference.
Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces (Sec.99, sub. 12).
Declare war with the approval of Congress (Sec. 99, sub. 15) and the state of
siege in case of external attacks, for a limited period of time, with the approval
of the Senate (Sec. 99, sub. 16).
Appoint senior offi cers with the approval of the Senate (Sec. 99, sub. 13).
Arrange, organize and deploy the Armed Forces (Sec. 99, sub. 14)
Powers of Congress:
Approve the declaration of war (Sec. 75, sub. 25) and the declaration of state of
siege in case of external attacks (Sec. 61).
Authorize the president to make peace (Sec. 75, sub. 25).
Authorize the entry of foreign troops to the national territory and allow the de-
ployment of national troops outside the country (Sec. 75, sub. 28).
Establish the Armed Forces (Sec. 75, sub. 27).
The Chamber of Deputies has the law-making initiative on raising revenues and
the recruitment of troops (Sec. 52).
Organize and govern the Armed Forces (Sec. 75, sub. 27).
Levy direct taxes for a certain amount of time, in all the territory of the Nation,
as long as the defence, common security and State general welfare policies so
require (Sec. 75, sub. 2).
Approve or dismiss treaties entered into with other nations and with international
organizations, as well as the concordats with the Holy See (Sec. 75, sub. 22).
Bolivia (2008)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces:
Provide the security and defence of the Nation (Sec. 172, sub. 16). They are composed of the Command-in-Chief, the Bolivian Army, Air Force and
Appoint and dismiss the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces and the Navy (Sec. 243).
Chiefs of the Army, the Air Force and Navy. (Sec. 172, sub. 17). Mission: defend and maintain national independence, security and stability of
Recommend to the Plurinational Legislative Assembly the promotions to Army the State and the national honor and sovereignty; secure the rule of the Political
General, Air Force General, Major General and Brigadier General; Admiral, Constitution, guarantee the stability of the legally-established Government and
Vice-Admiral and Rear-Admiral (Sec. 172, sub. 19). participate in the overall development of the country (Sec.244).
Exercise the powers as Capitán General (Commander) of the Armed Forces and Organization: Relying on hierarchy and discipline principles. The Armed Forc-
make use of them for the defence of the State, its independence and territorial es are to be obedient, non-deliberating, and subject to the laws and military
integrity (Sec. 172, sub. 25). regulations. As an institutional body, the Armed Forces shall not carry out any
The Executive shall have direct access to information on budgeted and execut- political action; individually, the members of the Armed Forces are entitled to
ed expenses of the Armed Forces through the appropriate Ministry (Sec. 321, exercise their citizen rights under the terms established by Law (Sec. 245). Ac-
sub. 5). tive members of the Armed Forces shall not be eligible for public offi ce at
elections, unless they have previously resigned at least three months before the
Powers of the Plurinational Legislative Assembly1 : election day (Sec. 238, sub. 4).
Approve the entry of foreign troops to the national territory and the deploy- The Armed Forces report to the President of the Nation and follow his/her or-
ment of national troops outside the country (Sec. 158, sub. 1, 21 and 22). ders on administrative matters, through the Minister of Defence and, on techni-
Approve in each legislature the military strength to be maintained in times of cal matters, through the Commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces (Sec. 246,
peace (Sec. 159, sub.10). sub. 1).
Ratify promotions proposed by the Executive to Army General, Air Force Gen- In the case of war, operations shall be headed by the Commander-in-Chief of
eral, Major General and Brigadier General; Admiral, Vice-Admiral, Rear-Admiral the Armed Forces. (Sec. 246, sub. 2).
and Bolivian Police General (Sec. 160, sub. 8). No foreign citizen shall be appointed to any command or administrative posi-
tion in the Armed Forces without prior authorization by the Capitán General of
Supreme Defence Council of the Plurinational State : the Armed Forces (Sec. 247, sub. 1).
Makeup, organization and powers established by law, presided over by the Promotions in the Armed Forces shall be determined by law (Sec. 250).
Capitán General of the Armed Forces (Sec. 248). In case of international war, the Bolivian Police Force shall report to the Com-
mand-in-chief of the Armed Forces for the duration of the confl ict (Sec. 254).
The Armed Forces’ fundamental duty is to secure the defence, security and con-
trol of the border security areas. The Armed Forces shall participate in overall
sustainable development policies for these areas and shall ensure their perma-
nent physical presence there (Sec. 263).
Brazil (1988. Last reform 2016)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces:
Initiate laws, on its own, to establish or modify the number of regular military The Armed Forces are a national permanent, regular and non-political institu-
members, rule over members of the military, their justice system, promotions, tion, organized on the bases of hierarchy and discipline They are composed of
stability, assignment of positions, remuneration, reform, and transfer to the the Navy, the Army and the Air Force (Sec. 142).
reserve (Sec. 61, sub. 1). Mission: defend the Motherland and guarantee constitutional powers as well
Order the state of defence and state of siege (Sec. 84, sub. 9). as, on the latter initiative, law and order (Sec.142).
Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces (Sec 84, sub. 13). Service member incorporation, age limits, rights, obligations, remuneration,
Appoint the Chiefs of the Armed Forces, and promote general offi cers (Sec. prerogatives and other special situations of military members, given the nature
84, sub. 13). of their activities, including duties under international commitments and war
Convene and preside over meetings of the Council of the Republic and the shall all be determined by law (Sec.142).
National Defence Council (Sec. 84, sub. 18). The members of the military on active duty are not entitled to join labor unions
Declare war with the approval of the Congress, in the event of a foreign ag- or go on strike; neither can they join a political party (Sec. 142, sub. 4); they
gression (Sec. 84, sub. 19). shall not be candidates at elections (Sec. 14, sub. 8), habeas corpus does not
Make peace, with the approval of the Congress (Sec. 84, sub. 20). apply to military disciplinary punishment (Sec. 142, sub. 2).
Allow the entry of foreign troops (Sec. 84, sub. 22). Military service is compulsory in accordance with the law (Sec. 143).
Military justice: it shall be incumbent upon the Military Courts to try and judge
1Asamblea Legislativa Plurinacional.
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 1: The Legal Framework

Powers of the Congress: military crimes defi ned by law. Military justice organization, operation and com-
Determine and modify the strength of the Armed Forces (Sec. 48, sub. 3). petence shall be determined by law (Sec. 124).
Authorize the President to declare war, make peace and approve the deploy-
ment of troops (Sec. 49, sub. 2).
Approve the state of defence and federal intervention (Sec. 49, sub. 4).
Council of the Republic2:
It is the President’s higher consultation body (Sec. 90).
Expresses position on federal intervention, state of war and state of siege (Sec.
90, sub. 1).
National Defence Council3:
It is the President’s consultation body on issues related to national sovereignty
and the defence of the democratic State (Sec. 91).
Expresses its position on war declaration and peace settlement (Sec. 91, sub.
1); declaration of the state of defence, state of siege and federal intervention
(Sec. 91, sub. 2).
Proposes the criteria and conditions for the use of areas which are key to the
security of the national territory, and expresses opinion on its effective use,
especially on border zones and those associated with the preservation and ex-
ploitation of natural resources of any kind (Sec. 91, sub. 3).
Chile (1980. Last reform 2015)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces:
Maintain external security (Sec. 24).
Composed of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force (Sec. 101).
Appoint and remove the Commanders-in-Chief of the Army, the Navy and the Air
Force (Sec. 32, sub. 16; Sec. 105). Mission: defend the Motherland (Sec. 101); safeguard the public order during
Appoint, promote and remove offi cers (Sec. 32, sub. 16). elections (Sec. 18).
Arrange, organize and deploy the Armed Forces depending on national security The members of the military on active duty cannot be elected Deputies or Sena-
needs (Sec. 32, sub. 17). tors unless they resign and retire during the year preceding the election (Sec. 57,
Supreme Chief of the Armed Forces in times of war (Sec. 32, sub. 18). Declare sub. 10).
war once the pertinent law has been adopted, and after hearing the National Depend on the National Ministry of Defence, they are essential to the national
Defence Council (Sec. 32, sub. 19). security, they are obedient, non deliberant, professional and disciplined, and fol-
Order payments not authorized by law to meet the pressing needs derived from low a hierarchical order (Sec. 101).
external aggressions, internal confl ict and serious harm or danger to national Incorporation to the Armed Forces is performed through their own schools, ex-
security (Sec. 32, sub. 20). Declare the state of assembly in case of external war,
cept in the case of professional scales and civilian personnel (Sec. 102).
with the approval of the National Congress (Sec. 40).
The President has the legal initiative to establish the air, land and sea forces, and Obligatory military service (Sec. 22).
the ones for the entry and deployment of troops (Sec. 65; Sec. 63, sub. 13). Appointments, promotions, retirement of offi cers, ranks, incorporation, social
security, seniority, command succession and budget are determined by constitu-
Powers of Congress: tional organic law (Sec. 105).
Indict (only Representatives) and judge (only Senators) Generals and Admirals The right to a legal defence, in the administrative and disciplinary spheres, shall
(Sec. 52, sub. 2, d; Sec. 53, sub. 1). be governed by the relevant regulations of the respective bylaws (Sec. 19, sub 3).
Approve or dismiss international treaties introduced by the President in order to
be ratifi ed (Sec. 54, sub. 1).
The Chamber of Deputies (Lower House) has the lawmaking initiative regarding
recruitment matters (Sec. 65).
National Security Council4:
Advise the President on national security (Sec. 106).
Powers of the President: The Military Forces6:
Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces (Sec. 189, sub. 3). The Military Forces comprise the Army, the Navy and the Air Force (Sec. 217).
Conducts operations when deemed necessary (Sec. 189, sub. 5). Mission: defend the sovereignty, independence, integrity of the nation’s terri-
Provide to external security (Sec. 189, sub. 6). tory and constitutional order (Sec. 217).
Declare war with the approval of the Senate, except in case of foreign aggres- The members of the military on active duty are not entitled to join labor unions
sion and accord peace, informing Congress (Sec. 189, sub. 6). (Sec. 39), vote, make petitions except on issues related to their service, or to
Allow, when the Senate is in recess, with the approval of the State Council, the participate in political activities and debates (Sec. 219). The Commanders of
transit of foreign troops through the territory of the Republic (Sec. 189, sub. 7). the Military Forces cannot be elected President before one year following their
previous position (Sec. 197).
Powers of Congress: In case of a manifest violation of a constitutional rule to the disadvantage of
Dictate general rules with objectives and criteria to establish wage levels and any person, the responsibility shall fall exclusively on the superior who has is-
social benefi ts for the military (Sec. 150, sub. 19, e). sued the order (Sec. 91).
Approve the appointment of senior offi cers (Sec. 173, sub. 2). Professional, cultural and social promotion systems for members of the public
Approve the entry of foreign troops (Sec. 173, sub. 4). Approve the declaration force shall be determined by law. The fundamentals of democracy and human
of war (Sec. 173, sub. 5). rights shall be taught during the professional training phase (Sec. 222).
Military justice for military crimes (Sec. 221, Sec. 250), civilians may not be tried
State Council5: by the Martial Law (Sec. 213).
Act as the supreme advisory body of the Government in administration matters.
In case of foreign troops’ transit through the national territory, and of stay or
transit of foreign warships or combat aircraft in national waters or airspace, the
government shall fi rst take the advice of the State Council (Sec. 237, sub. 3).
Powers or the Legislative Assembly The Army is abolished as a permanent institution. The police forces necessary
Approve or dismiss international agreements, public treaties and concordats. for the monitoring and maintenance of public order are provided for.
Public treaties and international agreements that assign or transfer certain The organization of military forces will be only permitted through continental
powers to a community legal order in order to achieve regional and common agreement or for the purpose of national defence; in either case they shall
objectives require the approval of the Legislative Assembly, through a vote of always be subordinate to the civil power: they may not deliberate or make
no less than two-thirds of its members. statements or representations individually or collectively (Sec. 12).
2 Conselho da República.
3 Conselho de Defesa Nacional.
4 Consejo de Seguridad Nacional.
5Consejo de Estado.
6 Denomination used in the constitutional text.
lizarB
Colombia (1991. Last reform 2015)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Costa Rica (1949, Last reform 2015)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

Protocols of lesser range derived from public treaties or international agreements Serving members of the military cannot be elected as deputies or run as candi-
approved by the Assembly do not require legislative approval when such instru- dates. (Sec. 109, sub. 5)
ments expressly authorize such derivation.
Approve or disapprove the entry of foreign troops onto national territory and
permission for warships or planes to stay at ports and airfi elds.
Authorize the Executive to declare a state of national defence and to make peace.
(Sec. 121, sub. 4,5 and 6)
Powers of the President:
Supreme Commander of the Public Forces (Sec. 139, sub. 3)
The following are duties and powers that correspond jointly to the President
and respective Government Minister: Appoint and remove members of the
Public Force, employees and offi cials who hold positions of trust, and others
determined, in very specifi c cases, by the Civil Service Law.
Maintain the order and peace of the Nation; take the necessary measures to
safeguard public freedoms.
Preside over the Republic’s international relations.
Employ the Public Force to maintain the country’s order, defence and security.
Government Council:
Composed of the President of the Republic and Ministers, it is under the primary
authority of the Presidency and exercises the following function: request the Leg-
islature to declare a state of national defence and authorization to decree military
recruitment, organize the army, and negotiate peace (Sec. 147, sub. 1).
Cuba (1976. Last reform 1992)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the National Assembly of People’s Power7: Revolutionary Armed Forces12:
Approve the general foreign and domestic policy guidelines (Sec. 75, sub. h). The members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces and other armed organiza-
Declare the state of war in case of military aggression and approve peace trea- tions have the right to vote and be elected as any Cuban citizen (Sec. 134).
ties (Sec. 75, sub. i).
Powers of the State Council8:
Decree general mobilization when required for the defence of the country and
assume the powers assigned to the National Assembly by the Constitution to
declare war in case of aggression or make peace, when this Assembly is in
recess or cannot be summoned with the necessary celerity and security condi-
tions. (Sec. 90, sub. f).
Powers of the President of the State Council and Head of State:
Preside over the National Defence Council (Sec. 93, sub. h).
Powers of the Council of Ministers9:
Provide for national defence, maintenance of internal order and security, and the
protection of human life and assets in case of natural disasters. (Sec. 98, sub. ch).
National Defence Council10:
Convened and prepared in times of peace to lead the country under state-of-war
conditions, during war, general mobilization or state of emergency. (Sec. 101).
Local Bodies of the People’s Power11 :
The Province and Municipal Assemblies of the People’s Power are responsible for
reinforcing the defensive capacity of the country (Sec. 105 and Sec. 106, sub. m).
The Defence Councils of the Provinces, Municipalities and Defence Zones are
created and prepared in times of peace to lead their respective territories in a
state of war, during the war, general mobilization or state of emergency, based
on a general defence plan and the role and responsibilities of the army’s military
councils (Sec. 119).
Dominican Republic (2010. Last reform 2013)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces:
Direct foreign and domestic policies and conduct civilian and military adminis- The Armed Forces are responsible for the Nation’s defence (Sec. 252).
tration. Supreme authority of the Armed Forces (Sec. 128). Their mission is to defend the independence and sovereignty of the Nation, the
Appoint or dismiss members of the military jurisdiction (Sec. 128, sub. 1, c). integrity of its geographical spaces, the Constitution and the institutions of the
Enter into and sign international treaties or conventions and submit them for Republic (Sec. 252, sub. 1).
approval to the National Congress (Sec. 128, sub. 1, d). Their nature shall be essentially defensive (Sec. 259).
Decide on all issues related to the Armed Forces; lead the Armed forces directly They shall intervene, as ordered by the President of the Republic, in programs in-
or through the relevant ministry, always maintaining the supreme command tended to promote the social and economic development of the country, mitigate
thereof. Establish their strength and make use of the Armed forces to perform disasters or public catastrophe situations, and provide assistance to the National
public service duties (Sec. 128, sub. 1, e). Police to maintain or restore public order in exceptional cases (Sec. 252, sub. 2).
Take the necessary measures to provide and ensure the legitimate defence of They are essentially obedient to the civil power, are not affi liated to any political
the Nation, while informing the National Congress of any rules adopted (Sec. party and are not entitled to deliberate under any circumstance (Sec. 252, sub. 3).
128, sub. 1, f). Declare the states of exception if the National Congress were The members of the military on active duty cannot run for President or Vice-
not in session (Sec. 128, sub. 1, g). President unless they have retired at least three years before the election (Sec.
Decide on anything related to the military zones (Sec. 128, sub. 1, i). 123, sub. 4).
The Armed Forces shall be responsible for the custody, supervision and control
Powers of the Congress: of all weapons, ammunitions and other military supplies, as well as war mate-
Authorize (Senate) the presence of foreign troops to perform military exercises rial and equipment, entering the country or produced by the national industry,
in the territory of the Republic, under the request of the President of the Re- subject to the restrictions established by law (Sec. 252).
public, provided there is no previous agreement (Sec. 80, sub. 6), and approve No discrimination shall be exerted in the admission, appointment, promotion
and disapprove the deployment of national troops outside the country in peace and retirement of Armed Forces members, in accordance with their organic law
missions authorized by international organizations (Sec. 80, sub. 7). and other complementary laws (Sec. 253).
7 Asamblea Nacional del Poder Popular.
8 Consejo de Estado.
9 Consejo de Ministros.
10 Consejjo de Defensa Nacional.
11 Órganos locales del poder Popular.
12Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD
aciR
atsoC

Chapter 1: The Legal Framework

Declare the state of national defence (Sec. 93, sub. 1, f). The military jurisdiction shall only have competence to try military infractions
Determine, under the request of the President of the Republic, the creation determined by the relevant laws. The Armed Forces shall have a military disci-
of permanent public security or defence corps composed of members of the pline regime applicable to those offenses that do not constitute an infraction
Armed Forces and the National Police, subordinated to the ministry or institu- under the military criminal justice system (Sec. 254).
tion of the sphere of their respective competences in accordance with the law
(Sec. 261).
National Security and Defence Council13:
Advise the President of the Republic on the design of national security and
defence policies and strategies and on any other matter requested by the Presi-
dent. The Executive shall regulate its make-up and operation (Sec. 258).
Ecuador (2008. Last reform 2015)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: Armed Forces:
Exercise the highest authority of the Armed Forces and appoint the military Mission: defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity and, in a complementary
senior staff (Sec. 147, sub. 16). manner, support the integral security of the State according to the provisions of the
Assume the political direction of the national defence (Sec. 147, sub. 17). existing laws (Sec. 158).
Decree the state of exception in all or part of the national territory in case of ag- The Armed Forces and the National Police are institutions designed to protect citizens’
gression, international or internal armed confl ict, grave internal unrest, public human rights, liberties and guarantees. The members of the Armed Forces shall be
catastrophe or natural disaster (Sec. 164). trained in accordance with the fundamental principles of democracy and human
Once the state of exception is declared, the President shall be entitled to make rights, and shall respect the dignity and rights of the people (Sec. 158).
use of the Armed Forces and the National Police and summon the whole or They shall be obedient and non-deliberating and shall comply with their mission un-
part of the reserved forces, as well as personnel of other institutions, for active der strict observance of the civilian control and the Consitution. The Armed Forces
service (Sec. 165, sub. 6). senior leadership shall be responsible for their orders. Obedience to orders issued by
senior offi cers of the Armed Forces shall not relieve subordinates from their respon-
Powers of the National Assembly14: sibility (Sec.159).
Approve or reject international treaties when appropriate (Sec. 120, sub. 8). Voting shall not be compulsory for members of the Armed Forces (Sec. 62, sub. 2).
The ratifi cation or rejection of international treaties shall require prior approval Members of the force on active duty cannot be candidates for elections subject to
of the National Assembly if: 1. They are related to territorial or border matters. popular vote nor ministers of State (Sec. 113, sub. 8 and Sec. 152, sub. 3).
2. They establish any political or military alliance (Sec. 419). The recruitment of candidates to the armed forces shall not be based on discrimination.
The members of the Armed Forces shall be subject to the specifi c laws regulating their
rights and obligations, as well as their system of promotions based on merit and gender
equality criteria. Their stability and professionalization shall be guaranteed (Sec. 160).
Civil and military service is voluntary and shall be carried out under the respect of
citizens’ rights and diversity. All kinds of forced recruitment are forbidden (Sec. 161).
The Armed Forces shall only be allowed to participate in economic activities related
to the national defence and shall provide their resources to support national devel-
opment in accordance with the law. Their reserves shall be organized based on the
needs for the compliance of their duties. The State shall allocate the necessary re-
sources for their equipment, training and education (Sec. 162).
Military barracks are not places authorized for the custody of civil population (Sec.
203, sub. 1).
The members of the Armed Forces shall make a sworn statement of their assets prior
to any promotion or retirement (Sec. 231).
The Armed Forces shall have a special social security regime in accordance with the
law; their social security entities shall form part of the integral public health network
and the social security system (Sec. 370).
Disciplinary arrests of military members shall be conducted in accordance with the
law (Sec. 77).
The members of the Armed Forces shall be tried by the Judiciary Branch bodies; in
the case of crimes committed while at a specifi c mission, they shall be tried by courts
specialized in military matters, which form part of the same Judiciary Branch. Disci-
plinary offenses shall be tried by the competent bodies established by law (Sec. 160).
Under the principle of jurisdictional unit, Armed Force members shall be tried by the
ordinary justice system (Sec. 188).
Powers of the President: The Armed Force17:
General Commander of the Armed Force (Sec. 157). It is a permanent institution at the service of the Nation. It is obedient, profes-
Maintain intact the sovereignty and integrity of the territory (Sec. 168, sub. 2). sional, apolitical and non-deliberating (Sec. 211).
Sign treaties and international concordats, subjecting them to the Legislative Its mission is to defend the sovereignty of the State and the integrity of the
Assembly (Sec. 168, sub. 4). territory. The main government branches, the Legislative, the Executive and the
Report on what the Assembly requires, except in the case of secret military
Judiciary, may use the Armed Forces to enforce any resolutions adopted within
plans (Sec. 168, sub. 7).
Organize, maintain and arrange the Armed Forces, confer military ranks in ac- their respective jurisdictions, to ensure full compliance with the Constitution. The
cordance with the law (Sec. 168, sub. 11). Armed Force shall cooperate with efforts of public benefi t assigned by the Execu-
Summon the Armed Force for the defence of national sovereignty and excep- tive Power and shall help the people in case of a national disaster (Sec. 212).
tionally, if no other means rest for the maintenance of internal peace, for the The Armed Force is obliged to cooperate with the special commissions of the
public security and tranquillity of the State (Sec. 168, sub. 12). Legislative Assembly (Sec. 132).
Direct war and accord peace treaties with the approval of the Assembly (Sec. It is part of the Executive branch and it is subordinated to the authority of the
168, sub. 13). President as General Commander in chief. Its structure, legal system, doctrine,
Determine the number of active troops of the Armed Forces on an annual basis organization and operation are determined by law, rules and special regulations
(Sec. 168, sub.19). the President adopts (Sec. 213).
Powers of the Legislative Assembly15: The military professional career and promotions are strictly based on rank and
In case of invasion, legally declared war or public calamity, the Assembly shall impose ob- in accordance with the law (Sec. 214).
ligatory loans if ordinary public taxes are not enough to cover the costs (Sec. 131, sub. 6). Military service is obligatory (Sec. 215).
Declare war and ratify peace (Sec. 135, sub. 25). The members of the military on active duty cannot be part of any political party,
Approve or dismiss the transit of foreign troops on the national territory, (Sec. or be candidates for elections. They can only be elected President three years after
135, sub. 29). they retire (Sec. 82; Sec. 127; Sec. 152). They have no right to unionize. (Sec. 47).
Executive Body on the Branch of Defence and Public Security16: Military justice jurisdiction: purely military crimes and offenses (Sec. 216).
Determine the number of troops annually according to the needs of the service
(Sec. 213).
13Consejo de Seguridad y Defensa Nacional.
14Asamblea Nacional
155Asamblea Leggislativa.
16Órgano Ejecutivo en el Ramo de Defensa y Seguridad Pública.
17Denomination used in the constitutional text.
cilbupeR
nacinimoD
El Salvador (1983, Last reform 2014)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

Guatemala (1985, Last reform 1993)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Army18:
General Commander of the Army (Sec. 182, 183 and 246). Give orders via the It is unique and indivisible, essentially professional, apolitical, obedient and non
general offi cer or colonel or his equivalent at the Navy, who serves as Minister deliberant. It is composed of the land, air and maritime forces. Organization:
of National Defence (Sec. 246). hierarchy, based on the principles of discipline and obedience (Sec. 244). It is
Provide for the defence and security of the Nation (Sec. 183, sub. b). regulated by the Constitution, its Statutory Law and other military laws and
Confer promotions, decorations, military honors and extraordinary pensions regulations (Sec. 250).
(Sec. 246, sub. b). They are not obliged to carry out illegal orders or those which involve commit-
Decree the mobilization and demobilization of troops (Sec. 246 sub. a). ting a crime (Sec. 156).
Mission: maintain independence, sovereignty and the honor of Guatemala, the
Powers of the Congress: integrity of the territory and internal and external peace and security (Sec. 244);
Declare war and sign peace treaties (Sec. 171, sub. f). cooperate in emergency situations or public calamity (Sec. 249).
Approve the transit of foreign troops on the national territory and the sojourn To be an offi cer it is required to be a native Guatemalan citizen and not have
of foreign military (Sec. 172, sub. a). adopted any foreign nationality at any time (Sec. 247).
Approve treaties which affect or may affect the security of the State or con- The members of the military on active duty cannot be elected Deputies (Sec.
clude a state of war (Sec. 172, sub. b). 164, sub. f) or President, only if they were discharged or retired fi ve years be-
The Army depends on the Congress if the President continues in the position fore taking offi ce (Sec. 186, sub. e), they are not entitled to vote or to make
once the constitutional period has come to an end and is not recognized by the political or collective petitions (Sec. 248).
Congress (Sec. 165, sub. g). The military courts shall acknowledge the crimes or offenses committed by the
The ministers of State are not obliged to come forward to the Congress to members of the Guatemalan Army (Sec. 219).
answer questions related to diplomatic issues or pending military operations
(Sec. 166).
Haiti (1987)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces
Guarantor of the independence and territorial integrity of the Nation (Sec. The “Public Forces” are composed of two distinct bodies: a. The Armed Forces
138). Head of the Armed Forces, although never commands them in person of Haiti, and b. The Police Forces. No other armed body may exist in the na-
(Sec. 143). tional territory. All members of the police and armed forces shall take an oath
Negotiates and signs international treaties, conventions and agreements and of loyalty and respect for the Constitution and the fl ag at the time of their
presents them to the National Assembly for ratifi cation (Sec. 139). enlistment (Sec. 263, sub. 1 and 2).
Declare war, and negotiate and sign peace treaties with the approval of the The Armed Forces of Haiti were created to guarantee the security and territorial
National Assembly (Sec.140). integrity of the Republic (Sec. 264).
With the approval of the Senate, the President appoints, by decree issued by The functions of the Armed Forces are: a. to defend the country in case of war;
the Council of Ministers, the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces and b. protect the country against any foreign threats; c. ensure the surveillance of
Commander in Chief of the Police (Sec. 141). land, sea and air borders; d. to assist the police at the request of the Executive
when the former is unable to handle the situation; e. assist the Nation in the
Powers of the Prime Minister: event of a natural disaster; f. in addition to their regular duties, the Armed
Together with the President of the Republic, is responsible for national defence Forces may be assigned to development work (Sec. 266).
(Sec. 159, sub. 1). They are apolitical. Members cannot be part of any political group or party,
and must demonstrate the strictest neutrality. Members of the Armed Forces
Powers of the National Assembly19: exercise their right to vote under the Constitution (Sec. 265).
Ratify any decision to declare war, when all efforts at conciliation have failed; Military personnel on active service may not be appointed to any public offi ce,
approve or reject international treaties and agreements. Decide when a state except temporarily for the provision of specialized services. To be a candidate
of siege should be declared, and, together with the Executive, order the sus- for elected offi ce, military personnel on active service must be inactive or retired
pension of constitutional guarantees and decide on any request to renew this one year prior to the publication of the electoral decree. The military career is
measure (Sec. 98, sub.3). a profession. Its hierarchical structure, conditions of enlistment, ranks, promo-
tions, demotions, and removals are determined by the regulations of the Armed
Forces. Military personnel are under the jurisdiction of a military court only for
offenses and crimes committed in wartime or for disciplinary violations. They
cannot be dismissed, placed on inactive service, placed on half pay, or removed
prematurely without their consent. If such consent is not given, the individual
may appeal to the relevant court authority. The state must provide benefi ts to
military personnel of all ranks, fully guaranteeing their physical security (Sec.
267).
In the framework of compulsory civilian service for both sexes, the Armed
Forces are involved in the organization and supervision of this service. Military
service is compulsory for all Haitians over the age of eighteen years. The law
provides for the procurement procedure, duration and regulations for the im-
plementation of these services (Sec. 268).
Honduras (1982, Last reform 2014)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces:
General Commander of the Armed Forces, exercises the Command-in-Chief They are permanent, apolitical, professional, obedient and non deliberant (Sec. 272).
(Sec. 245, sub. 16; Sec. 277). They are composed of the High Command, the Army, the Air Force, the Navy,
Maintain the peace and external security; repel external attacks or aggression the Public Security Force and other organizations determined by the Statutory
(Sec. 245, sub. 4), adopt measures for the defence of the Republic (Sec. 245, Law (Sec. 273).
sub. 16). Their operation is regulated by the Statutory Law, laws and regulations (Sec. 274).
Declare war and make peace if the Congress is in recess (Sec. 245, sub. 17). The orders given by the President of the Republic shall be abided by and ex-
Sign international treaties and agreements of a military nature, regarding the ecuted respecting the Constitution of the Republic and the principles of lawful-
territory and sovereignty with the consent of the Congress (Sec. 245, sub. 13). ness, discipline and military professionalism (Sec. 278).
Allow the transit of foreign troops on the national territory and the deployment The members of the military are not obliged to carry out illegal orders or those
of national troops outside the country with the approval of the Congress (Sec. that involve committing a crime (Sec. 323).
245, sub. 43 and 44). They are instituted to defend the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the
Confer military ranks (second lieutenant to captain) suggested by the Secretary Republic, maintain the peace, public order and the rule of the Constitution,
of National Defence (Sec. 245, sub. 36; Sec. 290). the principles of free suffrage and alternation of the Presidency of the Republic
Ensure that the Armed Forces are apolitical, essentially professional, obedient (Sec. 272), cooperate with the National Police in the maintenance of public
and non deliberant (Sec. 245, sub. 37). order (Sec. 272); and with State Secretariats, municipalities and other institu-
tions, at their or the President’s request, in public security, literacy, education,
agriculture, environmental protection, transport, communications, health and
18Denomination used in the constitutional text.
19Denomination used in the constitutional text
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 1: The Legal Framework

Powers of the Congress: land reform. Guidelines emanating directly from the President are also func-
Declare war (Sec. 205, sub. 28). tions and duties of the Military Police of Public Order.
Make peace (Sec. 205, sub. 28). They participate in international peacekeeping missions; provide logistical and
Confer military ranks (from major to general) suggested by the Executive Power technical support in communications and transport; in the fi ght against drug traf-
(Sec. 205, sub. 24; Sec. 290). fi cking; collaborate through the provision of personnel and resources in response
Approve the entry of foreign troops to the national territory and the deployment to natural disasters and emergency situations; as well as in programs to protect
of national troops outside the country (Sec. 205, sub. 26 and 27). and conserve the ecosystem, in the academic education and technical training of
Determine the number of permanent troops (Sec. 205, sub. 25). its members and others in the national interest. Cooperate with public security
Authorize reception of foreign military missions of assistance or technical coop- institutions at the request of the Security Secretariat, to combat terrorism, arms
eration in Honduras (Sec. 205, sub. 29). traffi cking and organized crime, as well as in the protection of the powers of
the State and the Electoral Tribunal, at their request, for their installation and
Secretary of State in the National Defence Dispatch20: operation.
The Secretary shall be appointed and removed freely by the President of the The Military Police of Public Order (MPOP) form part of the Armed Forces, and
Republic (Sec. 280). their duties and obligations are set out in their Special Law. Municipalities, ar-
eas under the special regime of Employment and Economic Development Zones
National Defence and Security Council21: (EEDZ), and other State agencies may, in special circumstances, request the Presi-
Creation (Sec. 287). dent of the Republic to order the Armed Forces to participate in public security
Organization and operation determined by law (Sec. 287). and crime reduction tasks through the Military Police of Public Order or other
bodies (Sec. 274).
Board of Commanders of the Armed Forces22: Promotions strictly determined by law (Sec. 290).
It is the consulting body for all the matters related to the Armed Forces. It rules Appointments and removal of the members of the military, related with the ad-
over issues of its competence and acts as a Superior tribunal of the Armed Forces ministrative order, shall be granted in accordance with the Law of Public Admin-
on matters which shall be subject to its knowledge. The Statutory Law of the istration. In the operative area, appointments and removals shall be conferred by
Armed Forces and its Regulations rule over its operation (Sec. 285). the Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff, in accordance with the organic structure
It is composed of the Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff, the General Inspector of the Armed Forces, the Statutory Law, and other legal regulations, including the
and the Commanders of each Force (Sec. 286). personnel of troops and auxiliaries (Sec. 282).
Voluntary military service (Sec. 276 and 288).
Joint Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces23: The members of the military on active duty are not entitled to vote (Sec. 37), and
The Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff is selected and removed freely by the they shall be eligible in the cases not prohibited by the law (Sec. 37). They cannot
President among the members of the Board of Commanders (Sec. 280). be elected Deputies prior to six months after they retire (Sec. 199, sub. 4 and 6) or
The Joint Chiefs of Staff is the superior technical body of consultation, planning, twelve months in case they are running for President (Sec. 240, sub. 2, 3 and 4).
coordination and supervision, which depends on the Secretary of National De- National Defence College: it is the highest house of studies for the Armed Forces.
fence; its tasks are assigned by the Statutory Law of the Armed Forces (Sec. 283). It trains selected military and civilian personnel, so they take part in the national
It shall issue a statement previous to conferring the promotions to the offi cers strategic planning (Sec. 289).
(Sec. 290). Institute of Military Social Security: for the protection, welfare and social security
of all the members of the military, presided by the Chairman of the Joint Chief of
Staff, shall operate in accordance with the specifi c Law (Sec. 291).
For defence and national security reasons, the territory shall be divided in military
reggions commanded byy a Chief of Militaryy Reggion. Their orgganization and oppera-
ttiioonn sshhaallll bbee iinn aaccccoorrddaannccee wwiitthh tthhee SSttaattuuttoorryy LLaaww ooff tthhee AArrmmeedd FFoorrcceess ((SSeecc. 228844)).
Military justice for military crimes and offences (Sec. 90 and Sec. 91).
A special law shall regulate the operation of military courts (Sec. 275).
Mexico (1917, Last reform 2016)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Force24:
Appoint and dismiss Colonels and other senior offi cers with the Senate’s ap- It is required to be a Mexican citizen by birth to join the Army in times of peace
proval (Sec. 89, sub. 4) and the rest of the offi cers according to the law (Sec. or the Navy and Air Force at all times, and to be appointed to any position or
89, sub. 5). perform any assignment in these forces (Sec. 32).
Declare war with the approval of the Congress (Sec. 89, sub. 8). The armed forces are composed of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force (Sec.
Preserve national security and make use of the permanent Armed Forces and the 73, sub. 14).
National Guard to safeguard the security and external defence (Sec. 89, sub. 6) Members of the military cannot be elected Deputies unless they retire ninety
and the National Guard (Sec. 89, sub. 7). days before the election (Sec. 55, sub. 4) or six months in case of the President
Direct foreign policy and sign international agreements (Sec. 89, sub. 10). (Sec. 82, sub. 5).
In times of peace, no military authority may perform any functions other than
Powers of the Congress: those that are directly connected with military discipline (Sec.129).
The Chamber of Deputies has the legal initiative on recruitment of troops (Sec. Crimes and offenses against military discipline shall be tried by military courts;
72, sub. h). however, under no circumstances and for no reason shall military courts extend
Declare war in view of the information submitted by the Executive Power (Sec. their jurisdiction over persons who are not members of the Army (Sec. 13).
73, sub. 12).
Raise and maintain the Armed institutions and regulate their organization and
service (Sec. 73, sub. 14).
Enact laws on national security (Sec. 73, sub. 29, m).
Approve (Senate) international treaties and conventions subscribed by the Exec-
utive Power, as well as conclude, denounce, suspend, modify, amend, withdraw
reserves and formulate interpretations (Sec. 76, sub. 1).
Approve the appointment of senior offi cers (Sec. 76, sub. 2; Sec. 89, sub. 4).
Approve the transit of foreign troops on the national territory and the deploy-
ment of national troops outside the country, and the sojourn of squadrons of
other powers in Mexican waters (Sec. 76, sub. 3).
20 Secretario de Estado en el Despacho de Defensa Nacional.
21Consejo Nacional de Defensa y Seguridad.
22 Consejo Superior de las Fuerzas Armadas.
23 Jefe del Estado Mayor Conjunto de las Fuerzas Armadas.
24Denomination used in the constitutional text.
sarudnoH

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

Nicaragua (1986, Last reform 2014)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Army26:
Supreme Commander of the Army (Sec. 95 and 144). Mission: to defend national sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity (Sec. 92).
In exceptional cases can the President, in a Council of Ministers, order the in- It is a national institution of professional character, unaffi liated with any politi-
tervention of the Nicaraguan Army to support the National Police, when the cal party, apolitical, obedient and non-deliberant. Members of the Army should
stability of the Republic is threatened by serious internal disorder, calamities or receive permanent patriotic and civic education and be trained in international
natural disasters (Sec. 92). human rights law (Sec. 93).
Direct international relations of the Republic. Negotiate, celebrate and sign Organization, structures, activities, ranks, promotions, retirements and everything
treaties, pacts, agreements or the like to be approved by the National Assembly related to its operational development is specifi ed in the law (Sec. 94).
(Sec. 150, sub. 8). The Army is strictly subject to the Political Constitution, to which it respects and
obeys, and is subject to civil authority as exercised by the President. No other
Powers of the National Assembly25: armed bodies may exist in the national territory, or military ranks other than
Approve the deployment of national troops outside the country (Sec. 138, sub. those specifi ed by law (Sec. 95). Members of the Army are able to temporarily
26) and the entry of foreign troops only for humanitarian purposes (Sec. 92). occupy positions within the Executive for reasons of national security when the
Approve or dismiss international agreements celebrated with countries or or- Nation’s supreme interests dictate it. In this case the individual will be under
ganizations subject to International Law (Sec. 138, sub. 12). commission of external service for all legal purposes. (Sec. 95).
Bodies of the Army are prohibited from engaging in activities of political es-
pionage (Sec. 96).
They cannot perform party-political activities or hold a position in political or-
ganizations; they cannot stand for public offi ce if they have not left their active
military post at least a year prior to the elections (Sec. 94); they cannot be Min-
isters, Deputy Ministers, Presidents or Directors of government or autonomous
entities, Ambassadors (Sec. 152), magistrates of justice (Sec. 161, sub. 6) or of
the Supreme Electoral Council (Sec. 171, sub. d). In the last two cases they must
leave their post twelve months prior to the elections.
There is no obligatory military service, and all kinds of forced recruitment into
the Army or the Police are forbidden (Sec. 96).
Crimes and offenses of strictly military nature committed by members of the
Army come under the jurisdiction of Military Tribunals. Common crimes and of-
fenses committed by the military are under the jurisdiction of common courts.
In no case will civilians be subject to the decisions of military courts (Sec. 93).
For the purpose of national security: a) in no case is it permissible to estab-
lish systems that alter or affect national communication systems; b) points of
communication for purposes of national defence within the national territory
should be under the ownership of the State; c) radio and satellite spectrums are
owned by the State and must be regulated by the regulatory body (Sec. 92).
Panama (1972, Last reform 2004)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Republic of Panama shall have no army. All Panamanians are obliged to
To ensure the preservation of public order (Sec. 183). take up arms to defend national independence and the territorial integrity of
To head foreign relations; conclude international treaties and agreements, which the State. For the preservation of public order, for the protection of life, honour
will be submitted for consideration to the Legislature; and accredit and receive and property of those under the jurisdiction of the State, and for the prevention
diplomatic and consular agents. Confer promotion to members of police services of criminal offenses, the Law shall organize the necessary police services, with
according to the police career and applicable legal provisions (Sec. 184). separate controls and career.
In the face of foreign aggression, special police services may be temporarily
Powers of the National Assembly27: organized by law for the protection of the Republic’s borders and jurisdictional
Approve or reject, prior to their ratifi cation, international treaties and agree- territory. The President is the chief of all the services established; and as agents
ments made by the Executive. Declare war and empower the Executive to make of the State these shall be subordinate to the civil power and therefore abide
peace (Sec. 159). by orders issued by national, provincial or municipal authorities in the exercise
of its statutory functions (Sec. 130).
Government Council: The police services have no deliberative function and may not make political
It is the meeting of the President, who presides it along with the Vice President statements or representations in individual or collective form. They may not
of the Republic and State Ministers (Sec. 199). Its functions include, under the become involved in partisan politics, other than in exercising their right to vote
collective responsibility of all its members, decreeing states of emergency and (Sec. 131).
the suspension of relevant constitutional provisions (Sec. 200, sub. 5).
Paraguay (1992, Last reform 2011)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
The Armed Forces:
Powers of the President: They are a permanent, professional, non deliberant and obedient institution,
Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces (Sec. 238, sub. 9). subordinated to the powers of the State, to the provisions of the Constitution,
Adopt the necessary measures for the national defence (Sec. 238, sub. 9). and to the law (Sec. 173).
Declare the state of national defence, in case of external aggression, with the Mission: safeguard the territorial integrity and defend the legitimately consti-
approval of the Congress (Sec. 238, sub. 7). tuted authorities (Sec. 173).
Make peace with the approval of the Congress (Sec. 238, sub. 7). The members of the military on active duty will conform their actions to the
Appoint senior offi cers of the public force (Sec. 238, sub. 9). laws and regulations. Military service is compulsory and must be based on full
Issue military regulations and arrange, organize and distribute the Armed Forc- respect of human dignity. In times of peace, it will not exceed twelve months
es (Sec. 238, sub. 9). (Sec. 129).
They cannot be affi liated to any political party or movement or engage in any
Powers of the Congress: type of political activity (Sec. 173); they cannot be elected President or Vice
Approve or dismiss international treaties (Sec. 141 and Sec. 202, sub. 9). President, except for those who retire at least one year prior to the day of elec-
Approve the appointment of senior offi cers (Senate) (Sec. 224, sub. 2). tion (Sec. 235, sub. 7).
Authorize the entry of foreign troops to the territory of the Republic and allow Police or military personnel on active duty cannot be candidates for senators
the deployment of national armed forces outside the country, except in cases or deputies (Sec. 197).
where this is required for courtesy reasons. (Sec. 183 sub.3). Military courts will hear only crimes and offences of a military nature, com-
Approve the entry of foreign troops to the national territory and the deploy- mitted by military personnel on active duty. Their decisions can be overturned
ment of national troops outside the country (Senate) (Sec. 224, sub. 5). by courts of law (Sec. 174). Only in cases of an armed international confl ict
can military courts have jurisdiction over civilians and retired military personnel
(Sec. 174).
25 Asamblea Nacional.
26Denomination used in the constitutional text.
27Denomination used in the constitutional text.
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 1: The Legal Framework

Peru (1993, Last reform 2009)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces:
Ensure external security (Sec. 118, sub. 4). The Armed Forces are composed of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force (Sec. 165).
Preside the national defence system; organize, deploy and arrange the Armed Forces Mission: guarantee the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, to take
(Sec. 118, sub. 14). control of the internal order in state of emergency if so provided by the President
Adopt the necessary measures to ensure the defence of the Republic, the integrity of (Sec. 165)
the territory and the sovereignty of the State (Sec. 118, sub. 15). The respective laws and regulations determine the organization, functions, specializa-
Declare war and accord peace with the approval of the Congress (Sec. 118, sub. 16). tion, training, use and discipline (Sec. 168).
Authorize Peruvians to serve in a foreign army (Sec. 118, sub. 23). They are non deliberant and are subordinated to the constitutional power (Sec. 169).
Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces (Sec. 164 and Sec. 167). The ethical and civic training and the teaching of the Constitution and human rights
Grant promotions to Generals and Admirals (Sec. 172). are compulsory both in the civilian and military education process. (Sec. 14).
Determine the number of troops (Sec. 172). The members of the military are not entitled to make collective petitions (Sec. 2, sub.
Declare the state of siege in case of invasion, foreign or civil war, in accordance with 20). They cannot run for elections) or perform political activities while on active duty
the Council of Ministries (Sec. 137). (Sec. 34); to set up unions or go on strike (Sec. 42). Members of the Armed Forces on
Sign international treaties on national defence (Sec. 56, sub. 3). active duty cannot be elected members of Parliament unless they have retired six (6)
months prior to the election (Sec. 91, sub. 4).
Powers of the Congress: They may not enter the fl oor of Congress without authorization from its President
Approve international treaties on national defence (Sec. 56, sub. 3). (Sec. 98).
Have the troops available as requested by the President of the Congress (Sec. 98). They can be ministers of State (Sec. 124).
Approve the entry of foreign troops to the national territory as long as it does not The law allocates funds for the logistical requirements of the Armed Forces (Sec. 170).
affect the national sovereignty in any way (Sec. 102, sub. 8). The Armed Forces and the National Police participate in the social and economic
Approve the declaration of war and the signing of peace treaties (Sec. 118, sub. 16). development of the country, and in civil defence according to the law (Sec. 171).
Military justice is established for the Armed Forces and the National Police (Sec. 139,
sub. 1). Military courts may have jurisdiction over civilians in the cases of treason and
terrorism (Sec. 173).
Uruguay (1967. Last reform 2004)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The Armed Forces:
Maintain and defend external security (Sec. 168, sub. 1). The members of the military are regulated by special laws (Sec. 59, sub. A).
Command the Armed Forces (Sec. 168, sub. 2). Members of the military on active duty cannot have a position in the govern-
Provide military posts and confer promotions, Grant retirements and manage ment, form part of commissions or political parties, subscribe to party mani-
pensions for civil and military employees in accordance with the law (Sec. 168, fests, authorize the use of their name and execute any other public or private
sub. 3, 9 and 11). political act, except voting (Sec. 77, sub. 4).
Order to break off relations and, based on a prior resolution by the General They cannot run for the election of Representatives (Sec. 91, sub. 2; Sec. 92),
Assembly, declare war if arbitration or other peaceful means have not been Senators (Sec. 100) or for President (Sec. 171) unless they resign and retire at
effective to avert a war (Sec. 168, sub. 16). least three months before the election.
Take prompt security measures in serious unexpected events of external attack Military justice for military crimes in state of war. Common crimes committed
or internal unrest, upon informing the General Assembly (Sec. 168, sub. 17). by members of the Armed Forces in times of peace, wherever they are commit-
Enter into and sign treaties, which shall later be ratifi ed with the approval of the ted, shall be subject to ordinary justice (Sec. 253).
Legislative Branch (Sec. 168, sub. 20).
Powers of the General Assembly28:
Declare war and approve peace treaties (Sec. 85, sub. 7).
Approve the appointment of senior offi cers (Sec. 168, sub. 11).
Approve the entry of foreign troops to the national territory and the deploy-
ment of national troops outside the country (Sec. 85, sub. 11 y 12).
Approve the number of Armed Forces personnel (Sec. 85, Sub. 8).
Establish militia regulations and determine time and number of recruitment
(Sec. 85, sub. 15).
Venezuela (1999)
Leading Political Procedures Military Instrument
Powers of the President: The National Armed Force31:
Commander-in-Chief of the National Armed Force. Exercise the highest author- It is an essentially professional institution, with no political orientation, organized
ity (Sec. 236, sub. 5) and the supreme command (Sub. 236, sub. 6). by the State, at the exclusive service of the Nation. It is founded on discipline,
Establish the armed forces strength (Sec. 236, sub. 5). obedience and subordination. The National Armed Force is composed of the Army,
Promote offi cers starting at the rank of colonel or naval captain and appoint the Navy, the Air Force and the National Guard Its mission is to guarantee the inde-
them to the positions exclusively reserved to them (Sec. 236, sub. 6). pendence and sovereignty of the Nation and ensure the integrity of its geographi-
Convene and preside over meetings of the National Defence Council (Sec. 236, cal space, through military defence, cooperation in the maintenance of internal
sub. 23). order, and active participation in national development (Sec. 328).
The President of the Republic, in a Council of Ministers, can declare the state Their essential responsibility is the planning, execution and control of military op-
of exception (Sec. 337). erations, as required to ensure the defence of the Nation. The National Guard shall
The President can declare the state of internal or external emergency in case of cooperate in the development of these operations and shall have as basic respon-
internal or external confl ict seriously endangering the security of the Nation, its sibility that of conducting operations as required maintaining internal order within
citizens or institutions (Sec. 338). the country. The National Armed Force shall carry out activities of administrative
policing and criminal investigation as provided by law (Sec.329).
Powers of the National Assembly29: Members of the military on active duty can vote. They are not allowed to run
Authorize the operation of military missions abroad or foreign military missions for elections, or to participate in propaganda, militancy or proselytizing (Sec. 330).
within the country (Sec. 187, sub. 11). It shall regulate and control, in accordance with the pertinent legislation, the
Approve any international treaties or agreements signed by the National Execu- manufacture, importing, exporting, storage, transit, registration, control, inspec-
tive (Sec. 187, sub. 18). tion, trade, possession and use of weapons, ammunition and explosives (Sec. 324).
Military promotions shall be effective in accordance with merit, hierarchy and va-
National Defence Council30: cancies. They are the exclusive prerogative of National Armed Forces in accordance
It is the highest consultative body for planning and advising the Public Authority with the corresponding law (Sec. 331).
on matters related to the integral defence of the Nation, its sovereignty and the Military justice for military crimes, its judges shall be elected by competitive proce-
integrity of its geographical space and it establishes the strategic concept of dures (Sec. 261).
the Nation. It is presided over by the President and includes the Vice President, The General Controller of the National Armed Forces: monitors, controls and audits
the President of the National Assembly, the Chairman of the Supreme Tribunal revenues, expenses and property allocated to the National Armed Force and their
of Justice, the Chairman of the Republican Moral Council, and the Ministers dependencies; it shall be under the responsibility of the General Controller of the
of Defence, Internal Security, Foreign Affairs and Planning, and other whose Armed Forces, appointed by means of a competitive process (Sec. 291).
participation may be deemed appropriate (Sec. 323).
28Asamblea General.
29 Asamblea Nacional.
30 Fuerza Armada Nacional.
31 Consejo de Defensa de la Nación.
Source: Compilation based on the Constitution of each country.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

Constitutional Missions of the Armed Forces
Mexico Honduras
Nº 89 Nº 89 Nº 272 Nº 272 Nº 272 Nº 272 Nº 274 Nº 272 Nº 274 Nº 274 Nº 274
y Nº 274 y Nº 274
Cuba
Haiti
Nº 264 Nº 266 Nº 266 Nº 266
Dominican Republic
Nicaragua
Guatemaallaa
Nº 252 Nº 252 Nº 252 Nº 252 Nº 252
Nº 92 Nº 92* Nº 92*
Nº 244 Nº 244 Nº 249
El Salvador Venezuela
Nº 212 Nº 212 Nº 212 Nº 212 Nº 212 Nº 328 Nº 328 Nº 328
y Nº 168*
Colombia
Nº 217 Nº 217
Ecuador
Brazil
Nº 158 Nº 158 Nº 162
Nº 142 Nº 142 Nº 142
Peerru
National defence
Nº 165 Nº 137 Nº 171 Nº 186 Nº 171
Ensure the y Nº 165*
constitutional
order
Ensure the legal Bolivia
government’s
stability
Nº 244 Nº 244 Nº 244 Nº 244 Paarraguay
Guarantee
internal order
Nº 173 Nº 173
Participate in
national
development
Provide electoral
support
Chile
Support in case Uruguay
of disasters
Nº 101 Nº 18
Participation in
peace operations Argentina
Support in
combatting
drug trafficking
No reference
*Only in exceptional cases.
Source:Compilation based on each country’s Constitution. There are other national supplementary regulations in addition to those presented in the map with respect
to the missions of the Armed Forces. For further information, refer to the “Countries” section of this publication. The cases of Costa Rica and Panama are not included
as the table refers specifi cally to the Armed Forces.
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 1: The Legal Framework

Additional References - Legislation*
Guarantee
Cooperation National
constitutional Participation
Country order/ with internal development/ Electoral support Support in the in peace
order/ environment event of disaster
stability of legal operations
security**
government
Argentina * In addition to the
defence of sovereignty.
Bolivia
** Argentina, Chile and
Brazil Dominican Republic
only under state of
Chile **** exception.
Colombia *** In times of peace
and with the explicit
Cuba authorization of the
National Defence
Dominican Republic Ministry, they may
render services or
Ecuador **** cooperate with activities
required on account
El Salvador
of their specialization,
Guatemala social relevance or
public convenience and
Haiti **** without this being to
the detriment of their
Honduras fundamental mission
(Ley marco de defensa
Mexico nacionaI, Sec. 20).
Nicaragua **** Under state of
emergency or disaster.
Paraguay
The cases of Costa Rica
Peru and Panama are not
included as the table
Uruguay *** *** *** refers specifi cally to the
Armed Forces.
Venezuela
Ensure the constitutional order / the legal government’s stability: • Form pppart of the Electoral Militaryyy Police duringgg national elections under the
• Guarantee the institutional order at the Republic (Ley orgánica constituci- control of the Central Electoral Board (Ley orgánica de las Fuerzas Armadas,
onal de las Fuerzas Armadas, Sec. 1 – Chile). Sec. 5 - Dominican Republic).
• Guarantee the legggal and democratic order of the social rule of law (Ley • Contribute,,, supppppport,,, take care and supppervise the Election Power facilities
orgánica de defensa nacional, Sec. 2 – Ecuador). and assets ((Leyy orgggánica de la Fuerza Armada Nacional Bolivariana, Sec. 42,
• Cooppperate in the maintenance of the State´s constitutional order (Ley sub. 6 – Venezuela).
orgánica de la Armada de México, Sec. 2 – Mexico).
• Guarantee the Rule of Law,,, constitutional order and democratic form of Support in the event of disaster:
ggovernment consecrated in the Political Constitution (Ley de la defensa na- • Oppperations supppppportinggg the national communityyy or friendlyyy countries (Ley de
cional, Sec. 5 and 16 - Nicaragua). reestructuración de las Fuerzas Armadas, Sec. 6 – Argentina).
• Defend the legggallyyy instituted authorities ((Leyy de organización general de las • Cooperate with civil defence (Ley complementarr 136, Sec. 16 – Brazil).
Fuerzas Armadas de la Nación, Sec. 6 – Paraguay). • The President of the State Council mayyy decide the use of the armed institu-
tions to face and remove the conseqqquences of natural disasters or other types
Cooperation with internal order/security: of disasters (Ley de la defensa nacional, Sec. 35 – Cuba).
• Cooppperate,,, if necessaryyy,,, in the maintenance of pppublic order,,, upppon reqqquest of • Assist the pppopppulation in cases and zones of disaster or emergggencyyy ((Leyy
the Executive Branch and accordinggg to the Political Constitution of the State orgggánica de la Armada,, Sec. 2,,, sub. VII))). In the event of disaster,,, helppp in the
(Ley orgánica de las Fuerzas Armadas, Sec. 6. G – Bolivia). maintenance of pppublic order,,, ppprotection to pppeoppple and their pppropppertyyy and re-
• Militaryyy Assistance when the National Police cannot,,, on its own,,, contain severe construction of areas affected (Ley orgánica del Ejército y Fuerza Aérea, Sec.
disorders or face a disaster or public calamity (Decree 1512, Sec. 79 – Colombia). 1 – Mexico).
• The President of the State Council mayyy decide the use of the Armed Forces • Contribute to strengggtheninggg the risk managggement pppolicyyy,,, based on the ppre-
to maintain internal order and ppprotect the citizenryyy,,, even thougggh a state of vention,,, mitigggation and managgement of natural disasters (Ley de la defensa
emergency has not been declared (Ley de la defensa nacional, Sec. 35 – Cuba). nacional, Sec. 16 – Nicaragua).
• In order to safeggguard internal ppprotection,,, the maintenance and control of • Cooppperate in civil defence ((Leyy de organización general de las Fuerzas Arma-
ppublic order and securityyy,,, the Armed Forces could supppppport oppperations in a das, Sec. 7, sub. D – Paraguay).
comppplementaryyy manner to what in this case is the compppetence of the National • Participppate in civil ppprotection oppperations in disaster situations. Supppppport communi-
Police (Ley de seguridad pública y del Estado, Sec. 11 – Ecuador). ties in case of disaster,,, pppublic calamities and similar events (((Leyyy orgggánica de la Fuerza
• Assist in maintaininggg pppeace and order of the nation in cases of extreme Armada Nacional Bolivariana, Sec. 4, sub. 6 and 15; Sec. 42, sub. 6 – Venezuela).
necessityyy ((Códigggo de orggganización, jurisdicción y previsión social militar, Sec.
2, sub. 2 and 6 – Nicaragua). Participation in peace operations:
• Oppperations sppponsored byyy the United Nations (Ley de reestructuración de las
Participation in national development / environment protection: Fuerzas Armadas, Sec. 6 – Argentina).
• Coopperate with national development as subsidiary function (Lei comple- • The emppployyyment of the Armed Forces in pppeace oppperations is a responsibility
mentarr136, Sec. 16 – Brazil). of the President (Ley complementarr136, Sec. 15 – Brazil).
• Take care over the whole national territoryyy of the ppprotection and defence of • Deppparture of national trooppps from the territoryyy of the Repppublic in order to
the environment and renewable natural resources ((Leyy por la cual se organiza ppparticipppate in pppeace oppperations orggganized under the Charter of the United
el Sistema Nacional Ambiental, Sec. 103 – Colombia). Nations ((Leyy qqque establece normas ppara la participación de tropas chilenas en
• Possessinggg a structure that allows the use of its members in activities contrib- operaciones de paz, Sec. 7 – Chile).
utinggg to the countryyy’s economic and social developppment and environmental • Theyyy mayyy ppparticipppate in pppeacekeepppinggg and humanitarian assistance opppera-
protection (Ley de la defensa nacional, Sec. 34 – Cuba). tions accordinggg to the countryyy’s foreigggn pppolicyyy and United Nations’ require-
• Ensure the full apppppplication of legggal dispppositions regggardinggg the conservation ments (Ley orgánica de defensa nacional, Sec. 16, sub. O – Ecuador).
of forests,,, ppprotected areas and wildlife (((Decreto de unidad especializada en • Take pppart in international pppeacekeeppppinggg and humanitarian aid oppperations,
materia de ecosistema y ambiente, Sec. 4 sub. 2 – Honduras). in accordance with the UN Charter (Ley de la defensa nacional, Sec. 16 –
• Perform civil actions and social work fosteringgg the country’s development Nicaragua).
(Ley orgánica del Ejército y Fuerza Aérea, Sec. 1 – Mexico). • Paraggguayyy mayyy ppparticipppate with its militaryyy institutions in pppeace missions ppro-
• Contribute to the countryyy’s developppment and supppppport its health ppplans,,, educa- moted byyy international orgganizations of which it is member (Ley de defensa
tion,, environmental pppreservation and renewal of its natural resources,,, includinggg the nacional y seguridad interna, Sec. 35 – Paraguay).
required environmental balance (Ley de la defensa nacionall, Sec. 16 – Nicaragua). • Missions abroad that are not directlyyy related to the Repppublic’s defence shall
be ppromoted byyy international orggganizations which the State is part of (Ley
Support to elections: marco de defensa nacional, Sec. 21 and 22 – Uruguay).
• Suppppport the Supppreme Electoral Council in the electoral ppprocess (((Códigggo de • Particippate in pppeace missions ((Leyy orggánica de la Fuerza Armada Nacional
organización, jurisdicción y previsión social militarr, Sec. 2, sub. 13 – Nicaragua). Bolivariana, Sec. 4, sub. 5 – Venezuela).
Source: Compilation based on the legislation mentioned. Reference is made to the missions specifi cally mentioned in the legislation regardless of those referring to sub-
jects referred to in constitutional mandates; this description does not purport to be complete or to encompass the whole set of the missions they are supposed to have.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

States of Exception
Country Name Cause Participation of the Legislative Power
Argentina Declared by the Congress and by the President if the
Internal commotion.
State of siege latter were not in session (with a subsequent report).
Foreign attack. Requires the approval of the Senate.
Danger for State security.
External threat. It requires the approval of the Plurinational Legislative
Bolivia State of exception Internal unrest. Assembly.
Natural disaster.
Grave or imminent institutional instability.
State of defence Natural calamities of great proportions.
Grave commotion of national impact.
Brazil
Requires the approval of the Congress.
Situations which prove the ineffi ciency of the state of
defence.
State of siege
Declaration of the state of war.
Response to an armed foreign attack.
State of assembly External war.
Internal war. Requires the approval of the Congress. State of siege
Grave internal commotion.
The President shall inform the Congress of the meas-
Chile
ures adopted.
State of catastrophe Public calamity.
Requires the approval of the Congress in case they are
extended for more than a year.
The President shall inform the Congress of the meas-
Grave disturbance of the public order.
ures adopted.
State of emergency
Grave damage to national security. Requires the approval of the Congress in case they are
extended for more than fi fteen days.
Requires the approval of the Senate except when it is
State of external war External war.
necessary to repel aggression.
State of internal Grave disturbance of the public order. The declaration of a third consecutive period requires
Colombia commotion the approval of the Senate.
Situations which disturb or seriously threat to immi- The Congress shall examine the causes and measures
State of emergency nently disturb the economic, social and ecological or- which determined it and those adopted, and shall ex-
der or which constitute public calamity. pressly rule on the convenience and timeliness of such
measures.
Requires the vote of no less that two thirds of the total
members of the Assembly. During recesses of the As-
Costa Rica S fu u n s d p a e m ns e io n n ta o l f rights and In case of evident public need. s ri e g m ht b s l y a , n th d e g P u r a e r s a id n e te n e t s m . T u h s e t d d e e c c r r e e e e t s h u e s p s e u n sp d e in n g s io g n u a o r- f
guarantees antees is equivalent, ipso facto, to a call to session
for the Assembly, which must meet within forty eight
hours.
Imminent natural disasters or catastrophes.
Cuba State of emergency Circumstances affecting internal order, national secu- The National Assembly of People’s Power must be in-
formed.
rity or stability.
Cases in which national sovereignty or territorial in- Congress shall have the power to declare it and the
State of national defence tegrity are under grave or imminent danger due to Executive Branch shall have the power to request its
armed foreign attacks. declaration.
Dominican State of internal Grave disturbance of public order causing an immedi-
Republic commotion ate threat to institutional stability.
Events disturbing or seriously threatening to disturb Requires Congress approval.
State of emergency the country’s economic, social and environmental or-
der or which constitute a public catastrophe.
Case of aggression.
International or internal armed confl ict. The National Assembly, which has the authority to re-
Ecuador State of exception Grave internal disturbance. voke the decree at any time, must be informed.
Public disaster.
Natural disaster.
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD

Chapter 1: The Legal Framework

States of Exception
Country Name Cause Participation of the Legislative Power
War.
Invasion of the territory.
Rebellion. It is decreed by the Legislative or the Executive Power.
El Salvador Exception regime Sedition. In case of the suspension of certain guarantees, the
Catastrophe. approval of the Legislative Power is required.
Epidemics or general calamity.
Grave disturbances of the public order.
State of prevention
Invasion of the territory.
State of alarm
Grave disturbance of the peace.
Guatemala State of public calamity Activities against the security of the State. The Congress can ratify, modify or dismiss it.
State of siege
Public calamity.
State of war
Civil war The Assembly must convene with immediate effect to
Haiti State of siege Foreign invasion1 make an announcement regarding the measure.
It must be renewed every 15 days.
Invasion of the national territory.
Honduras State of siege Grave disturbance of the peace. The Congress can ratify, modify or dismiss the decree
sent by the President within thirty days.
Epidemics or any general calamity.
Suspension, in all the Invasion.
country or in a specifi c
Mexico place, of the guarantees Grave disturbance of the public peace.
which could constitute an Any other issue which could put the society in grave Requires the approval of the Congress.
obstacle to cope with the danger.
situation in a quick and Confl ict.
easy manner
When required by:
Nicaragua State of emergency National security. The Assembly can approve, modify or dismiss it.
Economic conditions.
National catastrophes.
The Legislative Body must hear the declaration of a
Foreign war
Panama State of urgency Internal disturbance that threatens the peace and state of urgency if it lasts more than ten days and
confi rm or reverse the decisions related to the state
public order.
of urgency.
State of exception Armed confl ict. It can be declared by the Executive Power or the Congress.
Grave internal commotion which puts the Constitu- If it is declared by the Executive Power it requires the
Paraguay tion or the bodies established in it in imminent danger. approval of the Congress.
State of defence External aggression. Requires the approval of the Congress.
Disturbance of the peace or internal order. Decreed by the President with the consent of the
State of emergency Catastrophe or grave circumstances which affect the Council of Ministers. The Congress must be informed
life of the Nation. about it.
Peru
Invasion. Decreed by the President with the consent of the
State of siege External war. Council of Ministers. The Congress must be informed
Civil war. about it.
Imminent danger of the above mentioned situations. The extension beyond forty fi ve days requires the con-
sent of the Congress.
Foreign attack.
UUruguay QQuiickk securiitty measure Internal commotion. RReeqquuiirreess aa rreessoolluuttiioonn ffrroomm tthhee GGeenneerraall AAsssseemmbbllyy.
Catastrophes and public calamities which seriously
State of alarm
endanger the security of the Nation, or its citizens.
Venezuela State of economic Extraordinary economic circumstances which seriously The extension requires the approval of the National
emergency affect the economic situation of the Nation. Assembly.
State of internal or Internal or external confl ict which seriously endangers
external commotion the security of the Nation, its citizens or institutions.
1. Law 2008-004 of 2008/09/10 incorporated the state of urgency for cases of natural disaster.
Source: Compilation based on the Constitution of each country.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2016 Edition

Constitutional Powers of the Congress
Related to War and Peace Related to Control
Country ¿Se Irse qitus iaeprep rsouv aapl rroebqaucirieódn tpoa ra
Can it declare war? Can it make peace? eal pnpoominbtr asemniieonrt oof dfi ece orfis coifa ltehse
superiores Adrem laesd f uFoerrzcaess ?armadas?
Argentina No No Yes1
Bolivia No No Yes1
Brazil No No No
Chile No No No
Colombia No No Yes1
Costa Rica No No No2
Cuba Yes Yes N/R
Dominican Republic No No No
Ecuador No No No
El Salvador Yes No No
Guatemala Yes No No
Haiti Yes No Yes
Honduras Yes Yes Yes
Mexico Yes No Yes1
Nicaragua No No N/R
Panama Yes No No2
Paraguay No No Yes1
Peru No No No
Uruguay Yes No Yes1
Venezuela No No No
1Corresponds to Congress
2 For Costa Rica and Panama, the reference refers to the appointment of senior offi cers within the Public Security Forces.
N/R: No reference.
Source:Compilation based on the Constitution of each country
Political Participation of Military Personnel Institutional Guidance
Can they vote? Can they be candidates for Elections? Country be C co an m t e h M e i m ni i s li t t e a r r s y o m f e D m ef b e e n r c s e?
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Argentina Yes (if they have retired)
Costa Rica(4), Cuba, Ecuador,
Active Haiti, Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Cuba, Honduras1 and Mexico2 Panama(4), Peru, Uruguay and Bolivia Yes (if they have retired)
Venezuela.
Brazil Yes (if they have retired)
Yes, all those that have retired are
Retired Yes, in all cases 3,4.
able to vote Chile Yes (if they have retired)
Colombia Yes (if they have retired)
1. The Constitution mentions the possibility of running for elections in those cases not prohibited
by Law (Sec. 37), but it establishes that they cannot be elected as Deputies (Sec. 199) or President Cuba Yes
(Sec. 240).
2. Members of the military on active duty must resign from their position at least 90 days prior Dominican Republic Yes
to standing to be elected as a Deputy (Political Constitution, Sec. 55) or Senator (Political Consti-
tution, Sec. 58), with this period extending to six months for those standing for the Presidency Ecuador Yes (if they have retired)
(Political Constitution, Sec. 82). Legislation indicates that in order to occupy a position involving
El Salvador Yes
a popular vote, members of the armed forces must request a special permit for that purpose.
3. In Bolivia, in order to hold a position of public offi ce, military personnel must resign at least Guatemala Yes1
three months prior to the election. (Political Constitution, Art. 238). In Chile, Colombia and Nica-
ragua, one year after retiring. In El Salvador a period of three years in retirement is required prior Haiti Yes (if they have retired)
to running as a candidate in a presidential election. The Constitution of Haiti establishes a period
of two years prior to standing for any non-military public position. In Guatemala, fi ve years in Honduras Yes (if they have retired)
retirement is stipulated. In the Dominican Republic, the Constitution establishes as a require-
ment that the President not be in active military or police service for at least three years prior to Sec. of Nat. Defence Yes
presidential elections. Section 77 pertaining to the conditions required to become a congress Mexico
member, does not mention any requirement. In Uruguay, subsection 4 of Section 77 of the Sec. of the Navy Yes
National Constitution establishes that only the members of the military on active duty cannot
perform political activities. Nicaragua Yes (if they have retired)
Note: In Brazil, military personnel on active duty are not allowed to run as candidates. If they have less Paraguay Yes (if they have retired)
than ten years in service, the individual must retire; if he/she has had more than ten years of service, he/
she shall be separated from duty by his superior authority; if elected, he shall automatically be discharged. Peru Yes
In the Dominican Republic, Section 123 of the Political Constitution establishes as a requisite that the
President is not in active military or police service for at least three years prior to standing in presidential Uruguay Yes (if they have retired)
elections. Section 77, pertaining to the conditions required to become a congress member, does not men-
tion any requirement.
In Uruguay Subsection 2 of Section 91 of the National Constitution establishes that “military personnel Venezuela Yes
who resign their salary and post in order to enter the legislature shall keep their rank, but for the duration
of their legislative responsibilities last they shall not be promoted. They shall be exempt from all military 1 According to the Constitution of the Republic, civilians cannot
subordination and the duration of their legislative activities will not be counted towards promotion”. Sec- become Ministers of Defence.
tion 98 of the Organic Law of the Armed Forces Nº 14157, states that military status shall be suspended in
As determined by the Constitution Costa Rica and Panama do
the case of a member of the military that is elected for a political position.
not have Armed Forces, and their Ministries of Public Security
have always been of civilian character.
Source:Compilation based on national legislation. For more detail on such legislation refer to sec- Source: Compilation based on information provided by the
tion “Countries” of this publication. Ministries of Defence of each country.
gro.ladser.www//:ptth
LADSER
morf
dedaolnwoD