Issue Brief
How to Assess
the Likelihood of
Malicious Use
of Advanced
AI Systems
Authors

Josh A. Goldstein

Girish Sastry

Executive Summary
Policymakers are debating the risks that new advanced artificial intelligence (AI)
technologies can pose if intentionally misused: from generating content for
disinformation campaigns to instructing a novice how to build a biological agent.
Because the technology is improving rapidly and the potential dangers remain unclear,
assessing risk is an ongoing challenge.
Malicious-use risks are often considered to be a function of the likelihood and severity
of the behavior in question. We focus on the likelihood that an AI technology is
misused for a particular application and leave severity assessments to additional
research.
There are many strategies to reduce uncertainty about whether a particular AI system
(call it X) will likely be misused for a specific malicious application (call it Y). We
describe how researchers can assess the likelihood of malicious use of advanced AI
systems at three stages:
1. Plausibility (P)
2. Performance (P)
3. Observed use (Ou)
Plausibility tests consider whether system X can do behavior Y at all. Performance
tests ask how well X can perform Y. Information about observed use tracks whether X
is used to do Y in the real world.
Familiarity with these three stages of assessment—including the methods used at
each stage, along with their limitations—can help policymakers critically evaluate
claims about AI misuse threats, contextualize headlines describing research findings,
and understand the work of the newly created network of AI safety institutes.
–––––––––––––––––––––––
This Issue Brief summarizes the key points in: Josh A. Goldstein and Girish Sastry, “The
PPOu Framework: A Structured Approach for Assessing the Likelihood of Malicious
Use of Advanced AI Systems,” Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics,
and Society 7, no. 1 (2024): 503–518.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 1

Introduction
Concerns about bad actors intentionally misusing advanced artificial intelligence (AI)
systems are prevalent and controversial. These concerns are prevalent as they receive
widespread media attention and are reflected in polls of the American public as well
as in pronouncements and proposals by elected officials.1 Yet they are controversial
because experts—both inside and outside of AI—express high levels of disagreement
about the extent to which bad actors will misuse AI systems, how useful these
systems will be compared to non-AI alternatives, and how much capabilities will
change in the coming years.2
The disagreement about misuse risks from advanced AI systems is not merely
academic. Claims about risk are often cited to support policy positions with significant
societal implications, including whether to make models more or less accessible,
whether and how to regulate frontier AI systems, and whether to halt development of
more capable AI systems.3 If views of misuse risks will inform policy, it is critical for
policymakers to understand how to evaluate malicious-use research.
In a new paper “The PPOu Framework: A Structured Approach for Assessing the
Likelihood of Malicious Use of Advanced AI Systems,” published in the Proceedings of
the Seventh AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, we provide a framework
for thinking through the likelihood that an advanced AI system (call it X) will be
misused for a particular malicious application (call it Y).4 The framework lays out three
different stages for assessing the likelihood of malicious use:
1. Plausibility (P): Can system X perform malicious behavior Y even once?
2. Performance (P): How well can system X perform malicious behavior Y?
3. Observed use (Ou): Is system X used for malicious behavior Y in the real world?
Once a potential misuse risk has been identified, researchers can investigate the risk at
each stage outlined in Figure 1. The figure also summarizes the key methodologies and
challenges at each stage.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 2

Figure 1. The PPOu Framework Summary
Research at each of these three stages addresses different forms of uncertainty. For
example, while demonstrations at the plausibility stage may be able to show that
system X can be used for behavior Y (or a behavior similar to Y) once, they will leave
uncertainty about how useful X would be for potential bad actors. Risk assessments at
the performance stage can help model the marginal utility for bad actors, but actual
use of X by bad actors may differ from research expectations. Observed use can track
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 3

actual applications to right size expectations, but it will not determine how future
systems could be misused or whether X will be used for variants of Y in the future.
We hope that by laying out these stages, we will provide policymakers with a better
understanding of the types of uncertainty about malicious use and where research
can—and cannot—plug in. In Figure 2, we provide examples of the types of questions
researchers could ask at each stage from three risk areas: political manipulation,
biological attacks, and cyber offense.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 4

The PPOu Framework
Figure 2. Stages of the PPOu Framework and Example Questions
Stage Example from Example from Example from cyber
political biological attacks offense
manipulation
Plausibility Could a multimodal Could a chatbot Could a large-language-
agent generate and guide a (resourced) model-based software
distribute a short undergrad through agent identify and produce
video of partisans the process of (but not necessarily
interfering in the creating a Category deliver) a working exploit
electoral process?* B potential for a widely used piece of
bioterrorism software?
agent?5
Performance How realistic, reliable, How much uplift How much does it cost to
and cost-effective are does the chatbot operate the agent to
multimodal models at provide over produce the exploit
generating and existing biological compared to a similarly
distributing videos of design tools? skilled human?
partisans attempting
to interfere in the
election process?
Observed use Do people use Do request- Is there chatter on criminal
multimodal models to response logs forums that people are
generate and indicate that a user experimenting with such
distribute videos of is applying a an agent?
partisans attempting chatbot to guide
to interfere in the them through
electoral process, in creating a potential
practice? bioterrorism agent?
* On agents, see: Helen Toner, John Bansemer, Kyle Crichton et al., “Through the Chat Window and Into
the Real World: Preparing for AI Agents,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, ,

for-ai-agents/.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 5

Stage 1: Plausibility: Can system X perform malicious behavior Y even once?
The simplest way to test whether there is a risk of system X being used for malicious
behavior Y is to see if X can do Y, just once. Red-teamers and stress testers adopt an
adversary’s mindset and probe an AI system for “identification of harmful capabilities,
outputs, or infrastructure threats.”6 If a model does not produce harmful behavior on
the first try, the next step is to iterate. Researchers use different techniques, including
improving prompts (the input fed to the model, such as instructions or examples) or
fine-tuning (a small amount of additional training) a model for the specific behavior.
If X still fails to exhibit Y, despite employing various techniques and tricks, the question
naturally becomes: How long should one
The simplest way to test whether continue trying? While researchers can
there is a risk of system X being demonstrate that system X can be used for
malicious use Y by showing an example,
used for malicious behavior Y is
proving the negative (that system X cannot
to see if X can do Y, just once.
do Y) is more challenging.
Because AI models are often general-purpose and our ability to predict their
capabilities is still advancing, we may not know whether system X cannot perform Y, or
whether the prompting strategies used have been insufficient. This is known as the
“capability elicitation problem.” For example, one paper found that simply prepending
“Take a deep breath” before a requested task improved performance.7 Analysts may
thus conclude that a system could plausibly do Y if it gets close, within a certain
margin of error (known as a “safety margin”), to account for possible gains from better
elicitation techniques.8 The determination about what qualifies as close enough is a
matter of judgment.
To scale up red-teaming efforts, AI developers can use both humans and machines.
Leading AI labs are hiring external contractors to red-team their models, allowing
them to augment the expertise (and labor hours) they possess in-house.9 Researchers
are also developing ways to use AI models to red-team other models, which is a
promising direction for future research.10
Stage 2: Performance: How well can system X perform malicious behavior Y?
Showing that a system can do the malicious behavior once (Stage 1) does not mean it
is necessarily a useful tool for doing so. Plausibility still leaves a lot of uncertainty,
including about the quality of the output, the reliability of the system, and how useful it
is compared to alternatives that may have existed before. As a result, research at
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 6

Stage 2 focuses on addressing these and related questions, aiming to reduce
uncertainty about the utility of the system in question, often through static
benchmarks, experiments, or modeling marginal utility.
First, similar to taking a written test, researchers will test AI models against
predetermined sets of questions. For example, can a model recognize images? Solve
PhD-level math problems? Answer questions about the law? If researchers have a
standardized set of questions, they can continually test new models against that
benchmark as models are developed.11 This can provide comparability between
models at relatively low cost. Recently, researchers have also been building
benchmarks for potentially harmful applications.12 In practice, however, static
benchmarks can be difficult to create. Sometimes they are “polluted” because the
model was already provided with the answer as part of its training set.13 Other times,
constructing them can be labor-intensive, necessitate specialized knowledge, or
require access to classified material.
A second approach is to conduct experiments,
Stage 2 aims to reduce
deliberately introducing an AI system or piece of
uncertainty about the utility
AI-generated content in an environment to
determine its effect on outcomes of interest. This of the system in question,
could range from using AI in penetration-testing often through static
exercises to using AI to convince people against
benchmarks, experiments,
conspiracy beliefs.14 In lab and survey
or modeling marginal
experiments, researchers can study the effects of
utility.
different treatments, recruit respondents using
existing pools, and straightforwardly ensure
informed consent. However, for assessing malicious-use risks, researchers will still
face limitations because of the duty to minimize harm to respondents. This is especially
acute for field experiments that test the effects of an AI system in the real world.
Finally, researchers may test for uplift—that is, how useful a tool is compared to a set
of alternatives.15 If a system can reliably produce instructions for designing a
bioweapon, but a Google search could do the same, then the uplift is limited. These
marginal utility tests require establishing a relevant set of alternatives (which will vary
based on the threat model) and outcomes of interest. For example, if the goal is to
assess whether language models will be useful for propaganda, uplift tests would
require establishing baselines (human-written propaganda) and outcomes of interest,
such as the cost of running a campaign or the number of people persuaded to take an
action.16
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 7

Performance testing could improve in several ways. First, researchers could test for the
equivalent of “scaling laws” in the malicious-use domain.17 In other words, how much
riskier in a malicious-use domain do models become with certain capability
improvements (or scale increases)? From an institutional perspective, the field can
continue to develop arrangements that minimize incentive issues. AI labs may have the
best capability elicitation techniques, but they also have incentives to sandbag or not
thoroughly test their own systems.18 In the future, government entities such as AI
safety institutes could conduct a subset of malicious-use risks to ensure testing
occurs.19
Stage 3: Observed Use: Is system X used for malicious behavior Y in the real world?
In Stages 1 and 2, researchers can test whether system X can be used for malicious
behavior Y and investigate how useful X may be. While forecasts prior to deployment
estimate how likely system X is to be misused,
research expectations and actual misuse may diverge.
The observed use stage
Policymakers must recognize that pre-deployment
shifts away from
research may misestimate risks due to cognitive biases
focusing on projected
(e.g., analysts projecting their own assumptions onto
scenarios to discovering
adversaries) or unforeseen capabilities (e.g., emergent
how bad actors misuse abilities of AI systems discovered after deployment).
AI systems in the real Historical examples—such as the misjudged threats of
cyberattacks in the 1990s—highlight how anticipated
world.
risks can differ from actual misuse.20
The observed use stage shifts away from focusing on projected scenarios to
discovering how bad actors misuse AI systems in the real world. This is often
challenging, as actors misusing tools may deliberately obscure their activities due to
reputational risks, legal concerns, or fears that exposure could undermine their
effectiveness.
One method for uncovering misuse is monitoring by AI providers themselves. For
example, companies that make their new systems available through an application
programming interface could monitor requests and responses. OpenAI has recently
released several reports describing influence operations misusing its tools.21
Monitoring by AI providers can be an effective strategy, because it can expose misuse
early in an operation—for example, after covert propagandists begin creating content,
but before they build large followings. However, this strategy also faces trade-offs
related to user privacy.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 8

A second route for discovery comes from outside the AI companies. Open-source
researchers and journalists can uncover the use of X for malicious behavior Y. Potential
routes to discovery include finding evidence of bad actors using AI in their workflows,
interviewing them to ask how they use advanced AI systems, monitoring discussions
on criminal forums, and more. The news outlet 404 Media has uncovered a range of
applications of AI online—including spam and scams—demonstrating the role of
journalists who closely track online developments.22
Last, researchers can develop incident databases to move beyond single case studies
and better understand patterns of abuse. The AI Incident Database and the Political
Deepfakes Incidents Database are two ongoing efforts. Those building AI incident
databases can draw valuable lessons from fields with established incident reporting
systems, such as airline safety, including considerations of the trade-offs between
voluntary and mandatory disclosure.23
Because the application of X for malicious use Y Policymakers should be
may be intentionally hidden, the observed use careful not to over-index
stage faces several limitations. First,
on the misuse that is most
observational data about misuse may not be
easily countable.
representative of the broader universe of cases,
leading to faulty conclusions about areas that
require heightened attention. Policymakers should be careful not to over-index on the
misuse that is most easily countable. Furthermore, even if observed use today is
representative, it may not project into the future. New capability elicitation techniques
or improvements in model capabilities can lead to substantially different misuses of
subsequent generations of systems. Future efforts could empower external
researchers to work with AI companies to better understand misuse, develop
increasingly capable classifiers for malicious use, and scale monitoring efforts.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 9

Conclusion
Each stage of the framework—plausibility, performance, and observed use—attempts
to reduce uncertainty about the likelihood of misuse of an advanced AI system. Can the
model perform the harmful behavior, just once? How well does it do so, and how
useful is it to bad actors? What is the existing evidence of bad actors misusing the tool,
or similar ones, for this application in the real world?
For policymakers, these questions can be useful when encountering claims about
misuse risks. For example, imagine coming across a headline that reads: “AI Chatbots
Can Give Instructions for Creating Bioweapons.” Using the PPOu Framework, a
discerning policymaker may ask whether that is a plausibility assessment (e.g., red-
teaming found instructions once) or a result of performance testing (e.g., researchers
found the system could generate valid instructions reliably). The policymaker then
might search for further information: How good is the chatbot, and compared to what
baseline? Just because a system can be used for a particular malicious purpose does
not mean it will be in the real world. Policymakers can use the PPOu Framework as a
guide, while recognizing that some degree of uncertainty about the likelihood of
malicious use will always remain.
The diverse set of methodologies also highlights that a wide range of experts can
contribute. As AI models become advanced and have wider applications, building up a
risk assessment ecosystem will grow more important. The U.S. government should
seek the advice of, and provide funding support for, researchers with different
substantive expertise (such as misuse domains of interest) as well as different
methodological training (for example, machine learning or human-subject
experiments). If the network of AI safety institutes progresses, it, too, will be stronger
for soliciting cooperation from a large tent.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 10

Authors
Josh A. Goldstein is a research fellow at Georgetown University’s Center for Security
and Emerging Technology (CSET), where he works on the CyberAI project.
Goldstein is currently on rotation as a policy advisor at the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) under an Interdepartmental Personnel Act
agreement with CSET. He completed this work before starting at CISA. The views
expressed are the author’s own personal views and do not necessarily reflect the
views of CISA or the Department of Homeland Security.
Girish Sastry is an independent policy researcher.
Reference
This policy memo summarizes an original research paper: Josh A. Goldstein and Girish
Sastry, “The PPOu Framework: A Structured Approach for Assessing the Likelihood of
Malicious Use of Advanced AI Systems,” Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on
AI, Ethics, and Society 7, no. 1 (2024): 503–518.
Acknowledgments
For research assistance support, we thank Abhiram Reddy. For feedback on the
underlying paper, we thank Lama Ahmad, Markus Anderljung, John Bansemer, Eden
Beck, Rosie Campbell, Derek Chong, Jessica Ji, Igor Mikolic-Torreira, Andrew Reddie,
Chris Rohlf, Colin Shea-Blymyer, Weiyan Shi, Toby Shevlane, Thomas Woodside, and
participants at the NLP SoDaS Conference 2023.
© 2025 by the Center for Security and Emerging Technology. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit 
Document Identifier: doi: 10.51593/20240042
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 11

Endnotes
1 Taylor Orth and Carl Bialik, “Majorities of Americans Are Concerned about the Spread of AI Deepfakes
and Propaganda,” YouGov, September 12, 2023, 
majorities-americans-are-concerned-about-spread-ai; Office of Congressman Don Beyer, “Ross, Beyer
Introduce Legislation to Regulate Artificial Intelligence Security, Mitigate Risk Incidents,” news release,
September 23, 2024, 
2 Sayash Kapoor et al., “On the Societal Impact of Open Foundation Models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.07918 (2024), Yoshua Bengio et al., “International
Scientific Report on the Safety of Advanced AI (Interim Report),” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05282
(2024), 
3 Irene Solaiman, “The Gradient of Generative AI Release: Methods and Considerations,” in FAccT:
Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (New York:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2023), Yoshua
Bengio et al., “Managing Extreme AI Risks Amid Rapid Progress,” Science 384, no. 6698 (2024): 842–
845, Yoshua Bengio et al., “Pause Giant AI
Experiments: An Open Letter,” Future of Life Institute, March 22, 2023, 
letter/pause-giant-ai-experiments/.
4 Josh A. Goldstein and Girish Sastry, “The PPOu Framework: A Structured Approach for Assessing the
Likelihood of Malicious Use of Advanced AI Systems,” Proceedings of the Seventh AAAI/ACM
Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society 7, no. 1 (2024): 503–518, 
5 “Potential Bioterrorism Agents,” Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College
of Medicine, accessed November 22, 2024, 
microbiology/emerging-infections-and-biodefense/potential-bioterrorism-agents.
6 “Issue Brief: What Is Red Teaming?” (Frontier Model Forum, October 27, 2023),

7 Chengrun Yang et al., “Large Language Models as Optimizers,” 12th International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR 2024), 
8 Mary Phuong et al., “Evaluating Frontier Models for Dangerous Capabilities,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.13793 (2024), 
9 “OpenAI Red Teaming Network,” OpenAI, September 19, 2023, 
network/.
10 Alex Beutel et al., “Diverse and Effective Red Teaming with Auto-generated Rewards and Multi-step
Reinforcement Learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.18693 (2024), 
11 “Browse State-of-the-Art,” Papers with Code, accessed November 22, 2024,

Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 12

12 See, for instance, Manish Bhatt et al., “CyberSecEval 2: A Wide-Ranging Cybersecurity Evaluation
Suite for Large Language Models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13161 (2024),

13 Andy K. Zhang et al., “Language Model Developers Should Report Train-Test Overlap,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.08385 (2024), 
14 Thomas H. Costello, Gordon Pennycook, and David G. Rand, “Durably Reducing Conspiracy Beliefs
through Dialogue with AI,” Science 385, no. 6714 (2024),

15 Kapoor et al., “On the Societal Impact of Open Foundation Models.”
16 Micah Musser, “A Cost Analysis of Generative Language Models and Influence Operations,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.03740 (2023), 
17 Jared Kaplan et al., “Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361
(2020), 
18 Ryan Greenblatt et al., “Stress-Testing Capability Elicitation with Password-Locked Models,” 38th
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeuIPS 2024),

19 See, for example, U.S. AI Safety Institute, Managing Misuse Risk for Dual-Use Foundation Models
(Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology, ),

20 Sean Lawson and Michael K. Middleton, “Cyber Pearl Harbor: Analogy, Fear, and the Framing of Cyber
Security Threats in the United States, 1991–2016,” First Monday 25, no. 3–4 (),

21 Ben Nimmo, “AI and Covert Influence Operations: Latest Trends” (OpenAI, ),

3bcca18b633/Threat_Intel_Report.pdf; Ben Nimmo and Michael Flossman, “Influence and Cyber
Operations: An Update” (OpenAI, ), 
reports/influence-and-cyber-operations-an-update_October-2024.pdf; “Disrupting a Covert Iranian
Influence Operation,” OpenAI, August 16, 2024, 
influence-operation/.
22 Jason Koebler, “Where Facebook’s AI Slop Comes From,” 404 Media, August 6, 2024,
 Jason Koebler, “A ‘Law Firm’ of AI Generated
Lawyers Is Sending Fake Threats as an SEO Scam,” 404 Media, April 4, 2024, 
firm-of-ai-generated-lawyers-is-sending-fake-threats-as-an-seo-scam/. See also: Renee DiResta and
Josh A. Goldstein, “How Spammers and Scammers Leverage AI-Generated Images on Facebook for
Audience Growth,” Harvard Misinformation Review 5, no. 4 (2024),
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 13

images-on-facebook-for-audience-growth/.
23 Ren Bin Lee Dixon and Heather Frase, “An Argument for Hybrid AI Incident Reporting” (Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, ), 
content/uploads/CSET-An-Argument-for-Hybrid-AI-Incident-Reporting.pdf.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology | 14