How AI Learns the Bundeswehr’s
“Innere Führung”
Value-Based Engineering with IEEE7000TM-2021
Yvonne Hofstetter and Joseph Verbovszky Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
DAIO Study 23|10

About the Defense AI Observatory
The Defense AI Observatory (DAIO) at the Helmut Schmidt University in Hamburg
monitors and analyzes the use of artificial intelligence by armed forces. DAIO comprises
three interrelated work streams:
Culture, concept development, and organizational transformation in the context of
military innovation
Current and future conflict pictures, conflict dynamics, and operational experience,
especially related to the use of emerging technologies
Defense industrial dynamics with a particular focus on the impact of emerging
technologies on the nature and character of techno-industrial ecosystems
DAIO is an integral element of GhostPlay, a capability and technology development project
for concept-driven and AI-enhanced defense decision-making in support of fast-paced
defense operations. GhostPlay is funded by the Center for Digital and Technology Research
of the German Bundeswehr (dtec.bw).
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von

How AI Learns
the Bundeswehr’s
“Innere Führung”
Value-Based Engineering with
IEEE7000TM-2021
Yvonne Hofstetter and Joseph Verbovszky Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
DAIO Study 23|10

About the Authors
Prof. Yvonne Hofstetter is IEEE700TM Value Lead for GhostPlay, Founder and Co-Managing
Director of 21strategies GmbH and Honorary Professor for Digitalization and Society at the
Center for Ethics and Responsibility at Bonn-Rhein-Sieg University of Applied Sciences.
She is the German representative in the new NATO Data and Artificial Intelligence Review
Board (NATO DARB) and has been working at the interface of product and technology de-
velopment as well as ethics and legal issues since 1999. Prof. Hofstetter has written several
bestselling nonfiction books, including Sie wissen alles (Munich: C. Bertelsmann Verlag,
2014), Das Ende der Demokratie (Munich: C. Bertelsmann Verlag, 2016), and Der unsicht-
bare Krieg (Munich: Droemer Knaur, 2019).
Joseph Verbovszky is DAIO’s Research Fellow for defense technology-industrial affairs.
Before joining DAIO, he worked in the areas of international coordination and strategic
analysis at different defense companies. He holds a master’s degree in international
relations and economics from the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies
(SAIS). He graduated with a PhD on German Structural Pacifism from the University of the
Bundeswehr München. His Twitter account is @warkhorse.
Design
Almasy Information Design Thinking
Imprint
Yvonne Hofstetter and Joseph Verbovzsky, How AI Learns the Bundeswehr’s
“Innere Führung.” Value-Based Engineering with IEEE7000TM-2021, DAIO Study 23/10
(Hamburg: Defense AI Observatory, 2023).
Defense AI Observatory | Chair of Political Theory | Helmut Schmidt University
Holstenhofweg 85 | 22043 Hamburg | T +49 40 6541 2776
 | contact@defenseai.eu | @Defense_AIO
ISSN (online): 2749-5337
ISSN (print): 2749-5345
4 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

Content
1 Summary ..................................................................................................................... 6
2 “Innere Führung”: A Sketch ...................................................................................... 7
3 Can AI Do “Innere Führung?”A Critique of Tactical AI for the Bundeswehr. ..... 12
3.1 Values? What Values then? .........................................................................................14
3.2 A Life in Freedom for AI? ...........................................................................................15
3.3 Who Bears the Responsibility? ...................................................................................17
3.4 A Question of Time? ..................................................................................................19
4 How “Innere Führung” Comes to the Machine:
Value-Based Engineering with IEEE7000TM-2021. ................................................. 22
4.1 Of Interest: Operational Concept and Context Exploration .........................................25
4.2 The Value Exploration ................................................................................................26
4.3 From Theory to Practice: Ethical Value Requirements..................................................29
5 Conclusion. ................................................................................................................ 31
Literature ...................................................................................................................... 33
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 5

1 Summary
The increasing ubiquity of Artificial Intelligence (AI) poses significant political
consequences. The rapid proliferation of AI over the past decade has prompted
legislators and regulators to attempt to contain AI’s technological consequences.
For Germany, relevant design requirements have been expressed by the European
Commission’s High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence (HLEG AI), and,
at the national level, by the German government’s Data Ethics Commission (DEK)
as well as the German Bundestag’s Commission of Inquiry on Artificial Intelligence
(EKKI). These requirements set by commissions or working groups are not bind-
ing. Where they are not transformed into sovereign law – such as the EU AI Act,
which is expected to be passed and enter into force around 2025 – they can still
become “soft law” based on contractual agreement between social partners or,
in value chains, on the (self-) commitment to corporate social responsibility (CSR).
Violation of such soft law still bears significant financial consequences. As a result,
translation of the “principles of the ought-to-be, which provide orientation for our
actions”1 i.e., values, into technical functions of AI, becomes a priority.
This article walks through exemplary values of the Bundeswehr, which are ex-
pressed in the leadership philosophy of “Innere Führung,” and places them in the
context of AI. For the elicitation of values from “Innere Führung,” officers of the
Bundeswehr themselves were interviewed. Their remarks are followed by a quick
tour of the standard for Value-based Engineering (VBE), ISO/IEC/IEEE 24748-
7000:2022 Systems and software engineering — Life cycle management — Part
7000: Standard model process for addressing ethical concerns during system
design (in short: IEEE 7000™-2021), which was at first published by the IEEE in
. This new standard aspires to achieve a daunting task: to pro-
duce technology that meets the rigorous and complex system requirements of law
and ethics.
1 Spiekermann,„DieEthikinderKünstlichenIntelligenz.“
6 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

2 “Innere
Führung”
A Sketch
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 7

This study explores the application of “Innere Führung” (see Box 1) to defense
Artificial Intelligence (AI) through a non-representative series of interviews with
officers of the Bundeswehr in 2022.2 The interview series was based on the follow-
ing guiding question: “Please help us to understand the tension between ‘Innere
Führung’ and the use of AI in the Bundeswehr, so that
1) a ‘morally good Smart Comrade’ emerges from tactical AI,
2) which is in line with the understanding of ‘Innere Führung, ‘
3) is willingly used by the Bundeswehr, to
4) improve defense and response capabilities and
5) establish technology leadership.”
Box 1: “Innere Führung” – the Moral Code of the Bundeswehr
“InnereFührung”referstothemoralcodeoftheBundeswehr.ThiscodeseesGerman
soldiersas“CitizensinUniform,”whoremaincommittedtheprinciplesoftheGermancon-
stitution,bothinpeaceandinwar.Amongthemostprominentprinciplesarethefollowing:
Independentjudgmentonthemoralityandlegalityoforders.Germansoldiersare
forbiddentoissueorfolloworderswhicharecontrarytothenormsandprinciplesofthe
GermanBasicLaw,andevencontrarytotheirconscience
TheprimacyofcivilianpoliticalcontrolofthearmedforcesthroughtheGermanBunde-
stag(Parliament).
AclearrejectionoftheWehrmachtasasourceofmilitarytradition(exceptforthose
militaryofficerswhoformedpartoftheGermanresistancetoHitler).
Source:“WasbedeutetInnereFührung.”
2 Thesamplesizeis10.Inthefollowing,thecitationsrefertotheanonymizedinterviewees(capitalletter)andtherespective
pagenumberoftheprotocol.Inordertoadequatelycapturethemeaningoftheparticipants’statements,mostareprovidedin
theoriginalGerman.Acourtesyapproximatetranslationisofferedinthefootnotes.
8 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

In the following examples, a few voices from the interviews highlight the issues
raised.
“Innere Führung” is unique to the Bundeswehr:
(Innere Führung ist) (e)in sehr weites Feld, ein absolutes Alleinstellungsmerk-
mal der Bundeswehr. Ich habe das sehr spezifisch erlebt, dann im Kontext mit
anderen Armeen.3
The sources of “Innere Führung” are first and foremost the applicable law, espe-
cially the Basic Law and international law. With its recourse to the Basic Law, the
Bundeswehr commits itself to a certain conception of man: it is the conception of
the “person (‘per se existere’), who is individually distinct from all others (‘per se
unum’) and free [because] acting out of himself (‘per se agere’).”4 This definition
from Thomas Aquinas elevates the person through dignity (in contrast to objects)
to a legal subject and bearer of rights and legal obligations. Moreover, a person
always remains sovereign, i.e., free both in its decisions and actions. This freedom
of choice of the person constitutes his dignity and remains the normative founda-
tion for individual members of the Bundeswehr.
As sovereign individuals (persons), members of the Bundeswehr are not only
bearers of their own dignity. In the event of conflict, the dignity of the enemy must
also be respected and upheld. For this purpose – in addition to their commitment
to the Basic Law – the Bundeswehr can draw on international humanitarian law,
as well as their own moral understanding of humanity – as constructed historically
and culturally in Europe:
Auch wenn etwas nicht vorgeschrieben oder verboten ist, gibt es trotzdem
das Prinzip der Humanität – dass man sich (durch Humanität) leiten lässt (und
einschätzt), ob es richtig ist, nach dem moralischen Kompass, den wir als
Staatsbürger in Uniform haben sollten, etwas zu tun oder (besser) nicht zu tun.5
The quotation suggests that “procedural ethics without procedure,” i.e., ethics
without context-related specifications such as the Kantian moral doctrine with its
“intended nature of actions”, is also6 a legitimate source of “Innere Führung.” This
specifically refers to the knowledge (of facts) and the conscience of members of
the Bundeswehr:
3 “(‘InnereFührung’is)abroadtopic,anabsolutelyuniquetotheBundeswehr.Ihaveexperiencedthisfirsthand,andtheninthe
contextofothermilitaries.”21strategies,E-2.
4 ThomasAquinas,quotedfrom:Prechtl/Burkard,MetzlerLexikonPhilosophie,p.444.
5 “Evenifsomethingisnotprescribedorforbidden,thereisneverthelesstheprincipleofhumanity–thatoneisguided(by
humanity)andassesseswhetheritisrighttodosomethingor(better)nottodosomethingaccordingtothemoralcompassthat
weshouldhaveascitizensinuniform.”21strategies,D-34.
6 Vöneky,“EthicalExpertsandMoralAuthoritarianism,”p.88.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 9

(Innere Führung) sagt zum einen: Jeder Soldat ist auch ein denkender,
fühlender, ethisch bewertender Mensch. Und das zuerst, bevor er oder sie
Soldat ist. Und (er oder sie) darf auch, muss auch nach ethischen Grundprinzip-
ien handeln.7
Ethics and morality, in addition to applicable law, are therefore prescriptive for the
self-image of the Bundeswehr.
Morality, since it also concerns the “feeling of one’s own dignity and questions as
to whereby our life acquires meaning or finds fulfillment,”8 is to be assigned to
the world of feelings according to the prevailing legal opinion.9 Federal military
officers likewise interpret ethics and morals as subjective feelings or intuitions:
Dann gibt es ja das Bauchgefühl, nachdem jemand entscheidet… der am
Ende auch entweder wertebasiert entscheidet oder eine rein statistische Entsc-
heidung (trifft), weil: Ich habe das schon zehn Mal gesehen. Dann wird es beim
elften Mal auch richtig.10
Conscience as an intuition, which is shaped by an individual’s “world view, (...)
religion, (...) upbringing, (...) parental example, (...) socialization at school, in the
community,”11 also poses risks for the Bundeswehr:
Im Prinzip können Sie (Werte) nur vorleben und hoffen, dass [die Formung]
funktioniert, aber Sie wissen (es) nicht. 12
Dem Soldaten sein Gewissen zu geben – als mächtige Waffe und als Ein-
schätzungstool –, ist nicht einfach. Deswegen tut das Militär das normalerwei-
se nicht; und deswegen ist es in Deutschland auf dramatische Weise schief
gegangen. (Trotzdem) sagt die Bundeswehr: Wir akzeptieren die Probleme,
die wir damit haben.13
7 “(‘InnereFührung’)saysontheonehand:Everysoldierisalsoathinking,feeling,ethicallyevaluatinghumanbeing.Andthatfirst,
beforeheorsheisasoldier.And(heorshe)mayalso,mustalsoactaccordingtobasicethicalprinciples.”21strategies,E-14.
8 Prechtl/Burkard,MetzlerLexikonPhilosophie,p.391.
9 “Againstthefactthatsucharationaljustificationofnormativestatementsispossible,manyhaveobjected(...).Theyhaveall
assumed,withdifferentreasons,thatethicalstatementsarenotstatementscapableofjustificationortruth,buteithermere
shamstatements,oronlyexpressionsoffeeling,recommendations,orimperatives.”Vöneky,“EthischeExpertenundmoralis-
cherAutortarismus,”p.89.
10 “Thenthereisthegutfeeling,accordingtowhichsomeonedecides...whointheendalsoeitherdecidesbasedonvaluesor
(makes)apurelystatisticaldecision,because(theythinktothemselves):Ihavealreadyseenthistentimes.Thenitwillalsobe
righttheeleventhtime.”21strategies,A-63.
11 Ibid.,G-14.
12 “Basically,youcanonlymodel(values)andhopethat[shaping]works,butyoudon’tknow(it).”Ibid.,I-50.
13 “Givingthesoldierhisconscience–asapowerfulweaponandassessmenttool–isnoteasy.That’swhythemilitaryusually
doesn’tdoit;andthat’swhyitwentdramaticallywronginGermany.(Nevertheless)theBundeswehrsays:Weacceptthe
problemswehavewithit.”Ibid.,E-74.
10 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

The problems implicit in the quotations are not primarily caused by the individual
soldier, but by the lack of objectively valid norms for moral action. “What used
to be regarded as the basic ethical tenets of Western civilization (...) [had] been
devalued over time to the level of mere conventions (as easily replaceable as a
code of table manners).”14 In 1965, Hannah Arendt lamented the lack of objectivi-
ty in morality and hoped at least for a “moral taste” that transcends society:15 “Es
widerspricht eigentlich dem Menschlichen, der menschlichen Natur, wenn man
Sadist ist oder Mörder.”16
In addition to the normative, prescriptive power for members of the Bundeswehr
as a whole, “Innere Führung” influences the understanding of leadership and
hierarchy with the military organization:
(Innere Führung stellt) aber auch sehr hohe Ansprüche an die Führung, denn
ich muss auch so führen, um meinen Soldaten diesen Raum zu geben, dass sie
selber als Menschen mit Emotionen, Ethik, Moral nach moralischen Aspekten
handeln können und dürfen.17
In this context, the concept of “Führen mit Auftrag” – often used synonymously
with the term “Auftragstaktik”18 – is juxtaposed to command tactics:
Das sind für mich die beiden Hauptpunkte (bei der Inneren Führung), dass
man (i) eine gewisse Freiheit bzw. Flexibilität bei der Auftragserfüllung hat und
(ii) gleichzeitig halt nicht jeden Auftrag oder Befehl umsetzen muss, sondern
eher dazu angehalten ist, auch innezuhalten und aufzuzeigen, wenn offensicht-
lich was Verbrecherisches oder Selbstmörderisches befohlen wird. 19
When leading with a mission, the superior military leadership entrusts subordi-
nates to carry out the mission they have been given according to the commander’s
intent without the need for explicit instruction. In the sense of this intersubjective
process, “Innere Führung” is considered successful when the subordinates retain
their freedom of conscience and action, but at the same time the leadership itself
also behaves in an exemplary manner.
14 Arendt,DasUrteilen,p.166.
15 Ibid.,p.167.
16 “Itactuallycontradictshumannature,ifoneisasadistoramurderer.”21strategies,G-11.
17 “(‘InnereFührung’alsoputs)veryhighdemandsontheleadership,becauseImustalsoleadinsuchawaytogivemysoldiers
thisspacethattheythemselvescanandmayactaspeoplewithemotions,ethics,moralsaccordingtomoralaspects.”Ibid.,
E-7.
18 FührenmitAuftragisgenerallyunderstoodasleadingwiththemissioninmindwhileAuftragstaktikcanbetranslatedas
missiontactics.
19 “Forme,thesearethetwomainpoints(in‘InnereFührung’),that(i)onehasacertainfreedomorflexibilityintheexecutionof
ordersand(ii)atthesametimeonedoesnothavetoimplementeveryorderbutisratherrequiredtopauseandpointoutwhen
somethingobviouslycriminalorsuicidalisordered.”Ibid.,D-20.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 11

3 Can AI Do
“Innere
Führung?”
A Critique of Tactical AI for the Bundeswehr
12 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

Ich behaupte, wir gewinnen dann, wenn wir at machine speed arbeiten. Und
das heißt, wir müssen eigentlich den Menschen rausnehmen. Großes Entset-
zen immer.20
With its principles of the rule of law and ethics and morality, the Bundeswehr
engages the full potential of Third Wave AI (“tactical AI”). Reconnaissance, evalu-
ation, situational analysis, warning, and even information aggregation have been
traditional fields for the application of Second Wave AI for the military since the
1990s. But for modern defense, these capabilities alone are no longer sufficient.
Today, the Bundeswehr demands strategic and tactical capabilities from machines
that take place at machine speed. Tactical AI is the basis of those machines that
“take the man out.” Battlefield simulators and training systems, (partially) autono-
mous drones in the air and at sea as well as on land, smart munitions, cyber-phys-
ical systems, or cross-domain AI-controlled networks of defenders – the list of
conceivable fields of application for tactical AI is extensive. At the strategic level,
it aims to compress planning cycles – such as an air tasking orders – to a third or a
quarter of the time required at present.21 At the operational level, it can increase
the combat value of legacy systems, transform them into technically (partially)
autonomous weapon systems,22 establish higher self-protection, optimize ammuni-
tion consumption and logistics, or even provide algorithmic tactical command and
control of units during battle. In the future, the commander no longer uses AI. The
AI is the commander.
Tactical AI for the Bundeswehr, however, is the subject of a debate: “There is
always great horror.” This is because tactical AI for the military operates in an
extreme environment: it serves the state’s use of force; and as tactical AI in the
service of the state, it must be embedded in the legal and value framework of
the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany, relevant EU regulations and
(humanitarian) international law, or more precisely: in the Bundeswehr’s leadership
principle, “Innere Führung.” It proves to be a great challenge to transform legal,
ethical, or social norms into the functions of a software system.
20 “Imaintainthatwewinwhenweworkatmachinespeed.Andthatmeansweactuallyhavetotakethehumanoutofit.Great
horroralways.”Ibid.,F-1.
21 ThisaspectisaddressedbytheDefenseAdvancedResearchProjectsAgency’sStrategicChaosEngineforPlanning,Tactics,
ExperimentationandResiliency(SCEPTER)researchproject.Seefurther:“DARPASCEPTERprogramwillexploremachine-gen-
eratedstrategiesforwarfare”.
22 Vieregge,„FähigkeitslückederBundeswehrschließen.“
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 13

3.1 Values? What Values then?
The positive meanings that members of the Bundeswehr attribute to “Innere
Führung” read like a colorful bouquet of good intentions and positive qualities.
De facto, the officers express a plethora of ideas in connection with “Innere
Führung” that trigger certain emotional states in them as “feeling and desiring
subjects (...).”23 What moves their souls ranges from A for adventurousness to Z for
Zeitgeist.
One main reason for the high number of differing ideas expressed by the study
participants is the lack of moral objectivity. That value views are subjectively influ-
enced24 and are formed against the background of certain ideologies, world views
or paradigms i.e., “cultural background radiation,”25 is described by a general
as follows: “Aber was wollen wir? Es wird andere geben, die sagen: Was ist das,
ethisch? Ethisch ist, wenn wir gewinnen und die anderen verlieren.”26
In addition to the subjective world of experience, there is another deficit: A “philo-
sophically founded conceptual world” is missing,27 when people talk about values.
The structural properties of values are not reflected in language as the language of
values is not precise enough. At the same time, the “critique of language (...) is a
constitutive part of methodological philosophy and ethics.”28 This inadequacy is a
crucial reason for the difficulties of developers and engineers to implement tactical
AI as a bearer of the desired positive ideas or even capable of supporting them.
“Technical robustness and security” or “transparency,” three meanings as defined
by the HLEG AI Ethics Checklist for AI,29 are generally quality attributes of techni-
cal systems,30 as they were described by default in software specifications before
agile software development began to prevail. They are “hygiene requirements”
for software systems,31 or, more pointedly expressed: They are self-evident. But
for more than two decades, greatly shortened software development cycles, cost
pressures, the focus on shareholder value, the commoditization of programming
power, and the resulting faster time to market of software have worked in favor of
a manufacturer’s or operator’s sales and profits; but at the same time, the quality
23 Scheler,DerFormalismusinderEthikunddieMaterialeWertethik,p.10.
24 “MaxSchelerwastheprophetofanewobjectivism.ItwastobehisradicaldemolitionoftheoldKantiansecuringsubjectiv-
ism:(...)oftheethicalsecuringoftheworldofidealsandvaluesbysubjectiveautonomy(...).”Citedaccordingto:Przywara,
Humanitas:DerMenschgesternundmorgen,pp.30-31.
25 Funk,Roboter-undK-Ethik,p.17.
26 “Butwhatdowewant?Therewillbeotherswhosay,whatisthat,ethical?Ethicaliswhenwewinandtheylose.”21strategies,
F-48.
27 Spiekermann„DieEthikinderKünstlichenIntelligenz.“
28 Funk,Roboter-undKI-Ethik,p.36.
29 Election,“High-LevelExpertGroupPublishesEthicsChecklist(2020).”
30 Spiekermann,“Value-basedEngineering:PrinzipienundMotivationfürbessereIT-Systeme.”Seealso:
wiki/List_of_system_quality_attributes(lastaccessed:October17,2022)
31 SarahSpiekermann,personalcommunications,November12,2021.
14 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

of even mission-critical systems has suffered greatly. Fatal evidence is provided
by the crashes of two Boeing 737 MAX-8 aircraft which were attributable to poor
software design, as well as to the lack of the aerodynamics expertise of the pro-
grammers involved.32
The self-evident expected quality attributes of software systems are far from
sufficient to realize core values such as human dignity and freedom, peace, justice,
or virtuous character traits such as love of one’s homeland, truthfulness, or courage
in tactical AI. Value--based AI must therefore be preceded by meaning-making
and rigorous conceptualization, a task that the IEEE 7000™-2021 standard for
values-based technology imposes on value leads – a wholly new employment
category in software development. Their role and scope of responsibilities in the
development process will be addressed in chapter 4.
3.2 A Life in Freedom for AI?
Intuitively, officers mentally transfer the idea of being human to tactical AI as well.
Especially, since it is currently being considered, that tactical AI could evaluate
moral behavior, judge ethically or abide by human laws on its own:
Ich gebe dem Smart Gepard die Regeln vor, an die wir uns noch moralisch und
ethisch gebunden fühlen.33
Wenn wir sagen, Innere Führung in der KI... wie macht man das? Indem man
sie so trainiert, dass sie die Dinge, die sie dann auslösen soll, an den Maßstä-
ben orientiert, die man als Mensch vielleicht anlegt.34
Aber das ist so interessant an der KI. (KI) ist vielleicht sogar noch menschlicher
als der Mensch selbst und in gewissen Situationen auch sicherlich berechen-
barer als ein Soldat.35
The tendency to view AI systems not as things, as objects, but as “subjects of
ethical judgment”36 is as questionable as it is profound. If one considers AI as
32 BoeinghaslostexperiencedaircraftengineersoverthelasttwentyyearsandmovedsoftwaredevelopmenttoIndia;manyan
engineerhasleftthecompanybecauseheknewabouttheshortcomingsandhowmanagementdealtwiththeerrors.Foran
exampleoftheprocess,see:Spaeth,“FundamentalSoftwareFlawFoundinBoeing737Max.”
33 “IgivetheSmartGepardtherulestowhichwestillfeelmorallyandethicallybound.”21strategies,E-60.
34 “Whenwesay‘InnereFührung’inAI...howdoyoudothat?Bytrainingitinsuchawaythatitthenorientsthethingsitissup-
posedtotriggertothestandardsthatyoumightapplyasahumanbeing.”Ibid.,F-3.
35 “Butthat’swhat’ssointerestingaboutAI.(AI)isperhapsevenmorehumanthanhumansthemselvesandcertainlymore
predictablethanasoldierincertainsituations.”Ibid.,I-57.
36 Funk,Roboter-undKI-Ethik,p.40.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 15

an object, then AI ethics is to be understood as people “morally scrutinizing the
purposeful use (of AI).”37 This is a different case from two other definitions of AI
ethics, according to which (i) AI could itself make ethical considerations and (ii) AI
would have to follow rules and regulations.38 In the latter two cases, we would be
talking about AI as a subject that could itself act morally and be subject to a code
– a written or unwritten ethos.
What is remarkable about the last two quotes is the way they are expressed in
relation to AI. “(AI) is perhaps even more human” is not the same as “(AI) acts
perhaps even more human” or “(AI) behaves perhaps even more human.” Persons
act in freedom of action, the “capacity and (the) ability to act consciously and
voluntarily.”39 However, tactical AI never acts in this sense, simply because it lacks
the intrinsic capacity to do so. Regardless of its amazing technical skills, it has “no
personal character because it is unable to give itself laws but must obey human
laws.”40 As a machine, it lacks consciousness, voluntariness, its own motivation.
Ignoring the lack of theoretically exact formulations in the aforementioned quotes,
the three interviewees used as examples are instinctively hesitant to grant AI
the same freedom as humans. “AI is more human,” denotes nothing more than
being in the sense of a possibility that humanity might be intrinsic to the material
object called AI. “Things it is then supposed to trigger,” leaves open whether AI
either acts or behaves without mental processes, or simply functions, because the
utterance focuses only on the effect of AI. “Actions that the machine ended up
performing,”41 indicates that the actual action – the use of AI – is assigned to the
soldier; it is the soldier’s action that is causal for the effect of the AI.
The object property of AI would also be on the verge of dissolution if AI were to
adhere to an ethos, a code. Both sovereign law such as the Basic Law and the
Rules of Engagement of the German armed forces are such codes. With a view
to the discussion of values, they standardize the “ethical minimum” in the best
case.42 Law, however, is created by people for people – and not by people for
machines. Law makes people free, because people are given the freedom to vio-
late the law. The enforcement of rules by machines – the smart car that won’t start
because its occupants haven’t buckled up yet – means coercion and moral pater-
nalism. Thus, if an AI were able or required to observe human codes itself, it would
become the “subject of moral action” in this case as well.43 Would the subjection
37 Ibid.,p.25.
38 Ibid.,pp.69-88.
39 Prechtl/Burkard,MetzlerLexikonPhilosophie,p.188.
40 “Personisthatsubjectwhoseactionsarecapableofimputation.Moralpersonalityisthereforenothingotherthanthefreedom
ofarationalbeingundermorallaws...,fromwhichitthenfollowsthatapersonissubjecttonootherlawsthanthosewhichhe
(eitheralone,oratleastsimultaneouslywithothers)givestohimself.”KantsgesammelteSchriften,AA22.
41 21strategies,E-24.
42 “Therightisnothingotherthantheethicalminimum.”AttributedtoGeorgJellinek(1851-1911).
43 Cf:Funk,Roboter-undKI-Ethik,p.69.
16 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

of AI to human laws then have the consequence that AI could or would also have
to bear responsibility?
3.3 Who Bears the Responsibility?
With the imagined subjectification and individualization of AI, the human-machine
blurring of the digital age would advance further. However, the concept of the
person still has legal validity. Only the subject, not an object like AI, can make free
ethical judgments and act freely. The human being – and only the human being –
therefore bears the responsibility for freely made value judgments and his or her
free actions:
Lenkwaffen kann ich, nachdem ich sie abgeschossen habe, (auch) nicht mehr
sehen. Ich kann sie nicht mehr steuern. Ich kann nicht mehr eingreifen, und ich
bin trotzdem dafür verantwortlich, wenn die eben kein Kampfflugzeug treffen,
sondern einen zivilen Jet. Und dann bin ich wieder dran, und das auch zu
Recht.44
Responsibility for their actions is a central concern for members of the Bundes-
wehr, especially when they have led to the death of both comrades and enemies.
It is important for officers to explain the reasons and intentions of their actions:
Wo Menschen arbeiten, passieren Fehler. Wenn das im militärischen Einsatz
schlimm wird, muss man auch zu seiner Verantwortung dort stehen, solange
man sagt: Ich habe das aus diesen und diesen Gründen gemacht. Ich bin in
der Conclusio zu dem Ergebnis gekommen: Ich kann das verantworten.45
Responsibility is something that describes an intersubjective happening. It involves
the discussing and the processing of events from person to person. The interview-
ees explicitly emphasize the differences between humans and machines, especially
the human capacity for empathy, compassion, strength, intuition, mercy. Respon-
sibility is also the reason why officers prefer human decisions to more precise
and accurate machine calculations, even when a human decision has turned out
completely wrong:
44 “IcannolongerseeguidedmissilesafterIhaveshotthem(either).Icannolongercontrolthem.Icannolongerintervene,and
I’mstillresponsibleiftheydon’thitafighterplane,butacivilianjet.Andthenit’smyturnagain,andrightlyso.”21strategies,
E-30.
45 “Whereverpeoplework,mistakeshappen.Ifthingsgowronginamilitaryoperation,youhavetoacceptyourresponsibility,as
longasyousay:Ididthisforsuchandsuchreasons.Intheend,Ihavecometotheconclusion:Icantakeresponsibility for
that.”Ibid.,C-118.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 17

Die Entscheidung der KI könnte ja sogar besser sein im Sinne von: Sie hat viel-
leicht zu weniger Toten geführt auf der eigenen Seite. Aber die Angehörigen
der gestorbenen Kameraden haben niemanden, mit dem sie darüber reden
können. Und ist das nicht am Ende furchtbarer als andere Konsequenzen, die
man aber im Nachhinein bearbeiten kann?46
Aber einem autonomen System verzeihen Sie keine Fehler. Einem Menschen
verzeihen Sie immer Fehler oder eher Fehler.47
Without exception, all interviewees support the use of AI; likewise across inter-
views, there is agreement that only the military leader is responsible for the use of
AI:
(D)as einzig Realistische, Pragmatische, was wir beim Militär auch noch immer
brauchen, ist, dass jener, der dieses Produkt am Ende einsetzt, derjenige ist,
der die Verantwortung trägt. Man wird (die Verantwortung für den Einsatz
von KI) nicht auf den Entwickler, der sie fünf Jahre vorher programmiert hat,
zurückführen können.48
But the willingness to take responsibility for the use of a machine is conditional:
“(W)hat can [operators] do to live up to this responsibility for the actions that the
machine has carried out?”49 Soldiers want to know “their” AI inside and out and
what they are getting into before they put AI into real-world use: “Then I need
really good training, and very realistic training.”50 In addition to intensive human
training with an AI, there is also a requirement that the functioning of the AI is
ensured through a quality assurance process and standards:
Da wird man wahrscheinlich Standards schaffen müssen. Wie oft und mit
welcher Fehlerwahrscheinlichkeiten muss in einem gewissen Szenario die KI zu
folgendem Ergebnis kommen?51
As a second prerequisite, the respondents report – keeping with the spirit of
“Innere Führung” – is that they be granted freedom of choice. They want to
decide for themselves whether they want to use tactical AI or not:
46 “ThedecisionoftheAIcouldevenbebetterinthesenseof:Itmayhaveledtofewerdeathsontheownside.Buttherelatives
ofthedeadcomradeshavenoonetotalktoaboutitwith.Andisn’tthatintheendmoreterriblethanotherconsequencesthat 
canbedealtwithafterwards?”Ibid.,B-72.
47 “Butyoudonotforgiveanautonomoussystemformistakes.Ahumanbeingyoualwaysforgivemistakesorrathererrors.”
Ibid.,I-54.
48 “(T)heonlyrealistic,pragmaticthingwestillneedinthemilitaryisthatthepersonwhousesthisproductintheendistheone
whobearstheresponsibility.Youwon’tbeabletoput(theresponsibilityforusingAI)backonthedeveloperwhoprogrammed
itfiveyearsbefore.”Ibid.,E-25.
49 Ibid.,E-24.
50 Ibid.,E-40.
51 “Standardswillprobablyhavetobecreated.HowoftenandwithwhaterrorprobabilitiesmusttheAIarriveatthefollowing
resultinacertainscenario?”Ibid.,F-34.
18 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

Die KI darf nicht Unsicherheiten in die Situation bringen. Deshalb würde ich
vielleicht sagen, ein militärischer Führer, der (KI) einsetzt, sollte sich dazu viel-
leicht selbst entscheiden. Also nicht so, dass ein anderer ihm sagt: Du musst
diese KI nutzen.52
So while the interviewees are all in favor of using AI – even with technical auton-
omous capabilities and even if the two prerequisites of quality assurance and
training are met, and soldiers are then also willing to take full responsibility for the
functioning of the AI – they still need inner strength when it comes to the time gap
between the deployment decision and the effect.
3.4 A Question of Time?
How is it that people assume AI makes free decisions? The question becomes
particularly precarious in the military use of AI, where a fight-or-kill decision is
at stake. It is also the issue at stake in the debate on the outlawing of “killer
robots” or “lethal autonomous weapon systems” at the Permanent Conference on
Disarmament.
One officer sums it up: The problem lies with the question of time. When tactical
AI is used, the effect is either severely delayed or occurs at machine speed i.e., so
quickly that the human seems to be no longer in control of the AI. In addition, the
soldierly action of employing AI is taken in the complex dynamic environment of
the battlefield. In this dynamic environment, time is also relevant because the envi-
ronment is constantly evolving. The deployer’s own actions and the functioning of
the AI are thus doubly “in time.” They are closely linked to the medium of time:
Der Schuss muss durch das Individuum (abgelegt) werden. Jetzt übertragen
wir das auf den Leopard. Er markiert das Ziel. Da ist es eigentlich kein Prob-
lem. Klar (schießt der Leopard) auf das Ziel, aber da ist schon vorher alles
gelaufen. Es ist interessant – der Faktor Zeit.53
What is expressed here is a theory of time that defines time as a sequence of
causal relationships, as a flow of cause and effect.54 While knowledge as a state
of cognition plays the greatest role in the decision to act quickly, in the delayed
52 “AIshouldnotbringuncertaintyintothesituation.SomaybeIwouldsayamilitaryleaderwhouses(AI)shoulddecideonthat
himself.Soit’snotlikesomeoneelseistellinghim:youhavetousethisAI.”Ibid.,B-95.
53 “Theshotmustbetakenbytheindividual.Nowwetransferthistotheleopard.Hemarksthetarget.Thereitisactuallyno
problem.Sure(shootstheleopard)onthetarget,butthereeverythinghasalreadyrunbefore.Itisinteresting–thefactor
time.”Ibid.,I-98.
54 Cf:Reichenbach,TheDirectionofTime.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 19

effect of an action, the human deployer decides now whether to deploy tactical
AI. His action is now causal for the later effect of the AI, which may only occur with
a (long) time delay. This is because the deployer and the AI may be “disconnect-
ed” from each other in time – perhaps even in location. In AI reinforcement learn-
ing, such a temporal effect is known as Temporal Difference. A backgammon AI
must make a move now but does not “know” until much later whether that move
now will help win the board game at the end of the game. Thus, the effect of a
move made now will not occur until 1,500, 1,800, 2,300, or x time steps later. The
situation is very similar when using a tactical AI. Due to the time-delayed effect,
it appears as if the AI has made its own combat or kill decision (“autonomously”)
and not the military leader, who already decided long before on the deployment.
He makes the decision to act now, but the effect of his decision to act is both
temporally and spatially distanced from him.
Some people do not like this temporal and spatial distance between decision and
consequence:
(Autonomie, BVR55 ist,) was dem typischen Panzersoldaten nicht gefällt. Der
möchte gerne aus seiner Luke alles sehen. Obwohl er weiß, dass er da extrem
gefährdet ist, wollen trotzdem alle oben rausschauen und wollen dann die
Entscheidung treffen, wer wohin fährt.56
The disconnect between decision and effect is not new:
(Der Einsatz von KI) ist am Ende des Tages nicht viel anderes als das, was der
Offizier – wenn man über einen klassischen Krieg redet – irgendwo in seinem
Zelt [tut], das auf dem Gefechtsfeld steht, aber halt zehn Kilometer hinter
der Front, und der seinen Truppen gesagt hat: Bitte diese Stellung da vorne
einnehmen. Und der dafür verantwortlich ist, dass die [Truppen] es richtig tun
und nicht das Dorf und die Zivilisten daneben attackieren. 57
This leads a colonel to conclude that, after all, Auftragstaktik “is the right leader-
ship philosophy (for AI) because Auftragstaktik only provides the “what,” but not
the “how,” and the framework of AI has already been established.”58
55 BVR:BeyondVisualRange.
56 “(Autonomy,BVR),whichisnottothelikingofthetypicaltanksoldier.Hewouldliketoseeeverythingfromhishatch.Although 
heknowsthatheisextremelyendangered,everyonestillwantstolookoutfromaboveandthendecidewhogoeswhere.”
21strategies,E-27
57 “(TheuseofAI)is,attheendoftheday,notmuchdifferentthanwhattheofficer–ifyou’retalkingaboutaclassicwar–[does] 
somewhereinhistent,whichisonthebattlefield,butjusttenkilometersbehindthefront,andwhohastoldhistroops:Please 
takethispositioninfront.Andheisresponsibleformakingsurethatthe[troops]doitrightanddon’tattackthevillageandthe 
civiliansnexttoit.”Ibid.,E-27.
58 Personalcommunication,April13,2022.
20 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

The problem of time between action and effect, can be elucidated by reference
to neuroscientific literature, which deals with reward for decisions. People prefer
decisions whose effects occur in temporal proximity to the decision over those for
which they have to wait longer for the onset of the effect.59 This explains people’s
discomfort with the use of autonomous systems. It is not based on the dissolu-
tion of the object character of AI or the questioning that humans act and AI only
functions. Rather, it is the psychological reasons that lead to discomfort. Thus,
“delay discounting” sets in for decisions with deferred effects,60 based on motives
such as doubts, misgivings, temptations, and so on. In contrast, the deployer of AI
needs willpower to compartmentalize the use of tactical AI against the uncertainty
or unease that then follow until the AI finally takes effect. At this point, it should
be noted that the misgivings as “un-values” must also be included in a value
consideration of “Innere Führung.” This is because values not only have positive
meanings, but negative ones as well. As un-virtues – or vices –, some of them can
be studied, for example, on the basis of Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics.61
59 Klapproth,“Timeanddecisionmakinginhumans.”
60 Ibid.
61 Birnbacher,AnalytischeEinführungindieEthik,p.68.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 21

4 How “Innere
Führung”
Comes to the
Machine
Value-Based Engineering with
IEEE7000TM-2021
22 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

As recently as , the globally renowned Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) published the IEEE 7000™-2021 standard for VBE,
which addresses a difficult task: merging the humanities and the sciences. The
standard, which requires both a specific process and work products (outcomes)
to demonstrate full conformity of technology to applicable law and other societal
demands, has a well-thought-out philosophical core full of intrinsic beauty. This is
owed less to the standard itself than to its underlying ethical pluralism, based on
the theories of great (Western) philosophers, especially of the 18th and 19th cen-
turies. At the same time, potential future versions of the standard do not exclude
considering axiologies from other cultural regions of the world – because the IEEE
is represented worldwide.
IEEE 7000™-2021 is a global blueprint that is applicable to system designs from
all industries in all countries. In particular, IEEE 7000™-2021 is also applicable
to military systems and Defense AI. This is not a foregone conclusion, as a vote
among members of the standards body on the applicability of the standard to
defense systems came up very close. After all, one intention of the standardization
body was to “pull the teeth out of startups,” with a focus to tame digital busi-
nesses and software systems that neglect law and ethics for the sake of corporate
growth and revenue-making, harming democracy (e.g. Twitter), physical health
(e.g. Instagram) or truth (e.g. Facebook).62 It is clear, however, that it is the state
which is bound by constitutionally guaranteed rights and the rule of law in a very
different way than private companies are. The need to build and deploy legally
and ethically compliant technology is disproportionately greater for the state than
for private organizations. Accordingly, the (supra-)state interest in IEEE 7000™-
2021 is high. Also, in 2022 the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) have adopted the
standard,63 and NATO considers to re-use or amend it for its own standardization
efforts.
IEEE 7000™-2021 belongs to a series of standards, of which those following
standard 7000 deal with technical details: with the transparency of autonomous
systems (7001), the governability of personal data (7002), or algorithmic biases
(7003). Standard 7000 requires precise philosophical work. This is a major chal-
lenge for technologists and engineers, who often find nothing further from their
minds than to tailor their technology to non-technical needs that require interpre-
tation. Incidentally, this is also the challenge encountered by other international
technical standardization organizations. Technically adept, standards bodies are
often speechless when it comes to law and ethics.
62 SarahSpiekermann,personalcommunication,February17,2022.
63 ForISO/IEC/IEEE24748-7000,seealso:
2b730be96522/iso-iec-ieee-fdis-24748-7000(lastaccessedOctober17,2022).
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 23

VBE’s social innovation therefore includes so-called value leads. They form a
new profession and must be trained in value axiology and ethical theories. In
system development, they are responsible for conceptual work, as we indicated
in chapter 3, and the ethical analysis of requirements. In doing so, they act in
equal measure as collectors, structurers, and facilitators who can fit seamlessly
into any common approach to software development, analogous to product
management.64 Value leads are responsible for the outcomes that the standard
calls for, have both contextual and domain knowledge, knowing the value quali-
ties of a domain, and ethical education, with which they align (objective) ethical
requirements for tactical AI with its stakeholders, the literature, applicable law and
legislative intent. Value leads possess the virtue of apatheia, the restraint of one’s
own opinion, and should not consider their own ideas, but instead the demands of
a system’s stakeholders.65
VBE with IEEE 7000™-2021 confronts the disorder that has entered the domain of
ethics as Hannah Arendt described: “We would not need to worry about all this if
metaphysics and this whole value business were not so dilapidated.”66 People can
probably deal with the confusion of values that Hannah Arendt already criticized,
but machines certainly cannot. The special appeal of IEEE 7000™-2021 therefore
lies in the logic and design of the standard and where it deals with values, their
elicitation, prioritization, and translation into technical requirements. It is based
on Max Scheler’s axiology. Whereas Immanuel Kant ethically bound the world by
ideals and values accessible to subjective reason, “everything to the narrowness
of man,”67 Max Scheler breaks with the subjective and with his Material Ethics
of Values introduces an objectivism open to infinity.68 Scheler’s theory of values
objectifies the definition of values by stating: Values exist a priori without subjec-
tive cognition and independent of context.69 This makes the standard applicable
across cultures and nations, and regardless of whether the technology in question
is a commercial system or one of defense. For defense, VBE is fully applicable with
IEEE 7000™-2021 in its entirety.70
64 Theseincludethewaterfallmodel,theV-ModellXToragilesoftwaredevelopmentuptotheagileoverallorganizationaccord-
ingtotheSAFe®processmodel.
65 SarahSpiekermann,personalcommunication,February17,2022.
66 Arendt,DasUrteilen,p.172.
67 Przywara,Humanitas:DerMenschgesternundmorgen,pp.30-31.
68 Ibid.
69 Onthe“independenceofthebeingofvaluesfromthings,goods,statesofaffairs,”see:Scheler,DerFormalismusinderEthik
unddieMaterialeWertethik,p.7.
70 NATO’sInnovationUnithasmadeasensibleproposalforamoredetaileddesignofthestandard.There,thequestionisbeing
examinedwhetherexistingtoolsofthestandardcandetailindividualprocessstepsofthestandard.
24 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

4.1 Of Interest: Operational Concept and
Context Exploration
Scheler’s open view into infinity is urgently needed in tactical AI, because the lists
of qualities of “robust” or “trustworthy” or “ethical” AI mentioned at the begin-
ning – such as those drawn up by HLEG AI – lead into a predefined narrowness
and are not sufficient to implement value-based AI. Linguistically imprecise and
unsystematic, they establish a pre-selection of phenomena that influence an en-
gineer and hinder his creativity, rather than motivating him to explore values that
are relevant to a defined AI system. In contrast, VBE assesses only a single System
of Interest (SOI) at a time in its own unique context. Each individual AI has its own
value qualities that are highly context-specific – just as fruit carries the value of
good taste, but the quality of good taste is different depending on whether the
fruit is a strawberry or an avocado – and extends beyond the aforementioned lists.
This is also why, according to IEEE 7000™-2021, only a single AI system can be
certified, not the manufacturing company as a whole.
To illustrate an SOI, imagine that tactical AI is used in the decommissioned air
defense tank Gepard to transform the unit that normally has a crew of three into
a technically autonomous robot. With the help of tactical AI, the Gepard can
become a Smart Gepard71 – completely uncrewed. What would be the scope
of the SOI then? Would it be solely about the AI software or even just one of its
components? Then it would probably also include the data on the basis of which
the SOI would become active, i.e., the sensor technology. If the smart Gepard de-
pended on its own sensor technology, its sensor technology would also have to be
included in the VBE value analysis. Perhaps, however, its outdated sensors would
no longer be needed. If the Smart Gepard instead obtained its data from a net-
work, it would have to be analyzed who provided the data that caused it to take
certain actions. This already shows how important the selection of a SOI’s suppliers
is. Are the suppliers honest and transparent about how they govern data?
The analysis of the SOI also includes the context in which a Smart Gepard would
be deployed. Was it just a demonstrator to show how tactical AI allows a lifecycle
extension of legacy equipment? Or would the Smart Gepard enter combat oper-
ations in Ukraine? It depends on the concept of operations and the operational
environment whose and which values are affected. In the first case, perhaps only
government auditing, the Bundestag or procurement agencies, and perhaps AI
research itself, are interested. The second operational scenario involves life and
death on the battlefield, the interests of military personnel, civilians, and opposing
71 Vieregge,„FähigkeitslückederBundeswehrschließen.“
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 25

governments. The operational context, then, determines who the Smart Gepard’s
stakeholders are and which of their values are affected by the SOI.
4.2 The Value Exploration
Core Values, Value Qualities and Value Dispositions of an SOI
If values are defined quite generally as (good or bad) “properties” of a subject,
object, action or objective, it should be briefly noted at this point that several di-
mensions of values exist. Values can be moral or non-moral in nature, are intrinsic
or extrinsic and, depending on the theory of values, within a hierarchy.72
To find out how technology can realize the potential of the good that a specific
context holds, the stakeholders of an SOI are involved right in the early stages of
VBE. Their considerations are captured using philosophical frameworks of ethics.
It is this philosophical part of VBE with IEEE 7000™-2021 that requires extreme
linguistic precision.
A core value for the Bundeswehr is human dignity. In Western democracies with
their image of the free man, human dignity is an intrinsic value. An intrinsic value
is a valuable phenomenon that is desirable for its own sake. The intrinsic value of
human dignity is so important for a democracy that it must be safeguarded not
only by law, but also by technology, not only by the state, but also by private third
parties.
Human dignity is expressed through many value qualities, all of which feed into
human dignity. The value qualities condition the core value; they go into the core
value.73 Thus, a core value is composed of many value qualities. Duty of assis-
tance, mercy, ability to discriminate, self-protection of tank crews in combat, or
decision-making ability are just a few of the value qualities that members of the
Bundeswehr cite and that make up the quality of human dignity.
Finally, the value dispositions (the “Value Demonstrators”, as they are called by
the standard) of an SOI are the realization of the value qualities in the SOI. They
can be both technical and organizational in nature. If, for example, the Smart
Gepard “removes the human”74 and is transformed into a self-controlling robot by
72 Indetail:Birnbacher,AnalytischeEinführungindieEthik,p.242ff.
73 Scheler,DerFormalismusinderEthikunddieMaterialeWertethik,p.15.
74 21strategies,F-1.
26 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

tactical AI in order to increase self-protection, technical and organizational precau-
tions coincide technically, because the tactical AI is a quasi-automation of the tank
crew, and organizationally, because the crew no longer has to operate the tank
itself, but acts safely at some distance from the battlefield.
Ethical Value Elicitation: The SOI in the Light of Three Ethical Theories
Once the SOI has been sufficiently defined, its stakeholders explore its universe of
values and make use of the ethical theories of utilitarianism, duty ethics and virtue
ethics. In light of this ethical pluralism, the stakeholders answer the question of
which measures can strengthen positive value qualities and avoid negative ones.
This approach not only completes the value analysis, but also shapes the opera-
tional concept of an SOI further.
Utilitarianism belongs to consequentialist ethics, which is essentially opposed
to deontological ethics. To put it simply: In consequentialist ethics it is the good
consequences of an action that count. In deontological ethics it is just the other
way round: What counts is the morally good action without regard to its conse-
quences, as demanded, for example, by Kant’s ethics of duty. There are mixed
forms; moreover, differences of both theories also exist in the fact that deontolog-
ical ethics wants to see moral values realized, whereas utilitarianism knows only
one non-moral value: utility. Utilitarianism is therefore also considered a monistic
system. In addition, utilitarianism does away with value conflicts, whereas deon-
tological ethics engages in weighing values against each other. The duo is com-
plemented by virtue ethics, which does not introduce another theory, but instead
examines motivation, character traits of an individual that lead to moral action.
Beginning with utilitarian ethics, founded in the 18th century by Jeremy Bentham
and John Stuart Mill, the stakeholders, under the guidance of the value lead,
reflect on the Smart Gepard in light of its utility: “Bei mir geht es letztendlich nur
um Wirkung.”75 For the utilitarian, only this single benefit counts as an intrinsic
value. Objective values such as freedom, justice, or the common good are con-
sidered extrinsic values by utilitarianism, “their value depends on the value of the
subjective states they bring about.”76 This results in a kind of gradation of values
that gives higher weight to what is more conducive to utility.
Immanuel Kant’s Categorical Imperative is a textbook example for the examination
of the SOI in the sense of obligatory ethics: “Act only according to that maxim
75 “Forme,ultimately,it’sonlyabouttheeffect.”21strategies,I-19.
76 Birnbacher,AnalytischeEinführungindieEthik,p.218.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 27

by which you simultaneously want to become a general law. „77 The Categorical
Imperative is an unconditional ought-sentence: „Es widerspricht eigentlich dem
Menschlichen, der menschlichen Natur, wenn man Sadist ist oder Mörder.“78 Thou
shalt not kill; thou shalt not torture, these are generally valid maxims from which
moral action follows.
When the Smart Gepard is deployed, two human lives are at stake: one’s own
and that of the enemy. If the Smart Gepard as a whole were to be considered as
a SOI – and not just its tactical AI subsystem – the self-protection of one’s own
troops would be maximally promoted because the Smart Gepard would manage
entirely without a human crew. On the other hand, special rules apply to the lives
of enemy soldiers. A legal exception is made to the general principle: “Thou shalt
not kill” when deployed on the battlefield, because killing enemy forces in uniform
is permitted in principle, although practice suggests:
So richtig schießen wollte keiner (im Einsatz), weil jeder Angst hatte, sofort
hinterher vom Staatsanwalt (strafrechtlich verfolgt zu werden).79
Last, the question of how the SOI subverts the character of its stakeholders is
considered in light of virtue ethics. How would dealing with the Smart Gepard
negatively impact the character of the affected stakeholders in the long run if the
proper precautions were not taken? Constant interaction with technology chang-
es us humans. What virtues does the SOI subvert? What vices does it promote?
Will a Smart Gepard make the deployer more careless? Will killing the enemy be
trivialized if a device can be deployed at a greater distance without physically
participating in the battle itself? Without evaluating or ranking the soldierly virtues,
stakeholders under the guidance of the Value Lead ask themselves here whether
a Smart Gepard can help ensure that operators are not harmed – physically or
psychologically – when using the device:
Ich finde den Punkt sehr interessant, dass Anwendungen oft das Potenzial
haben, Menschen so zu unterstützen, dass sie keine oder weniger Fehler
machen, (die Menschen ein Leben lang belasten würden), weil die ein Gewis-
sen haben. Also (quasi) als Hilfe, ein sauberes Gewissen zu behalten. Das finde
ich einen sehr wichtigen Aspekt.80
77 Ibid.,p.141.
78 “Itactuallycontradictshumannature,ifoneissadistormurderer”21strategies,G-11.
79 “Noonereallywantedtoshoot(inaction)becauseeveryonewasafraidofbeing(prosecuted)bythelawimmediatelyafter-
wards”.Ibid,G-34.
80 “Ifindthepointveryinterestingthatapplicationsoftenhavethepotentialtohelppeoplenottomakemistakes,ortomake
fewermistakes(thatwouldburdenpeopleforalifetime),becausetheyhaveaconscience.So(sortof)helpingthemkeepa
cleanconscience.Ithinkthat’saveryimportantaspect.”Ibid.,I-105.
28 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

Value Clustering and Prioritization
To complete the value adjustment, the Value Lead consolidates and clusters core
values together with their value qualities.
A stakeholder may have voiced that the tactical AI of a Smart Gepard must not
put its calculations into action without authorization. He wants to see the Man
in the Loop. In the language of the standard, the core value of human dignity
then unfolds in the value quality of the target fire authorization: “Human dignity
demonstrates itself in human authorization of fire.” Authorization expresses a
value quality of the SOI that is intended to protect not only the human dignity of
third parties, but also one’s own. At this point, it is not yet clear how authorization
is accomplished. Rather, there are several potential possibilities for authorization,
especially considering the temporal aspect, as indicated above.
The results of the value analysis are value cluster representations, supplemented
by curated tables in which the statements of stakeholders are assigned to intrin-
sic core values in each case. The tables are essential for tracing and mapping of
stakeholder statements to derived system functions. They are approved by the
SOI stakeholders and then prioritized.
In the prioritization that follows any prioritization of value clusters must also
consider the corporate story of the SOI manufacturer. In setting priorities, it is
essential to know what mission and vision the manufacturer of the SOI is pursuing.
Its justified economic interests should and must be included.
Priorities are also influenced by the current and future legal situation facing the
SOI. The expertise of the Value Lead therefore also includes knowledge of the
applicable law, current legislative projects, case law, philosophy and (scientific)
literature. Even legislative projects such as the EU AI Act have an impact on a
tactical AI, which, if present, must also appreciate the soft law of a manufacturer,
as its violation can result in severe financial penalties.
4.3 From Theory to Practice:
Ethical Value Requirements
From value qualities like “target firing authorization” one cannot go directly to
implementation because value qualities do not yet describe value dispositions.
This role is taken over by the Ethical Value Requirements, in short: EVR, which can
be not only technical, but also organizational or social in nature.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 29

To authorize target fire in the Smart Gepard, a tactical AI would need to provide
information to its deployer. For example, a tactical AI could (i) communicate the
probability that there is a legitimate adversary to engage (“98.9 percent proba-
bility”) and (ii) display a countdown (“n seconds”) of how much longer target fire
would useful and/or effective and (iii) provide an operating interface where the
human hands over engagement of a target to the tactical AI with the push of a
button.
Defining EVR is the most important step of VBE with IEEE 7000™-2021, making
sure that EVRs are formulated in such a way that, once implemented as system
functionality, they are testable and assessable. The result: the ethics of an AI
become measurable. “A countdown indicates the time in which target firing would
be useful.” Operators want to be able to rely on the displayed value – they want
to be sure that the calculation procedure is implemented correctly, that uncertain-
ties of the raw data are considered in the calculation or that the calculation has
been tested statistically.
The EVRs are followed by an important final step. In interaction with the stakehold-
ers, the value lead performs a risk assessment. He seeks to answer the question
of how at risk the specified EVRs are. What threatens an EVR, and what controls
(system requirements) must be taken to ensure an EVR? System developers may
be required to ensure that the countdown is calculated correctly not only on
known data sets but also on out-of-sample data, or that the test data set is pub-
lished along with the system.
Standard risks, which include insufficient test coverage, for example, are applied
by the value lead to a risk matrix and assigned a probability. This is because not
all identified risks have the same probability of occurring. The rule of thumb is
the greater the risk of a threat, the higher the weighting of a system requirement,
which must also be prioritized by software development when implementing the
SOI. The control mechanism must be specified in such a way that it can ensure
EVRs.
However, it is not considered a standard risk when intrinsic values and their value
qualities are threatened: “With 98.9 percent probability, the target is a legitimate
adversary.” If there is the threat of a hazard, any ranking is out of the question. To
determine risk under these circumstances, the value lead undertakes a technology
assessment, while the development team takes precautions at the earliest possible
stage to manage and mitigate risks with very high hazard potential.
30 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

5 Conclusion
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 31

Genau genommen ist das, was Sie schaffen, quasi die Innere Führung für
KI. Man könnte dieses Wertekonstrukt der Inneren Führung übertragen. Es
schließt sich nicht aus. 81
That AI considers the universe of values of “Innere Führung” is an urgent and
legally required wish of the Bundeswehr. It can be fulfilled with value-based
technology according to IEEE 7000™-2021, a global standard that is already ready
for defense systems (it could also be extended by existing standards such as the
NATO Risk Assessment Tool). In the meantime, the standard is being rolled out,
and training centers for value leads with the skills and training of both a philosoph-
ical and technical understanding are proliferating. This begins the realization of
a standard whose intrinsic beauty lies in the logic and structure of its value work:
that better technology serves the good of people.
81 “Strictlyspeaking,whatyouarecreatingis,asitwere,‘InnereFührung’forAI.Youcouldtransferthisvalueconstructto‘Innere
Führung’.It’snotmutuallyexclusive.”Ibid.,A-173.
32 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

Literature
“DARPASCEPTERprogramwillexploremachine-gen- Scheler,MaxDer Formalismus in der Ethik und die
eratestrategiesforwarfare,”DefenseTechconnect, Materiale Wertethik. Neuer Versuch der Grundlegung
January24,2022, eines ethischen Personalismus (FormalisminEthicsand
com/2022/01/24/darpa-scepter-program-will-ex- MaterialValueEthics.RenewedAttemptatEstablishing
plore-machine-generated-strategies-for-warfare/(last EthicalPersonalism) (HalleanderSaale:VerlagvonMax
accessedOctober17,2022). Niemeyer,1916).
“WasbedeutetInnereFührung,”Bundeswehr.de, Spaeth,Andreas,“GrundlegenderSoftwarefehlerin
 derBoeing737Maxgefunden(FundamentalSoftware
selbstverstaendnis-bundeswehr/innere-fuehrung,(last FlawFoundinBoeing737Max),”NeueZürcherZeitung,
accessed11February2023) August5,2019,
boeing-737-max-grundlegender-softwarefehler-ge-
Arendt,Hannah,Das Urteilen (TheJudgment) funden-ld.1499955(lastaccessed11February2023).
(München:Piper,2020).
Spiekermann,Sarah“Value-basedEngineering:
Birnbacher,Dieter,Analytische Einführung in die PrinzipienundMotivationfürbessereIT-Systeme
Ethik. 3.durchgeseheneAuflage(AnalyticalIntroduction (Value-basedengineering:principlesandmotivationfor
intoEthics.3rdRevisedEdition)(Berlin:DeGruyter, betterITsystems),”InformatikSpektrum,44:4(). 2021),pp.247-256(2021,
article/10.1007/s00287-021-01378-4(lastaccessed
Funk,Michael,Roboter- und KI-Ethik: Eine metho- October17,2022).
dische Einführung(RoboticsandAIethics:amethodo-
logicalintroduction).Volume1.(Wiesbaden:Springer Spiekermann,Sarah,“DieEthikinderKünstlichen
Vieweg,2022). Intelligenz(EthicsinArtificialIntelligence),”inKlaus
Mainzer(ed.):Philosophisches Handbuch der Künstli-
Kants gesammelte Schriften. Herausgegeben von der chen Intelligenz (Philosophical Handbook of Artificial
Königlich preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften Intelligence) (Munich:SpringerReferenceGeisteswis-
(Kant‘sCollectedWritings.PublishedbytheRoyalPrus- senschaften,inpress).
sianAcademyofSciences)(Berlin:G.Reimer,1900ff.).
Vieregge,Kerstin,“FähigkeitslückederBunde-
Klapproth,Florian“Timeanddecisionmakingin swehrschließen(ClosingtheBundeswehrCapability
humans,”Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience, Gap),”pressrelease,March15,2022,
8:4(December2008),pp.509-524 kerstin-vieregge.de/artikel/faehigkeitsluecke-der-bunde-
com/article/10.3758/CABN.8.4.509(lastaccessed11 swehr-schliessen(lastaccessed11February2023).
February2023).
Vöneky,Silja,“EthischeExpertenundmoralischer
Prechtl,PeterandBurkard,Franz-Peter(eds.), Autoritarismus”(EthicalExpertsandMoralAuthori-
Metzler Lexikon Philosophie. Begriffe und Definitionen. tarianism),”inSiljaVönekyetal.(eds.)Legitimation
3.,erweiterteundaktualisierteAuflage(MetzlerLexikon ethischerEntscheidungenimRecht:InterdisziplinäreUn-
Philosophie.TermsandDefinitions.3rd,expandedand tersuchungen(LegitimationofEthicalDecisionsinLaw:
updatededition)(HeidelbergandBerlin:J.B.Met- InterdisciplinaryStudies) (Berlin/Heidelberg:Springer,
zler’scheVerlagsbuchhandlung,2008). 2009),pp.85-97.
Przywara,Erich,Humanitas: Der Mensch gestern und Wahl,Thomas,“High-LevelExpertGroupPublishes
morgen (Humanitas: Men Past and Future) (Nuremberg: EthicsChecklist(2020),”
GlockundLutzVerlag,1952). high-level-expert-group-publishes-ethics-checklist/(last
accessed11February2023).
Reichenbach,Hans,The Direction of Time (Mineola,
N.Y.:DoverPublications,1956).
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 33

34 HOW AI LEARNS THE BUNDESWEHR’S “INNERE FÜHRUNG”

Defense AI Observatory Studies
23|10 Yvonne Hofstetter and Joseph Verbovzsky, How AI Learns the Bundeswehr’s
“Innere Führung.” Value-Based Engineering with IEEE7000TM-2021
23|09 Robert C Engen, When the Teeth Eat the Tail: A Review of Canada’s Defence Artificial
Intelligence
23|08 Çağlar Kurç, Enabling Technology of Future Warfare. Defense AI in Turkey
23|07 Lauren A. Kahn, Risky Incrementalism. Defense AI in the United States
22|06 Yvonne Hofstetter, Wie KI Innere Führung lernt. Wertbasierte Technik mit
IEEE7000TM-2021
22|05 Andrea Gilli, Mauro Gilli, and Ivan Zaccagnini, Exploring the Benefits of a New Force
Enabler: Defense AI in Italy
22|04 Kenneth Payne, Bright Prospects – Big Challenges. Defense AI in the United
Kingdom
22|03 Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber, Armin Brandstetter, and Gary S. Schaal, Free
Jazz on the Battlefield. How GhostPlay’s AI Approach Enhances Air Defense
22|02 Peter Layton, Evolution not Revolution. Australia’s Defence AI Pathway
21|01 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, Joseph Verbovszky, Beware the Hype. What Military
Conflicts in Ukraine, Syria, Libya, and Nagorno-Karabakh (Don’t) Tell Us About the
Future of War