POLICY BRIEF

SPECIAL
HEALTHCARE
SERIES
Promoting
KEY TAKEAWAYS
Algorithmic We studied the trade-offs clinical
predictive algorithms face
between accuracy and fairness for
Fairness in Clinical
outcomes like hospital mortality,
prolonged stays in the hospital,
Risk Prediction and 30-day readmissions to
the hospital. We found that
techniques that make these
programs more fair can degrade
Stephen R. Pfohl, Agata Foryciarz,
performance of the algorithm for
and Nigam H. Shah everyone across the board.
Making algorithmic fixes on the
HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS AND MEDICAL PROFESSIONALS ARE INCREASINGLY
developer’s side should only be
USING MACHINE LEARNING TO ADVANCE HOW TREATMENT IS DELIVERED
one option considered to fix this.
TO PATIENTS. From medical image analysis to a range of data processing
Policymakers should consider ways
functions, these machine learning applications will only continue to shape
to incentivize model developers
patient-care experiences and medical outcomes. Developers, doctors,
to engage in participatory design
patients, and policymakers are just some of the stakeholders grappling with
practices that incorporate
these algorithmic uses.
perspectives from patient
advocacy groups and civil society
That said, there is a fundamental problem with machine learning in healthcare:
organizations.
We cannot assume developers are making strides to remedy bias and other
fairness issues in a concerted manner. Discriminatory AI decision-making is
concerning in any setting. This is especially pronounced in a clinical setting, Algorithmic fixes may work in some
where individuals’ well-being and physical safety are on the line, and where contexts, but others may require
medical professionals face life-or-death decisions every day. policymakers to mandate that a
human stays in the decision-making
Until now, the conversation about measuring algorithmic fairness in healthcare loop or the use of the algorithm
has focused on fairness itself—and has not fully taken into account how fairness may not be worthwhile at all.

Policy Brief: Promoting Algorithmic
Fairness in Clinical Risk Prediction SPECIAL
HEALTHCARE
SERIES
techniques could impact clinical predictive models, Introduction
which are often derived from large clinical datasets. Our
new research, published in the Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, seeks to ground this debate in evidence, There is much excitement about using machine learning
and suggests the best way forward in developing fairer and observational health data to guide clinical decision-
machine learning tools for a clinical setting. making. Yet these tools have the potential to introduce
and exacerbate health disparities for disadvantaged and
We explicitly measure trade-offs in the fairness and underrepresented populations. Myriad realities contribute
performance of clinical predictive models. Using three to this fact: inequity in historical and current patterns of
large datasets spanning decades of health outcomes— care access and delivery, underrepresentation in clinical
such as hospital mortality, prolonged stays in the datasets, the use of biased or poorly calibrated statistical
hospital, and 30-day readmissions to the hospital—our methods, and differences in the accessibility, usability, and
research compared these outcomes with three different effectiveness of predictive models across groups.
notions of fairness across demographic groupings—
such as race, ethnicity, sex, and age. In total, we find In response, considerable attention has been devoted
that improvements in algorithmic fairness, based on to designing clinical predictive models to anticipate and
minimizing differences between demographic groups, proactively mitigate harm to the advancement of health
cause lowered performance across multiple metrics. equity, all while upholding ethical standards. Much of
This exposes many challenges ahead in successfully this research and the policy discussion surrounding
mitigating bias in algorithms of the kind that has long it have centered on algorithmic fairness. In effect,
plagued certain demographics within the United States. algorithm fairness methods use mathematical formulas
representative of an ideal state—such as equal error rates
Policymakers should recognize that there is no between male and female patients—and work to minimize
technical solution to address unfairness in clinical deviations from that ideal. Researchers can then use this
predictive models that does not decrease accuracy. to audit predictive algorithms’ problematic characteristics
Consequently, they should consider ways to incentivize and promote transparency in their outputs.
responsible algorithm development alongside policies
that address broader, structural healthcare inequities Nonetheless, the debate about performance versus
such as those caused by racism and socioeconomic fairness in clinical algorithms tends to lose sight
inequality. The use of clinical predictive models must of the broader picture. A range of social, political,
either be narrowly calibrated to a particular setting and economic factors contribute to massive health
or constructed so that a human healthcare provider disparities in care access and quality. While algorithmic
stays in the decision-making loop to ensure fair patient fairness techniques enable individuals to monitor and
treatment. If machine learning models do not promote manipulate the outputs of predictive models, they are
health equity, it may be appropriate to abstain from generally insufficient in and of themselves to mitigate
using an algorithm altogether. the introduction or perpetuation of health disparities
resulting from model-guided interventions.

Policy Brief: Promoting Algorithmic
Fairness in Clinical Risk Prediction SPECIAL
HEALTHCARE
SERIES
Health disparities arise as a result of structural racism
and related inequities in areas such as housing,
While algorithmic fairness
education, employment, and criminal justice that affect
healthcare access, utilization, and quality. These effects techniques enable individuals
are further compounded by underrepresentation of the
to monitor and manipulate the
elderly, women, and ethnic minorities in clinical trials
and cohort studies, as well as warped financial incentives outputs of predictive models,
in the healthcare system. At present, researchers often
they are generally insufficient
do not consider or explicitly discuss algorithmic fairness
in this social, political, and economic context—a fact that in and of themselves to
is especially ironic when discussing definitions of group
mitigate the introduction
fairness. Instead, fairness criteria are defined primarily
in technical terms related to a model’s predictions, or perpetuation of health
observed outcomes, and whether any of the patients in
disparities resulting from
the data belong to a prespecified demographic group.
What is more, the data is also evaluated on cohorts model-guided interventions.
derived after the fact.
Stepping back, this means that algorithmic fairness
criteria may be misleading, whether the observed
outcome is a proxy for some underlying cause (e.g.,
structural racism in health pricing) or the predictive
predictive models to report on accuracy and group
model is not appropriately contextualized in terms of the
fairness metrics. Using different fairness metrics (e.g.,
related interventions and policies. The conversation about
conditional prediction parity, calibration, and cross-
algorithmic fairness thus erroneously confuses model
group ranking), we specified situations in which there
performance and accrued benefits in health outcomes.
was an imbalance within the social strata for the health
outcome in question. The data was striking. Sometimes,
Research
proposed fairness methods made the algorithm’s
output “fairer” (by the definition used). But they also,
Outcomes in some cases, lowered the algorithm’s across-the-
board performance. In most cases, the original trained
model produced unfair results. Predictions were better
We conducted a large-scale study examining the trade- calibrated for some racial and ethnic groups than for
offs between algorithm performance and fairness others—or yielded different numbers of false positives
criteria, specifically in clinical predictive models. Across and negatives. This, of course, is highly concerning in a
25 different combinations of datasets, clinical outcomes, clinical setting and could exacerbate harmful inequalities
and demographic attributes, we trained a series of in the healthcare system.

Policy Brief: Promoting Algorithmic
Fairness in Clinical Risk Prediction SPECIAL
HEALTHCARE
SERIES
To address these issues, we applied algorithmic fairness
methods to the model and had some success. These
...achieving algorithmic
changes improved performance: Error rates roughly
equalized across groups, or predictions matched up fairness should be defined
better with outcomes in a narrowly defined scenario.
in terms of the impact an
But these fairness tweaks caused the model’s overall
predictive power to fall. Oftentimes, satisfying one notion algorithm-guided intervention
of algorithmic fairness meant another would not be met.
has on individuals, groups,
The possible fairness criteria did not all work in tandem.
and status quo power
Our research on fairness frameworks broadly yielded
structures…
several findings. Common definitions of racial categories
are entangled with historical and ongoing patterns of
structural racism, and their continued use reinforces
the idea of race as an accurate way to describe human
variability, rather than a socially constructed taxonomy.
Using these categorizations in algorithmic fairness
and economic inequality. Algorithms are a bigger
work thus raises numerous ethical questions. Further,
and bigger part of this landscape. Yet policymakers
marginalized groups are often not well-represented by
must realize the limits of, and problems with, current
the attributes used to assess group fairness, including
approaches to algorithmic fairness.
intersectional identities. Group fairness and algorithmic
fairness criteria also address individual attributes (e.g., race,
By considering only technical fixes to observable
gender) independently and consequently treat them as
algorithmic properties, evaluating models through
abstract, interchangeable constructs—without awareness
the group fairness framework ignores systemic issues
of meaningful contextual differences between them. For
and related second- and third-order effects on health
example, observed differences on the basis of race should
disparities. It also ignores inequities in the data
be primarily interpreted as deriving from systemic and
generation and measurement processes that inform how
structurally racist factors. By contrast, those observed on
algorithms work. And it misses the causal framing and
the basis of sex could be erroneously attributed to clinically
decision-making that, in practice, connects algorithmic
meaningful differences in human physiology.
predictions to clinical decisions—like when a medical
professional decides how to use algorithmic outputs.
Policy Discussion
From a research and a policy standpoint, requiring
predictive models to satisfy a notion of group fairness
Striving for health equity requires designing policies provides little more than a “veneer of neutrality.”
that directly counteract the systemic factors underlying Constraining a model in a way that achieves group
health disparities—primarily structural forms of racism fairness is insufficient for, and may even work against,

Policy Brief: Promoting Algorithmic
Fairness in Clinical Risk Prediction SPECIAL
HEALTHCARE
SERIES
promoting health equity via machine learning-guided
interventions. To be clear, optimizing the satisfaction
As AI increasingly influences
of fairness criteria can still be useful. But achieving
algorithmic fairness should be defined in terms of decisions about our health
the impact an algorithm-guided intervention has on
and our lives, it is crucial
individuals, groups, and status quo power structures
that directly or indirectly perpetuate health disparities. that we work to accelerate
these efforts to broaden
In light of these limitations, policymakers must consider
ways to incentivize developers to use participatory the research and policy
design practices that explicitly incorporate a diverse
community’s understanding of
set of stakeholder perspectives. For instance, this
should include patient advocacy groups and civil rights algorithmic fairness.
organizations. Doing so will allow developers to better
identify the mechanisms through which measurement
error, bias, and historical inequities affect data
collection, measurement, and problem formulation.
Participatory design would also enable developers
to better understand the relationship between in healthcare could help developers overcome the
those technical measurements and policy and other limitations of the current group fairness framework.
interventions in clinical settings. As AI increasingly influences decisions about our health
and our lives, it is crucial that we work to accelerate
All the while, it should not be assumed that algorithm- these efforts to broaden the research and policy
aided decision-making is always helpful in healthcare. community’s understanding of algorithmic fairness.
If it is not practical to employ algorithm-aided decision-
making responsibly, the better approach may be to
abstain from using it altogether. For example, our
recent study found that recalibrating risk models for
subgroups—to better match outcomes—increased
gaps between groups’ false positive and negative rates.
Using an equalized odds approach, meanwhile, to
equalize error rates for all groups, better matched the
guidelines we looked at yet created different error rates
for patients in high-risk categories.
Pursuing this context-driven understanding of
algorithm development and algorithmic fairness

The original article, “An Empirical Stephen R. Pfohl is a research scientist
Characterization of Fair Machine Learning at Google and a recent Ph.D. graduate
for Clinical Risk Prediction,” can be accessed of Biomedical Informatics at Stanford
at: University.
article/pii/S1532046420302495?via%3Dihub.
Agata Foryciarz is a Ph.D. candidate in
Computer Science at Stanford University.
Nigam H. Shah is professor of
Stanford University’s Institute for Human-
medicine (biomedical informatics) and
Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI) applies
of biomedical data science at Stanford
rigorous analysis and research to pressing policy
University. He serves as chief data
questions on artificial intelligence. A pillar of
scientist for Stanford Healthcare and is a
HAI is to inform policymakers, industry leaders,
faculty affiliate at HAI.
and civil society by disseminating scholarship
to a wide audience. HAI is a nonpartisan research
institute, representing a range of voices.
The views expressed in this policy brief reflect
the views of the authors. For further information,
please contact HAI-Policy@stanford.edu.
Stanford HAI: Cordura Hall, 210 Panama Street, Stanford, CA 94305-1234
T 650.725.4537 F 650.123.4567 E HAI-Policy@stanford.edu hai.stanford.edu