Chapter 4:
Political Definitions

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Defence Concepts
Argentina Ley de defensa nacional, Nº 23554 - 1988/05/05, Sec. 2
a deterrent or active way in order to face external aggression. Its purpose is to guarantee the sovereignty and independence of the Argentine
Nation on a permanent basis, as well as its territorial integrity and capacity for self-determination, and to protect the life and freedom of its
inhabitants.
Bolivia Bases para la Discusión de la Doctrina de Seguridad y Defensa del Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia, 2010
The concept of defence encompasses the combined set of measures that the State employs to counter any external or internal aggression in
order to attain adequate security conditions, on the conviction that this covers all of the country´s activities and, therefore, is not the exclusive
task and responsibility of the Armed Forces but instead of all organizations, legal entities, and persons.
Brazil Política Nacional de Defesa, 2012; Estratégia Nacional de Defesa, 2012
National defence is the set of measures and actions employed by the State, with emphasis on the military sphere, aimed at the defence of the
territory, sovereignty and national interests against mainly external threats. These may be either potential or actual in nature.
The national defence strategy is inseparable from the national development strategy. It is the linkage between the concept and policy of na-
tional independence, on one hand, and the protection of that independence by the Armed Forces on the other. The foundation of national
defence is the identifi cation of the Nation with the Armed Forces and vice versa.
Chile Libro de la Defensa Nacional de Chile, 2010
National defence is the set of material, human and moral resources available to a nation to counteract the threat of an adversary to disrupt
its national interests, in particular its sovereignty and territorial integrity. Its purpose is to attain an external security condition that enables the
country to reach its objectives free from any external interference.
Defence is an a non-transferable function of the State. It contributes to the nation’s security through the legitimate use of force, deterrence
and international cooperation.
Colombia Política Integral de Seguridad y Defensa para la Prosperidad, 2011
Consolidating peace means to guarantee the prevalence of the Rule of Law, security, full observance of human rights, and the effi cient opera-
tion of justice all over the national territory. It defi nes as principal risk factors: armed groups operating at the margin of the law, crimes against
citizens, external threats and natural disasters.
It sets forth the following strategic objectives: reduce the national drug production to its historical minimum; armed groups operating at the
margin of the law; create the security conditions necessary for the peaceful coexistence of the citizenry; advances towards a system of credible,
integrated and interoperable deterrence capacities; contribute to a timely response to natural disasters and catastrophes; and strengthen the
institutionalization and welfare of the national security and defence sector.
Costa Rica Decreto Ejecutivo 15832 - 1984/11/14
Since abolishing its Armed Forces, Costa Rica has placed trust for its external security in the norms and mechanisms of international law,
especially those stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations, the Charter of the Organization of American States, and the Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, all of which are compatible with its unilateral demilitarization and disarmament.
Cuba Ley de defensa nacional, Nº 75 – 1994/12/21, Preamble and Sec. 3
Cuban military doctrine is the set of ideas and concepts adopted by the State with regard to the essence, objectives, character, particularities,
and consequences of war; the country’s preparation for the successful conduct of war, and through these attempts to avert it; and the me-
thods for its execution in the face of military aggression. This doctrine has at its fundamental basis the concept of a War of All the People, a de-
fensive strategic concept that summarizes the historical experience accumulated by the nation. It is based on the deployment of the territorial
defensive system as a support to its military power, and in the wider use of all of the forces and resources belonging to society and the State.
Dominican Republic Directiva de seguridad y defensa nacional, Decree Nº 189-07 - 2007/04/03, Sec. 3
For the development of security and defence policy at the national level the following directives have been established:
- Defi nition and identifi cation of national objectives. - Approval of a National Security Act. - Modifi cation of the Organic Law of the Armed
Forces. - Publication of the White Book of Defence and the Manual of the Joint Doctrine of the Armed Forces. - Creation of a National Inte-
lligence System. - Strengthening of the Permanent Committee of Reform and Modernization of the Armed Forces. - Defi nition of the Armed
Forces model. - Foster transformation of the Armed Forces. - Develop a new model of institutionalization and professionalization. - Reform of
the military career. - Improve equipment. - Foster research, development and innovation.

Chapter 4: Political Definitions

Ecuador Agenda Política de la Defensa 2014-2017
Defence is an inalienable and permanent duty of the State. It is one of the components of a comprehensive security and guarantees sovereig-
nty and territorial integrity. It protects the rights, guarantees and freedom of all citizens, and actively participates in regional integration. It is a
public good. It’s a competence of the State and also a right and duty of citizens. Leadership of defence is exclusively a civilian responsibility. It
is oriented towards contributing to citizens’ well-being.
El Salvador Ley de defensa nacional, DL Nº 948, 2002/10/03, Sec. 4
National defence: the set of resources and activities that the State develops on a permanent and coordinated basis across all fi elds of action
in order to confront threats to national sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Guatemala Ley marco del sistema nacional de seguridad, Nº 18-2008, 2008/04/15, Sec. 20
External security refers to the defence of national independence and sovereignty, territorial integrity and peace, as well as the maintenance and
strengthening of international relations. It acts under the responsibility of the President through the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Defence.
The content of international treaties and agreements to which Guatemala belongs shall be considered during the functioning and coordination
of the fi eld of external security. Regarding foreign policy, its aim is to prevent and counteract threats and risks produced by external factors
that affect the country politically. With regard to national defence, it develops the Nation’s defence policy and guarantees the convening and
mobilization of civil defence.
Haiti Plan de Acción 2013-2016, 2013
In the context of the new vision of defence, the focus based in civil defence (ABDC) consists of establishing a set of strategic devices, and of
defi ning projects for the survival and protection of the population, or of the territory in the case of disasters. Two large fi elds are defi ned:
- Security in general, which considers threats to national sovereignty and the continuity of the State. It mainly deals with cases of serious disorder
within the country, with or without external intervention (riots, terrorism).
- Civil security, which refers to the risks related to the effective protection of the population, providing emergency assistance.
Honduras Libro de la Defensa Nacional, 2005
Defence is defi ned as the combined set of actions and capacities aimed at guaranteeing the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of
the country. National defence is focused principally on preventing and neutralizing external threats that jeopardize national interests.
The essential instrument of national defence are the Armed Forces, whose existence and performance are specifi ed in the constitutional fra-
mework that determines and conditions them, and which serves to support the formulation of a defence policy with the following characteristics:
state, public, consensual and long term. Defence is a public good. Its purpose is to achieve the security situation necessary for the country to
achieve its national objectives free from any interference.
Mexico Programa para la Seguridad Nacional, 2014-2018. Una política multidimensional para México en el siglo XXI.
In accordance with the provisions laid out in Article 3 of the National Security Act, national security is understood as the immediate and direct
actions destined to maintain the integrity, stability and permanence of the Mexican State, involving:
I. Protection of the Mexican nation in the face of the threats and risks confronting our country.
II. Preservation of national sovereignty and independence, and defence of the national territorial.
III. Maintenance of constitutional order and strengthening of the government’s democratic institutions.
IV. Maintenance of the unity of the integral components of the Federation, referred to in article 43 of the Political Constitution of the United
Mexican States.
V. The legitimate defence of the Mexican State with respect to other States or subjects of International Law.
VI. Preservation of democracy, based on the economic, social and political development of the country and its people.
Nicaragua Ley de la defensa nacional de la República de Nicaragua, Nº 748 - 2010/12/22, Sec. 3
Security is a condition to be achieved, and defence is a means to attain it. Security therefore entails defence, since the latter covers all diplo-
matic, economic, legal, political, military, environmental and social scopes and fi elds of action.
National defence is the means the Nicaraguan nation has to guarantee its sovereignty, national self-determination and independence, and the
inviolability of its territorial integrity, through the implementation of a set of measures and actions intended to prevent and overcome threats,
risks or aggressions.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

stpecnoC
ecnefeD
Paraguay Ley de defensa nacional y de seguridad interna, Nº 1337 - 1999/04/14, Sec. 2
National defence is the system of policies, procedures and actions exclusively developed by the State in order to fi ght any form of external
aggression that jeopardizes the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the Republic or its democratic constitutional order.
Panama Constitución Política de la República de Panamá
All Panamanians are obliged to take up arms to defend national independence and the territorial integrity of the State. Special police services
may be organized temporarily for the protection of the Republic’s borders and territory in the face of a risk of foreign aggression.
Panama declares the neutrality of the canal so that, in times of peace as in times of war, it shall remain secure and open to the peaceful transit
of vessels of all nations on terms of entire equality.
Peru Ley del sistema de seguridad y defensa nacional, Nº 28478 - 2005/03/27, Sec. 3; Libro Blanco de la Defensa Nacional, 2005
The national defence and security system is the inter-related set of State bodies whose functions are aimed at guaranteeing national security
by means of the conceptualization, planning, management, preparation, execution and oversight of national defence.
National defence is the set of measures, provisions and actions generated, adopted and executed by the State on a comprehensive and per-
manent basis, both internally and externally.
Uruguay Ley marco de defensa nacional, Nº18650 - 2010/03/08, Sec. 1 and 2
National defence refers to the set of civil and military activities aimed at preserving our country’s sovereignty and independence and protec-
ting its territorial integrity and strategic resources, as well as the peace of the Republic, within the framework of the Constitution and laws;
contributing to create the conditions necessary for the present and future social well-being of the population. National defence constitutes
both a right and an obligation of the citizenry. It is a public good, and thus an essential, permanent, non-transferable and comprehensive
responsibility of the State.
Venezuela Ley orgánica de seguridad de la Nación, GO Nº 37594 - 2002/12/18, Sec. 3
Comprehensive defence: the set of defence systems, methods, measures and actions, whatever their nature and intensity, that are actively for-
mulated, coordinated and executed by the State with the participation of public and private institutions and natural and legal persons, national
or foreign, in order to protect the independence, freedom, democracy, sovereignty, territorial integrity and integral development of the Nation.
Source:Compilation based on the legislation and documents mentioned above.
Offi cials on Defence / National Security Councils – in percentage
Countries: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela
President Vice-president Defence Minister Interior / Public Security
Minister
93% 53% 87% 87%
Minister of Foreign Relations Other Ministers Congressional Representative(s) Chief of Staff / General
CCoommmmaanndd ooff tthhee AArrmmeedd FFoorrcceess
87% 74% 33% 40%
Chiefs of the Armed Forces Chief(s) of Police Representatives of Intelligence Other members
Bodies
27% 27% 47% 53%
Notes:Although Sec. 287 of the Constitution of Honduras indicates the “Creation of the National Defence and Security Council, a special law shall regulate its
organization and operation”, this has yet to be created. In the Dominican Republic, Sec. 258 of the Constitution provides for the creation of a National Security and
Defence Council, but at the close of this publication the regulation of its composition and functioning was pending.
Sources:Ley de defensa nacionall(Nº 23554 - 1988/05/05) and Libro blanco de la defensa nacional (1999/03/01) of Argentina;Ley de organización del Poder Ejecutivo
(Nº 2446 - 2003/03/19) of Bolivia; Sec.91 of theConstituição da Republica Federativa del Brasill (Last amendment 2010/02/04) andLey sobre la organización y fun-
cionamiento del consejo de defensa nacionall(Nº 8183 – 1991/04/11. Last amendment: 2001/08/31) of Brazil; Sec. Nº 106 of theConstitución Política de la República
de Chile (Last amendment 2005/09/22) andLibro de la defensa nacional (2010) of Chile;Decreto por el cual se fusionan el Consejo Nacional de Seguridad, el Consejo
Superior de la Defensa Nacional y la Comisión creada por el Decreto 813 de 1989 (Nº 2134 - 1992/12/30. Last amendment: Decree Nº 4748 - 2010/12/23) of Colom-
bia;Ley de la defensa nacionall(Nº 75 - 1994/12/21) of Cuba;Ley de seguridad pública y del Estado (Nº 35 – 2009/09/28. Last amendment: Nº 263 – 2014/06/09) of
Ecuador;Decreto de creación del consejo de seguridad nacionall (Nº 168 - 1992/09/11. Last amendment: DE Nº 1 - 2005/01/12) of El Salvador;Ley marco del sistema
nacional de seguridadd (DL Nº 18-2008- 2008/04/15) of Guatemala;Ley de seguridad nacional (DOF 2005/01/31. Last amendment: DOF 2005/12/26) of Mexico;Ley
de organización, competencia y procedimientos del Poder Ejecutivo (Nº 290 – 1998/06/03. Last amendment: Law Nº 864 – 2014/05/20) of Nicaragua;Ley de defensa
nacional y de seguridad interna (Nº 1337 – 1999/04/14. Last amendment: Law N° 5036 – 2013/08/22) of Paraguay;Ley del sistema de seguridad y defensa nacional
(Nº 28478- 2005/03/23) of Peru;Ley marco de defensa nacional (Nº 18650 - 2010/03/08) of Uruguay; Sec.323 of the Constitución de la República Bolivariana de
Venezuela (Last amendment 2009/02/19) andLey orgánica de seguridad de la Nación (GO Nº 37594 - 2002/12/18) of Venezuela.

Chapter 4: Political Definitions

Constitutional Missions of the Armed Forces
Mexico Honduras
Nº 89 Nº 89 Nº 272 Nº 272 Nº 272 Nº 272 Nº 274 Nº 272 Nº 274 Nº 274 Nº 274
y Nº 274 y Nº 274
Cuba
Haiti
Nº 264 Nº 266 Nº 266 Nº 266
Dominican Republic
Nicaragua
Guatemaallaa
Nº 252 Nº 252 Nº 252 Nº 252 Nº 252
Nº 92 Nº 92* Nº 92*
Nº 244 Nº 244 Nº 249
El Salvador Venezuela
Nº 212 Nº 212 Nº 212 Nº 212 Nº 212 Nº 328 Nº 328 Nº 328
y Nº 168*
Colombia
Nº 217 Nº 217
Ecuador
Brazil
Nº 158 Nº 162
Nº 142 Nº 142 Nº 142
Peerruu
National defence
Nº 165 Nº 137 Nº 171 Nº 186 Nº 171
Ensure the y Nº 165*
constitutional
order
Ensure the legal Bolivia
government’s
stability
Nº 244 Nº 244 Nº 244 Nº 244 Paarraguay
Guarantee
internal order
Participate in Nº 173 Nº 173
national
development
Provide electoral
support
Chile
Support in case Uruguay
of disasters
Nº 101 Nº 18
Participation in
peace operations Argentina
Support in
combatting
drug trafficking
No reference
*Only in exceptional cases.
Source:Compilation based on each country’s Constitution. There are other national supplementary regulations in addition to those presented in the map with respect
to the missions of the Armed Forces. For further information, refer to the “Countries” section of this publication. The cases of Costa Rica and Panama are not included
as the table refers specifi cally to the Armed Forces.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition
42 Additional References - Legislation*
Guarantee
Cooperation National
constitutional Participation
Country order/ with internal development/ Electoral support Support in the in peace
order/ environment event of disaster
stability of legal operations
security**
government
Argentina * In addition to the
defence of sovereignty.
Bolivia
** Argentina and
Brazil Dominican Republic
only under state of
Chile **** exception.
Colombia *** In times of peace
and with the explicit
Cuba authorization of the
National Defence
Dom. Republic Ministry, they may
render services or
Ecuador **** cooperate with activities
required on account
El Salvador
of their specialization,
Guatemala social relevance or
public convenience and
Haiti **** without this being to
the detriment of their
Honduras fundamental mission
(Ley marco de defensa
Mexico nacionaI, Sec. 20).
Nicaragua **** Under state of
emergency or disaster.
Paraguay
The cases of Costa Rica
Peru and Panama are not
included as the table
Uruguay *** *** *** refers specifi cally to the
Armed Forces.
Venezuela
Ensure the constitutional order / the legal government’s stability: • Form pppart of the Electoral Militaryyy Police duringgg national elections under the
• Guarantee the institutional order at the Republic (Ley orgánica constitucio- control of the Central Electoral Board (Ley orgánica de las Fuerzas Armadas,
nal de las Fuerzas Armadas, Sec. 1 – Chile). Sec. 5 - Dominican Republic).
• Guarantee the legggal and democratic order of the social rule of law (Ley • Contribute,,, supppppport,,, take care and supppervise the Election Power facilities
orgánica de defensa nacional, Sec. 2 – Ecuador). and assets ((Leyy orgggánica de la Fuerza Armada Nacional Bolivariana, Sec. 42,
• Cooppperate in the maintenance of the State´s constitutional order (Ley orgá- sub. 6 – Venezuela).
nica de la Armada de México, Sec. 2 – Mexico).
• Defend the legggallyyy instituted authorities ((Leyy de organización general de las Support in the event of disaster:
Fuerzas Armadas de la Nación, Sec. 6 – Paraguay). • Opperations supppppportinggg the national communityyy or friendlyyy countries (Ley de
• Guarantee the Rule of Law,,, constitutional order and democratic form of gggo- reestructuración de las Fuerzas Armadas, Sec. 6 – Argentina).
vernment consecrated in the Political Constitution (Ley de la defensa nacional, • Cooperate with civil defence (Ley complementarr 136, Sec. 16 – Brazil).
Sec. 5 and 16 - Nicaragua). • The President of the State Council mayyy decide the use of the armed institu-
tions to face and remove the conseqqquences of natural disasters or other types
Cooperation with internal order/security: of disasters (Ley de la defensa nacional, Sec. 35 – Cuba).
• Cooppperate,,, if necessaryyy,,, in the maintenance of pppublic order,,, upppon reqqquest of • Assist the pppopppulation in cases and zones of disaster or emergggencyyy ((Leyyy or-
the Executive Branch and accordinggg to the Political Constitution of the State ggánica de la Armada,, Sec. 2,,, sub. VII))). In the event of disaster,,, helppp in the
(Ley orgánica de las Fuerzas Armadas, Sec. 6. G – Bolivia). maintenance of pppublic order,,, ppprotection to pppeoppple and their pppropppertyyy and re-
• Militaryyy Assistance when the National Police cannot,,, on its own,,, contain construction of areas affected (Ley orgánica del Ejército y Fuerza Aérea, Sec.
severe disorders or face a disaster or public calamity (Decree 1512, Sec. 79 1 – Mexico).
– Colombia). • Contribute to strengggtheninggg the risk managggement pppolicyyy,,, based on the ppre-
• The President of the State Council mayyy decide the use of the Armed Forces vention,,, mitigggation and managgement of natural disasters (Ley de la defensa
to maintain internal order and ppprotect the citizenryyy,,, even thougggh a state of nacional, Sec. 16 – Nicaragua).
emergency has not been declared (Ley de la defensa nacional, Sec. 35 – Cuba). • Cooppperate in civil defence ((Leyy de organización general de las Fuerzas Arma-
• In order to safeggguard internal ppprotection,,, the maintenance and control of das, Sec. 7, sub. D – Paraguay).
ppublic order and securityyy,,, the Armed Forces could supppppport oppperations in a • Participppate in civil ppprotection oppperations in disaster situations. Supppppport com-
comppplementaryyy manner to what in this case is the compppetence of the National munities in case of disaster,,, pppublic calamities and similar events ((Leyyy orgggánica
Police (Ley de seguridad pública y del Estado, Sec. 11 – Ecuador). de la Fuerza Armada Nacional Bolivariana, Sec. 4, sub. 6 and 15; Sec. 42, sub.
• Assist in maintaininggg pppeace and order of the nation in cases of extreme 6 – Venezuela).
necessityyy ((Códigggo de orggganización, jurisdicción y previsión social militar, Sec.
2, sub. 2 and 6 – Nicaragua). Participation in peace operations:
• Oppperations sppponsored byyy the United Nations (Ley de reestructuración de las
Fuerzas Armadas, Sec. 6 – Argentina).
Participation in national development / environment protection: • The emppployyyment of the Armed Forces in pppeace oppperations is a responsibility
• Coopperate with national development as subsidiary function (Lei comple- of the President (Ley complementarr136, Sec. 15 – Brazil).
mentarr 136, Sec. 16 – Brazil). • Deppparture of national trooppps from the territoryyy of the Repppublic in order to
• Take care over the whole national territoryyy of the ppprotection and defence of ppparticipppate in pppeace oppperations orggganized under the Charter of the United
the environment and renewable natural resources ((Leyy por la cual se organiza Nations ((Leyy qqque establece normas ppara la participación de tropas chilenas en
el Sistema Nacional Ambiental, Sec. 103 – Colombia). operaciones de paz, Sec. 7 – Chile).
• Possessinggg a structure that allows the use of its members in activities contri- • Theyyy mayyy ppparticipppate in pppeacekeepppinggg and humanitarian assistance opppera-
butingg to the countryyy’s economic and social developppment and environmental tions accordinggg to the countryyy’s foreigggn pppolicyyy and United Nations’ require-
protection (Ley de la defensa nacional, Sec. 34 – Cuba). ments (Ley orgánica de defensa nacional, Sec. 16, sub. O – Ecuador).
• Perform civil actions and social work fosteringgg the country’s development • Take pppart in international pppeacekeepppinggg and humanitarian aid oppperations,
(Ley orgánica del Ejército y Fuerza Aérea, Sec. 1 – Mexico). in accordance with the UN Charter (Ley de la defensa nacional, Sec. 16 – Ni-
caragua).
-Contribute to the countryyy’s developppment and supppppport its health ppplans,,, edu-
cation,,, environmental pppreservation and renewal of its natural resources, in- • Paraggguayyy mayyy ppparticipppate with its militaryyy institutions in pppeace missions ppro-
cludinggg the reqqquired environmental balance (Ley de la defensa nacional, Sec. moted byyy international orgganizations of which it is member (Ley de defensa
16 – Nicaragua). nacional y seguridad interna, Sec. 35 – Paraguay).
• Missions abroad that are not directlyyy related to the Repppublic’s defence shall
be ppromoted byyy international orggganizations which the State is part of (Ley
Support to elections: marco de defensa nacional, Sec. 21 and 22 – Uruguay).
• Suppppport the Supppreme Electoral Council in the electoral ppprocess (((Códigggo de • Particippate in pppeace missions ((Leyy orggánica de la Fuerza Armada Nacional
orgganización, jurisdicción y previsión social militar, Sec. 2, sub. 13 – Nicara- Bolivariana, Sec. 4, sub. 5 – Venezuela).
gua).
Source:Compilation based on the legislation mentioned. Reference is made to the missions specifi cally mentioned in the legislation regardless of those referring to sub-
jects referred to in constitutional mandates; this description does not purport to be complete or to encompass the whole set of the missions they are supposed to have.

Chapter 4: Political Definitions

Annual Reports on Ministerial Management
Country Name Published by
Memoria detallada del estado de la Nación Ministers’ Chief of Staff.
Bolivia Memoria Institucional Ministry of Defence
Brazil Relatório de Avaliação Ministry of Defence
Chile Cuenta Pública Government of Chile
Memorias al Congreso de la República
Colombia Logros de la Política Integral de Seguridad y Defensa para la Prospe- Ministry of National Defence
ridad - PISDP
Costa Rica Memoria Institucional Ministry of Interior, Police and Public Security
Cuba n/a n/a
Dominican
Memoria Anual Ministry of Defence
Republic
Ecuador Informe de Gestión Ministry of National Defence
El Salvador Memoria de Labores Ministry of National Defence
Guatemala Memoria de Labores Ministry of National Defence
Haiti n/a n/a
Honduras Memoria Secretariat of National Defence
Mexico Informe de Labores Secretariat of National Defence
Secretariat of the Navy
Nicaragua Memoria Anual Army of Nicaragua
Panama Memoria Ministry of Public Security
Paraguay Informe del Gobierno Nacional Presidency of the Republic
Peru Anuario Estadístico del Sector Ministry of Defence
Uruguay Memoria Anual Ministry of Defence
Venezuela Memoria y Cuenta Ministry of the People’s Power for Defence
n/a: no available data.
Source: Compilation based on the information provided by the institutions mentioned above.
Transparency Measures
Evolution in Latin America of 80%
submissions to the UN and
OAS Registers 70%
60%
50%
Implementation of Confidence
40%
and Security Building Measures
30%
Reporting Military Expenditures
20%
Register of Conventional Arms 10%
0%
1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013
Register/Instrument:Average number of reports submitted in each period (for the calculation of reports submitted to the OAS, all countries considered in this pub-
lication, with the exception of Cuba, have been included).
Source:Compilation based on reports submitted by the States to the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms and the United Nations Instrument for Reporting
Military Expenditures from 1992 to 2013 and reports submitted by States to the OAS on the Implementation of Confi dence and Security-Building Measures in the
1997-2013 period.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Policyy Documents
Country Document
Argentina Libro Blanco de la Defensa Nacional 1999. Revisión de la Defensa 2001. Directiva de Política de Defensa Nacional 2009.
Libro Blanco de la Defensa 2010
Bolivia Libro Blanco de la Defensa 2004. Bases para la Discusión de la doctrina de Seguridad y Defensa del Estado Plurinacional
de Bolivia 2010.
Brazil Política de Defesa Nacional 1996 and 2005. Estratégia Nacional de Defesa 2008 and 2010. Livro Branco de Defesa Nacional 2012.
Chile Libro de la Defensa Nacional de Chile 1997, 2002 and 2010.
Política de Defensa y Seguridad Democrática 2003. Política de Consolidación de la Seguridad Democrática 2007 and 2010. Política
Colombia
Integral de Seguridad y Defensa para la Prosperidad 2011. Política Nacional de Defensa de la Libertad Personal 2011.
Dominican Republic Directiva de Seguridad y Defensa Nacional 2007.
Ecuador Política de la Defensa Nacional del Ecuador 2002 and 2006. Agenda Política de la Defensa Nacional 2008, 2011 and 2014.
El Salvador Libro de la Defensa Nacional 2006.
Guatemala Libro de la Defensa Nacional de la República de Guatemala 2003. Política de la Defensa Nacional 2005.
Honduras Libro de la Defensa Nacional 2005.
Mexico Libro del Ejército y Fuerza Aérea Mexicanos 2005.
Nicaragua Libro de la Defensa Nacional de Nicaragua 2005
Paraguay Política de Defensa Nacional de la República del Paraguay 1999. Libro Blanco de la Defensa Nacional 2013.
Peru Libro Blanco de la Defensa Nacional del Perú 2005.
Uruguay Bases para una Política de Defensa Nacional 1999. Política de Defensa Nacional 2014
Defence Through the Websites of the Respective Ministries
What is the most frequently
cited content?
2.94% 11.76%
Personnel Plans
2.94% 8.82%
Budget
Operations
Disaggregation
Equipment for 5.88% 22.06%
Defence History
Education and 8.82% 19.12% 17.66%
Ministerial Legal
Training
Structures Framework
Note: Other issues are presented in addition to those cited, such as: gender, human rights, peace operations, military service, events, and visits and agenda, among others.
Source: Compilation based on the websites of the Ministries of Defence of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Haiti, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay, Ministry of the People’s Power for Defence of Venezuela, Secretariat of National Defence of Honduras,
Secretariat of National Defence and Secretariat of the Navy of Mexico. The cases of Costa Rica and Panama are not included as the table refers specifi cally to the
Ministries of Defence.
Political Participation of Military Personnel
Note: : In Brazil, military personnel on active duty
are not allowed to run as candidates. If they have
Can they vote? Can they be candidates for Elections? less than ten years in service, the individual must
retire; if he/she has had more than ten years of
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Costa
service, he/she shall be separated from duty by his
Rica(4), Cuba, Ecuador, Haiti, Mexico,
Active Nicaragua, Paraguay, Panama(4), Peru, Cuba, Honduras(1) and Mexico(2) superior authority; if elected, he shall automati-
cally be discharged.
Uruguay and Venezuela.
In the Dominican Republic, Section 123 of the
Yes, all those that have retired are Political Constitution establishes as a requisite
Retired able to vote Yes, in all cases (3)(4). that the President is not in active military or police
service for at least three years prior to standing
1. The Constitution mentions the possibility of running for elections in those cases not prohibited by Law (Sec. 37), but it establishes in presidential elections. Section 77, pertaining
that they cannot be elected as Deputies (Sec. 199) or President (Sec. 240). to the conditions required to become a congress
member, does not mention any requirement.
2. Members of the military on active duty must resign from their position at least 90 days prior to standing to be elected as a Deputy In Uruguay Subsection 2 of Section 91 of the Na-
(Political Constitution, Sec. 55) or Senator (Political Constitution, Sec. 58), with this period extending to six months for those standing tional Constitution establishes that “military per-
for the Presidency (Political Constitution, Sec. 82). Legislation indicates that in order to occupy a position involving a popular vote, sonnel who resign their salary and post in order to
members of the armed forces must request a special permit for that purpose. enter the legislature shall keep their rank, but for
3. In Bolivia, in order to hold a position of public offi ce, military personnel must resign at least three months prior to the election. the duration of their legislative responsibilities last
(Political Constitution, Art. 238). In Chile, Colombia and Nicaragua, one year after retiring. In El Salvador a period of three years in they shall not be promoted. They shall be exempt
retirement is required prior to running as a candidate in a presidential election. The Constitution of Haiti establishes a period of two from all military subordination and the duration
years prior to standing for any non-military public position. In Guatemala, fi ve years in retirement is stipulated. In the Dominican of their legislative activities will not be counted
Republic, the Constitution establishes as a requirement that the President not be in active military or police service for at least three towards promotion”. Section 98 of the Organic
years prior to presidential elections. Section 77 pertaining to the conditions required to become a congress member, does not men- Law of the Armed Forces Nº 14157, states that
tion any requirement. In Uruguay, subsection 4 of Section 77 of the National Constitution establishes that only the members of the military status shall be suspended in the case of a
military on active duty cannot perform political activities. member of the military that is elected for a politi-
4. In the case of Costa Rica and Panama references are made to members of public security forces. cal position.
Source: Compilation based on national legislation. For more detail on such legislation refer to section “Countries” of this publication.