HAI Founding Members Program
Creates $1,155,000 Annual Wallet
Membership duration: 3 years
A $5M annual membership gives access to a $1,155,000
$1,155K wallet customizable yearly fund to seed and support customized
research and engagement activities across Stanford that
are aligned with our members' AI and ML priorities.
The wallet Research: Collaborate with HAI
can be used
toward the
following:
Research Visiting FMAs:
Collaborations: Scholars/
A Stanford PhD student
Industry Members:
Members collaborate (Fellow) works closely with
with Stanford faculty and Experienced researchers an expert (Mentor) from
researchers on projects from member companies a member company to
that are aligned with their join with a Stanford faculty conduct advanced research
biggest R&D challenges member to study and engage under the guidance of a
and allow for a range of in research project(s) under Stanford faculty (Advisor).
measurable outcomes. their direction.
Student Engagement & Recruitment:
Founding Members enhance their company’s visibility across campus.
Additional Benefits: For Our Members
• Access to Executive Breakfast Seminars and the HAI Startup Series
• Membership in the Stanford Digital Economy Lab and the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Lab
• Semi-annual member meetings and access to exclusive HAI events with faculty, students and industry
“
The HAI Founding Members Program allows for customizable, project-based collaborations that engage participating
“Googlers with new topics, methods, and people in the domain of Human-Centered AI. We look forward to expanding
on these initiatives — Google recognizes that HAI's interdisciplinary perspective is key to shaping an inclusive AI
future.
Jeff Dean, Chief Scientist, Google DeepMind and
Google Research

Stanford HAI Industry Program
Information
For more information on any of the HAI Industry Programs
and engagement opportunities, contact:
Marc Gough, HAI Industry Partnerships & Engagement Manager, mjgough@stanford.edu
Ahmad Rushdi, HAI Senior Manager of Research Communities, rushdi@stanford.edu
David Levi, HAI Industry Partnerships Program Manager, dalevi@stanford.edu
Sha Sajadieh, HAI Industry Partnership Program Manager, shahed@stanford.edu
Hyla Shain, HAI Partnerships Administrator, hylashai@stanford.edu
Join us in our mission for
human-centered AI and
accelerate your AI journey today.
Check out our Industry Briefs at
hai.stanford.edu/industry-briefs
“ “ “
As the HAI Industry Program has The Stanford HAI Industry The HAI Industry Program
matured over the last couple of years, Program is specifically designed continues to be a great
we find increased opportunities for to engage companies with enabler for us to engage
our researchers to engage with faculty the Stanford AI community of with the broader ecosystem
and students to advance areas critical faculty, students, and experts to across research and industry
to the future of AI. In addition to the explore the unique problems and adjacencies. The insights and
benefits of engaging across a broad challenges that these companies value we derive from it have
community on technology, ethics, and or industries face. helped us tune our new to
policy, we are also beginning to see market offerings and reach a
specific advances in AI techniques and better product market fit.
approaches that are of mutual interest.
” Jeffrey J. Welser, COO IBM ” Fei-Fei Li, Sequoia Professor, ” Chintan Mehta,
Research, VP Exploratory Computer Science Department; CIO, Head of Digital
Science & University Denning Co-Director, Technology and
Collaboration, IBM Stanford HAI Innovation, Wells Fargo