The Evolution of French
Space Security
AUTHOR
Makena Young
A Report of the CSIS Aerospace Security Project

The Evolution of French
Space Security
AUTHOR
Makena Young
A Report of the CSIS Aerospace Security Project

About CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research
organization dedicated to advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding former
U.S. senator Sam Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as
president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of
values—nonpartisanship, independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship,
integrity and professionalism, and talent development. CSIS’s values work in concert toward the
goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research,
analysis, and recommendations. We organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media
appearances that aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and salience of policy issues with
relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policymakers and the
thinking of key influencers. We work toward a vision of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be
understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2024 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
202-887-0200 | 
The Evolution of French Space Security | II

About the Aerospace Security
Project
The Aerospace Security Project (ASP) is a trusted resource for policymakers, offering insightful
thoughts and in-depth analyses on policy issues, operational concepts, technology trends, and
economic drivers in the space and air domains. Our mission is to educate and inform policymakers
and the public, conduct independent research and analysis, and convene experts with broad
perspectives to advance creative and practical solutions that address the security challenges facing
the United States and its allies and partners. ASP also fosters the next generation of scholars in the
national security space and air power policy through fellowship and internship opportunities.
Part of the International Security Program at CSIS, Aerospace Security is led by Senior Fellow Kari
A. Bingen and includes a distinguished group of expert affiliates spanning national security, civilian,
commercial, and international aerospace issues.
Makena Young | III

Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Kari Bingen, Clayton Swope, Stephanie Songer, Jeremy Tammelleo,
Todd Harrison, Kaitlyn Johnson, Phillip Meylan, Katherine Stark, Jeeah Lee, Lauren Bailey, and
Louis Gleason for their support.
This report is made possible by general support to CSIS.
The Evolution of French Space Security | IV

Contents
Introduction 1
Modern Evolution of Space Strategy and Policy 4
The 2017 Defence and National Security Strategic Review 4
2019 Space Defence Strategy 5
Recent Developments 7
Creation of the French Space Command 7
Contributions to NATO 7
AsterX Space Exercise 8
Space Industrial Base 8
Regional Relationships 11
Germany 11
Italy 12
Partnerships with the United States 14
Areas of Potential Cooperation 16
Conclusion 18
About the Author 21
Endnotes 22
Makena Young | V

Introduction
In the last decade, there has been an international resurgence of focus on space for
commercial, civil, and military activities. Over 90 countries are operating in space, commercial
companies launch dozens of satellites a month, and at least 12 nations have dedicated military
organizations for space. Space is now a critical domain for many nations around the globe, and
both individual countries and multinational coalitions have recently released space policies and
strategies. European nations have taken a greater interest in space security by investing in space for
national security purposes. Among them, France stands out.
France has a long history in space, starting in 1961 with the establishment of the Centre National
D’Etudes Spatiales (CNES). It is the third-oldest space agency behind NASA in the United States
and Roscosmos in Russia. In 1965, France became the sixth country to orbit a satellite and the
third to have a domestic launch capability.1 CNES implements France’s civil space strategy across
“areas of strategic, economic, and scientific importance” to further French and European interests
in the space domain.2 The importance of CNES to French space strategy has continued to grow,
and CNES had the largest budget of any civil space agency in Europe in 2019 at €2.2 billion ($2.0
billion).3 CNES priorities include helping to establish downstream business and encouraging start-
ups and new companies to utilize the data from space capabilities.4 The agency has also expressed
interest in opening access to its space data for increased collaboration to create new value from
already collected information, specifically in Earth observation missions.5 One example of this
is forming partnerships with industry—in 2014 CNES joined with Airbus to open data from an
Earth observation satellite, Spot, to independent researchers in the hopes of advancing scientific
knowledge and analysis.6
The Evolution of French Space Security | 1

In addition to its substantial civil space program, France has long understood the value of space
to its military missions. In 1983, French prime minister Laurent Fabius created a working group to
assess the advantages of a military space program. The working group produced a report in 1986
that found having indigenous space-based surveillance capabilities was as crucial to the nation’s
strategic independence as a nuclear program.7 As a result, the French government launched its
first military satellite program, an optical reconnaissance system called Helios, in cooperation with
Italy and Spain, in 1995.8 However, this momentum would not last long, and by the early 2000s, the
French military space program had significantly slowed down. This deceleration was due to waning
interest from international partners and the ascendency of the European Union and European
Space Agency (ESA) as European-wide collaborative space entities.9
The evolution of European thinking on space security is important context for understanding
French views and actions regarding space. ESA is one of the largest space organizations in Europe
and was established by 10 founding members in 1975—the same year the organization launched
its first scientific satellite mission. After three decades of successful missions and partnerships
with other international civil space agencies, ESA published a European Space Policy in 2007. The
policy was drafted jointly with the European Commission, the politically independent executive
arm of the European Union which drafts legislative proposals, to create a unified framework for
European nations to work together in space.10 This policy aimed to “contribute to strengthening
the global role of Europe in the space domain through a joint international cooperation strategy.”11
This marked the beginning of a much larger role for Europe in international space missions as
ESA became a full partner in the International Space Station (ISS) and developed the capability to
launch its own astronauts.
After working jointly with ESA for some time on space policy, the European Union adopted its
first space strategy in 2016, focusing on the importance of space data for European citizens. The
strategy recognized that space is increasingly a priority for the European Union and outlined four
overarching goals: harnessing the benefits of space for European society and its economy, creating a
globally competitive European space sector, supporting European autonomy and security in space,
and promoting international cooperation.12 More recently, the European Union released a 2021–
2027 space policy that established an investment program aiming to create jobs across Europe,
fund science and research, foster a robust space economy, and promote policies regarding security,
defense, and digital technology.13 The European Union Space Programme delivers free services to
EU citizens through two flagship space programs, Galileo and Copernicus, which are navigation and
Earth observation systems, respectively.14 Charles Michel, the president of the European Council,
believes that “developing our space sector will help us reinforce our strategic autonomy—goal
number one of our generation.”15
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has also evolved its approach to the space domain
in ways that affect European security and space interests. In 2019, NATO recognized space as a
new operational domain and adopted the organization’s first Space Policy. NATO secretary general
Jens Stoltenberg described this new space policy as a first acknowledgment that the alliance relies
on space assets for essential military functions.16 NATO has made it clear that space is critical for a
Makena Young | 2

robust security and defense policy, and it plans to enhance the alliance’s space domain awareness
capabilities. Beyond recognizing space as an operational domain, in , NATO leaders
announced the extension of Article 5 to the space domain, which establishes that an attack on any
of the allies would be considered an attack on them all.17 That same year, NATO announced the
Strategic Space Situational Awareness System (3SAS), to be built at NATO headquarters in Brussels
and funded by Luxembourg. NATO also pledged €1.0 billion ($1.1 billion), spread across 2020 to
2034, for developing satellite communications services. This is the largest NATO investment in
space capabilities thus far.18
Beyond multinational obligations, many European nations have shown an increased interest in
space defense policy in the last decade. France, Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom have
all created military space commands to exist alongside corresponding civil agencies in the space
domain. Of these nations, French officials have been the most outspoken in Europe regarding space
defense capabilities. France is the only European country that has openly discussed its intent to
develop defensive counterspace capabilities, and since the election of French president Emmanuel
Macron in 2017, the nation has elevated the strategic importance of military space operations in its
overall defense strategy.
France is the only European country that has openly discussed
its intent to develop defensive counterspace capabilities.
The Evolution of French Space Security | 3

Modern Evolution of
Space Strategy and Policy
Today, France operates over a dozen military satellite programs, the majority of which are
communications satellites, followed by intelligence, optical reconnaissance, and one early
warning satellite.19 In addition to military systems, France operates a variety of additional
satellite systems, including for communication; Earth observation; science, technology, and
education; and traffic monitoring.20
A strength in France’s position comes from developing indigenous capabilities to support its space
security and warfighting missions that have also elevated the capabilities of Europe. French strategy
documents refer to “France and Europe,” indicating a strong emphasis on maintaining national
autonomy as well as a full commitment to elevating and participating in broader European efforts
on space security. This mirrors the country’s defense strategy stemming from the post–World War
II era and Charles de Gaulle, who broadly advocated for fierce French independence alongside a
united European posture.21
The 2017 Defence and National Security Strategic Review
The election of French president Emmanuel Macron in 2017 was an inflection point for France’s
space security policy. In , Macron gave a speech in which he spoke of having an
“ambitious space policy” for both France and Europe as a whole, “consolidating a competitive
European industry on a global scale.”22 By all accounts, it seemed that the focus at this time on
ramping up space capabilities came from the president himself. Commander of the French Space
Command Major General Michel Friedling confirmed this assessment in 2020 remarks: “the
Makena Young | 4

impulse came from the president himself, saying that space was a matter of national security.”23
This shift in space as a national security priority aligns with French leadership publicly discussing
developing active defenses in space, such as a laser that can blind sensors on other satellites. Such
discussions have moved France to the forefront of the debate over norms of behavior in space
and what it means to “weaponize” space. This is unique in a public framing in which many other
nations, including the United States, have been more reluctant to openly address active defensive
capabilities on orbit.
Though France did not recognize space as a warfighting domain until 2019, a 2017 Defence and
National Security Strategic Review, a follow-on to a 2013 white paper on the same topic, refers to
space as an operational environment, along with land, sea, air, and cyberspace. Space is highlighted
as “a domain of strategic and military rivalry.”24 The review emphasizes that space is of “crucial
importance” to France’s defensive capabilities and calls out the need to monitor objects in low
Earth orbit (LEO) and geosynchronous Earth orbit (GEO), as well as to bolster early-warning
capabilities for ballistic missile threats.25 The document went on to note competition in the domain
from other countries in space and called on the military to further develop partnerships with its
allies “to secure our military space assets.”26
The review called for a modernized approach to both designing and operating assets in space and
asserted that countries are capable of advancing military space operations under the guise of civilian
goals. It advocated for new defense practices in the space domain, noting that “the problem of space
weaponization must be now addressed in new terms.”27 The conclusion calls specifically for the
security of both national and shared space assets and, importantly, for “the capability to act against
security threats.”28 This foreshadowed a shift in French posture toward active defenses in space.
Following the release of this overarching review, France began working on a corresponding strategy
specific to space. In 2018, the French government approved the 2019–2025 Military Planning
Law, which was informed by the strategic review and laid out a spending plan for future years. It
included a goal of increasing acquisitions for a more well-equipped military by 2030 and allocated
€3.6 billion ($3.9 billion) over seven years to space defense, particularly in communication,
monitoring, and surveillance satellites.29
In 2023, the 2024–2030 Military Planning Law was released, which detailed a goal for better space
domain awareness and active defense in low Earth orbit. Three satellite programs were detailed as
patrolling satellites (YODA program), on-orbit lasers (FLAMHE project), and ground-based lazing
systems (BLOOMLASE project), which aim to be operational by 2030. In the six-year period, €6.0
billion ($6.5 billion) will be dedicated to space.30
2019 Space Defence Strategy
A key event that may have contributed to France’s shift in space policy involved a Russian satellite.
In , France publicly accused Russia of espionage by interfering with a French-Italian
military satellite, Athena-Fidus. The Russian satellite Luch had been operating in GEO for years and
was notorious for making unusual maneuvers and positioning itself close to other satellites. French
The Evolution of French Space Security | 5

minister of defence Florence Parly publicly spoke of Luch approaching Athena-Fidus too closely
in an attempt to intercept or monitor communications from the satellite.31 In early 2021, Macron’s
office mentioned other similar incidents but did not give any further details.32 The United States has
been outspoken about other unusual activities by Russian satellites, and Luch in particular, but no
events involving French assets have been addressed publicly by the United States.
Both countries have continued to speak out against Russian activities in space, and both France
and the United States publicly condemned Moscow in for an anti-satellite (ASAT)
weapon test that created over 1,500 pieces of space debris.33 In the United Nations General
Assembly’s First Committee in , France co-sponsored a resolution which called for
states not to conduct destructive ASAT tests.34 The resolution was adopted by a large majority of
nations, including France, but China, Russia, India, Iran, and North Korea remain unsupportive.
France has never conducted an ASAT test.
In 2019, as a show of continued momentum from the 2017 strategic review and the Luch event,
the French Ministry for the Armed Forces released a comprehensive Space Defence Strategy,
a 60-page document outlining the essential functions for the French armed forces in the space
domain. The Space Defence Strategy called for a more robust space defense policy and increased
emphasis on strategic autonomy in space. It presented a road map to strengthen space defense
doctrine, reorganize space-governing organizations and personnel, and develop new space defense
capabilities. The strategy does not pull any punches. The executive summary begins by stating, “a
revolution is taking place in the use of space,” and emphasizes that French space actors, both in
government and the private sector, must be able to defend against threats in the space domain.35
Consistent with the language in the 2019 Space Defence Strategy, France has been notably vocal
about its plans to defend its space assets, and Minister Parly has been up front about the capabilities
the country plans to field. In a bold public statement, she declared that if French assets in space
were threatened, “we intend to blind those [satellites] of our adversaries. . . . We reserve the
right and the means to be able to respond: that could imply the use of powerful lasers deployed
from our satellites or from patrolling nano-satellites.”36 Minister Parly also announced France’s
intention to launch small surveillance satellites, described as “fearsome little detectors that will
be the eyes of our most valuable satellites.”37 France is not the only country able to field active and
passive defenses in space. Still, it is unique in its decision to publicly discuss the types of defensive
counterspace weapons it currently has or may be developing.
“We reserve the right and the means to be able to respond:
that could imply the use of powerful lasers deployed from our
satellites or from patrolling nano-satellites.”
– French minister of defence Florence Parly
Makena Young | 6

Recent Developments
Creation of the French Space Command
In 2019, President Macron elevated the existing Joint Space Command under the French Air Force to
become the French Space Command, or Le Commandement de l’Espace (CDE), which was declared
fully operational in September of 2020.38 The CDE sits under what is today called the French Air
and Space Force and includes members of the other French armed services.39 Along with the
establishment of the CDE, France pledged a substantial €4.3 billion ($4.6 billion) from its defense
budget to invest in space infrastructure between 2019 and 2025. One of the CDE’s first investments
was the procurement of services from the French company Safran Data Systems to expand space
situational awareness (SSA) sensors and capabilities.40
Contributions to NATO
In 2020, NATO approved the French request to create a new Centre of Excellence focused on
space in the southern city of Toulouse. This will be NATO’s 27th Centre of Excellence and the
second that France hosts, after the Air Operations Centre of Excellence. The center will host 42
experts in space security, 25 of whom will be French. The new center is expected to be in place by
2025, and its main goals will be to draft policy, improve capabilities and alliance interoperability,
and identify lessons learned.41
The Evolution of French Space Security | 7

AsterX Space Exercise
In , France led its first international military space exercise, AsterX. Major General Michel
Friedling described the tactical exercise as a “stress test” for the country’s military space response.42
Prior to the test, France had participated in similar international wargames, but this was the first
time the country organized and conducted its own exercise. Germany, Italy, and the United States
were key participants. A second AsterX was conducted in , in which 50 participants from
the United States and European countries spent six days working through 16 escalation scenarios
in space. The AsterX game continued in 2023, establishing the exercise as an annual event.43 The
wargame was named as a tribute to France’s first satellite, Asterix, which referenced a French
cartoon in which a village chief of the same name is constantly worried the sky will fall on his head.
This continuing exercise follows the 2019 military space strategy, which emphasized France’s desire
to lead further allied cooperation in the space domain.
Space Industrial Base
In parallel with its civil and military space initiatives, France has developed a robust space industrial
base. Three corporations in particular—Airbus, Thales-Alenia, and ArianeGroup—are all substantial
actors in the global commercial industry.
Airbus is a multinational corporation that was started in France and maintains its head office in
Toulouse, though the official headquarters is now located in the Netherlands.44 Formed in 1970, the
company has three main business lines: commercial aircraft, defense and space, and helicopters.
Airbus is the second-largest aerospace company in the world, behind Boeing, and its defense and
space sector is arguably the preeminent exporter of Earth observation satellites.45 This sector also
provides experimental platforms for scientific research on the ISS, supports the European Service
Module of the Orion Deep Space Crew Vehicle, and supports some U.S. Department of Defense
space programs.46
In parallel with its civil and military space initiatives, France has
developed a robust space industrial base.
Thales-Alenia Space is a multinational aerospace manufacturing venture, with France’s Thales
owning a 67 percent share and Italy’s Leonardo owning a 33 percent share. The company
is the second-largest commercial provider of modules for the ISS and the largest satellite
manufacturer in Europe. Thales-Alenia Space supplies a majority of the pressurized modules
on the ISS and has partnered with U.S. company NanoRacks to supply the pressurized structure
of the commercial module on the ISS. In addition to partnering with civil space agencies with
great success, Thales-Alenia Space is developing on-orbit servicing capabilities to extend the
operational lifetime of satellites on orbit, to include repairs, maintenance, refueling, inspection,
and sustainable satellite de-orbiting.47
Makena Young | 8

Global conglomerate Safran has strong ties in France, and the French arm of the organization has
provided “its greatest successes in the aviation, space and defense industries.”48 Safran joined with
Airbus to create ArianeGroup in the early 1970s, which now provides a broad range of products
and support for the French government.49 The company has 11 subsidiaries, and one of its largest
is Arianespace, which focuses on launch services and commercial space transport. Arianespace
manages the launch services for the ESA-run Guiana Space Centre, often called Europe’s Spaceport,
which is located on the northeast coast of French Guiana.50 The spaceport hosted its first launch in
1970, and its proximity to the equator makes it ideal for launching satellites into GEO.
Ariane 5 parepares for launch at the Guiana Space Centre.
Photo: NASA/Bill Ingalls via Flickr, licensed under CC BY 2.0 DEED.
Space launch has historically been an area of commercial focus, including within the French industrial
base. Commercial companies have been integral to the success of France’s space launch capabilities
at the Guiana Space Center. Three main launch vehicles have historically been operated at the
spaceport: the Ariane 5, Vega, and Russian Soyuz. The Ariane 5 heavy launch vehicle was developed
by ESA and was able to launch many of the heaviest spacecraft in production. It is now described as
a “global benchmark for launches to geostationary transfer orbit,” with 117 successful launches that
placed 227 satellites into orbit.51 It flew its last flight on July 6, 2023.52 The next-generation Ariane 6
vehicle is in production, with plans for a first launch in the summer of 2024 after a series of delays.53
The Vega launch vehicle, also developed by ESA, is a four-stage launcher used for small satellites and
scientific missions.54 The next-generation Vega vehicle, Vega-C, completed its first flight on July 13,
The Evolution of French Space Security | 9

2022, from French Guiana. Vega-C suffered a launch failure during its second flight in .
The Vega-C has many of the same capabilities as the Vega vehicle but can deliver an additional 800 kg
to a polar orbit and has a larger fairing that can carry almost double the payload volume delievered to
orbit.55 A Vega-E vehicle, designed to be more affordable than its predecessors, is also in development,
with its maiden flight projected for 2026.56 The third launch vehicle is the Soyuz medium launch
vehicle, which was developed by the Russian Federal Space Agency and traces its heritage to the
launch of Sputnik in 1957.57 This medium launch vehicle was first used at the European spaceport
in 2011. Soyuz launches operated by Arianespace were suspended on March 4, 2022, in response to
sanctions imposed on Russia after its invasion of Ukraine.58 In total, Arianespace has launched over
1,100 satellites, including over half of the geostationary telecommunication satellites currently in
service.59 The company has launched from both the spaceport in French Guiana and the Russian-
operated Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan.60
In addition to heavy industry, new space companies are also ingraining themselves in the French
defense ecosystem, a strategy underscored by President Macron. In , he committed
€30.0 billion ($32.4 billion) for investment in high-tech sectors of the French economy, telling an
audience that “we want to have Elon Musks in France.”61 He also noted that the swift success of
SpaceX is an indicator of the rapid pace of global innovation, previously stating that the company
had “destabilized” the European space industry.62
One example is the commercial company Hemeria, created in 2019 as an offshoot from a
multinational defense company to focus on sovereign activities in France.63 Hemeria was awarded a
contract from CNES for the YODA program, which is planned as an “eyes in orbit” demonstration.64
This program aims to design and build two demonstrator reconnaissance small satellites in GEO,
meant to be “bodyguard satellites” to protect national security satellites from threats or “hostile
maneuvers” in orbit.65 These demonstrators are scheduled for a 2024 launch, with follow-on
operational satellites planned to be in orbit by 2030. This project underscores France’s desire to
invest in commercial space companies that can contribute capabilities to protect national security
assets in space.
Makena Young | 10

Regional Relationships
Germany
Germany’s space security strategy is primarily focused on missions through its civil space agency,
the German Aerospace Center (DLR), partnering with ESA and the European Union, rather than
investments in national military space capabilities. The DLR is Germany’s national agency for
aerospace, energy, and transportation research. It implements the majority of the country’s space
strategy, including managing the national space program, advising government officials, and
representing the country in international forums.66 In 2019, Germany committed €3.3 billion ($3.6
billion) over several years to ESA programs for telecommunications, Earth observation, technological
advancement and commercialization, and human spaceflight. Germany is ESA’s largest contributor,
followed by France and Italy, providing almost 23 percent of the organization’s budget.67
In , the German military established its own space command center, the Air and
Space Operations Centre (ASOC), which focuses on “information reconnaissance” and the collection
of SSA data.68 ASOC was opened by the federal minister of defence and chief of staff of the Air Force,
as the German Air Force oversees space operations.69 This joint command was established in response
to NATO’s declaration of space as an operational domain.70 In Germany’s High-Tech Strategy, released
in 2020, spaceflight was designated a key enabling technology for the German government.71
Germany was an initial competitor in hosting NATO’s space Centre of Excellence, which ultimately
ended up in Toulouse, France. Instead, during an meeting, NATO defense ministers
agreed to the establishment of a NATO Space Centre at the NATO Allied Air Command in Ramstein,
Germany. In contrast to the NATO Centre of Excellence in France, which focuses on space training
The Evolution of French Space Security | 11

and education, this center will support NATO activities, missions, and operations to increase NATO
space domain awareness. The center will initially be staffed with experts who already work at the
Allied Air Command, including representatives from the U.S. Space Force.72
In 2023, Germany released an updated National Space Strategy focused on the ways space
can impact Earth and the economic developments in the sector, with the federal minister for
economic affairs and climate action penning the foreword to underscore this emphasis. The
language throughout the strategy is largely framed around how space capabilities can support
Germany and Europe. The document outlines nine priorities for German space policy: European
and international competition; space as a growth market; climate change, resource protection,
and environmental protection; digitalization, data, and downstream activities; security, strategic
options, and global stability; sustainable, safe use of space; space research; international space
exploration; and space activities in the context of recruiting and attracting talent.73
France and Germany have an extensive history of cooperation in space, including military space
missions. In 2002, France and Germany signed the Schwerin Agreement, which grants each country
partial access to the other’s space systems. In this agreement, Germany is able to access up to 5
percent of the Helios 2 military Earth observation satellite system, while France benefits from
access to the German SAR-Lupe constellation, a five-satellite constellation dedicated to military
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance through synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imaging.74 In
a 2019 speech, Minister Parly identified Germany as an important ally in space, saying “in particular,
I count on Germany to be at the heart of space surveillance.”75
Italy
Similar to Germany and a majority of other European nations, Italian space strategy is largely
developed and implemented through its civil space agency, the Italian Space Agency (ASI). Italy is the
third-largest financial contributor to ESA and is a strong partner with NASA and other nations who
support the ISS.76 ASI released its Document on the Strategic Vision for Space, 2020-2029, centered on
three main pillars: bolstering of the Italian space economy through investments and new ventures,
research and innovation, and strengthening the country’s international role in space.77
The Italian parliament commissioned a government report on space in 2019, which resulted in the
Government Guidelines on Space and Aerospace, released by the Prime Minister’s Office.78 These
guidelines underscore the principles and international understanding of responsible uses of the
space domain regardless of geopolitical developments. Based on these guidelines, the Presidency of
the Council of Ministers released a National Security Strategy for Space as part of its space strategy.79
The document outlines the need to strengthen and protect national space capabilities, increase
the resiliency of Italy’s national space infrastructure, protect classified information, and focus on
international cooperation and the promotion of sustainable operations in the domain. International
cooperation is cited as a vital tool in the success of this strategy, with cooperation through
NATO, the European Union, and ESA highlighted as essential to the safety, sustainability, and
security of Italian space assets. The strategy seeks a “stable space environment” governed under
Makena Young | 12

international law and in accordance with the UN Charter so that nations do not have to “resort to
the development of self-defense capabilities.”80
In 2020, the Italian Joint Space Operations Command became operational. Its first action was
to “link the existing Air Defense Network with Early Warning and Missile Defense and Space
Situational Awareness to ‘spot, identify, and react to any threats brought into space or against
space assets.’”81
Italy also has a long history of space collaboration with France. In 2001, France and Italy signed
an intergovernmental agreement focused on optical and radar federated Earth observation.
Collaborating with systems that collected data in two different yet complementary ways, this
allowed France to access 75 images per day from the Italian COSMO-SkyMed SAR satellite
constellation and in return provided Italy with access to the French Spot 5 civilian Earth observation
imaging satellite system.82 The Spot 5 sensor was decommissioned in 2015, though the imagery it
collected remains available.83
France and Italy also collaborated on two military satellites, Athena-Fidus and Sicral 2. Athena-
Fidus was targeted by the Russian satellite Luch in 2018. Athena-Fidus is a wideband military
communications satellite that was funded equally by both nations, although they operate separate
parts of the satellite. Notably, Italy did not protest as forcefully or publicly as France did after the
Luch incident. The Sicral 2 satellite provides narrowband communication services to the French
and Italian militaries and was funded 62 percent by Italy and 38 percent by France.84
In , France and Italy announced a high-level working group focused on space launch and
the economic repercussions from the delayed development of the Ariane 6 and Vega-C launchers.
A press release for the working group further outlined a shared vision between the two countries
for a cohesive European set of launch vehicles with coordinated and complementary technological
and industrial approaches to their development. The document also mentions an agreement with
Germany on the future of liquid propulsion engines, a German strength.85
The Evolution of French Space Security | 13

Partnerships with the
United States
France has consistently been one of the United States’ strongest allies, and that cooperation
has extended into space. The United States and France have partnered on civil space missions
for decades, and the two nations signed a Framework Agreement for Cooperative Activities
in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes in 2007.86 This led to cooperation
between NASA and CNES on space exploration, Earth observation and monitoring, space operations,
and space science and research on missions such as CALIPSO and Jason.87 At a 2009 Civil Space
Cooperation Forum, NASA and CNES agreed to partner on four specific scientific missions: the Mars
Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN mission, the Magnetospheric MultiScale mission, the Convection
Rotation and Planetary Transits mission, and the Surface Water and Ocean Topography mission.88
CNES also played a large role in NASA’s 2018 Mars Discovery Program.89 In , France became
the 20th signatory to NASA’s Artemis Accords, agreeing to partner on the Artemis mission to the
Moon and adhere to a shared vision for safe and sustainable actions in space.90
One of the most recent examples of U.S.-French teaming in space is the James Webb Space
Telescope (JWST). A joint mission between NASA, ESA, and the Canadian Space Agency, the JWST
is the most advanced space telescope ever launched. In addition to supporting ESA contributions
to the telescope, CNES has been involved in the project since 2004 and has financially supported
the Mid-Infrared Instrument, which enables the telescope to see distant galaxies and deep space
activities like comets and newly forming stars.91 After many delays, the JWST was launched on
the morning of December 25, 2021, on an Ariane 5 rocket out of the Guiana Space Centre.92 The
mission has been an initial success, producing clear deep space images and detecting carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere of other planets.93
Makena Young | 14

In addition to a strong partnership between civil space agencies, both France and the United States
have placed increasing importance on national security space. In 2016, the French minister of
defence and the U.S. secretary of state issued a joint statement of intent on the future of bilateral
military cooperation. This included expanding cooperation in the cyber domain—an ongoing
process since 2010—and in the space domain to include joint training events, reciprocal visits
at respective air force bases, and exchanges between military leaders in each country’s space
command.94 Additionally, France has a liaison officer stationed at the U.S. Combined Space
Operations Center in Colorado Springs, Colorado. In a statement, then French liaison
officer Colonel Oliver Fleury spoke about the ambitions the U.S. and French military commands
share as well as the shared commitment to facing risks and threats together as allies in space.95
To further integrate military approaches, France and the United States participate in hosted
wargames. Each year since 2001, the United States has hosted an annual Schriever Wargame
focusing on space capabilities and operations, and France has been a participant since 2012.96
Originally run by Air Force Space Command, the U.S. Space Force led its first Schriever Wargame
in 2020, with 200 attendees from eight countries: France, Germany, Australia, Canada, Japan, New
Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States.97 Similarly, the United States participated in
France’s first space-focused wargame, AsterX, in its inaugural 2021 game as well as the following
iterations in 2022 and 2023. Participation from military leaders in these wargames builds
confidence and insight into the strategy and decisionmaking of each, especially with regard to
space threats.98
International partners come together for the 2023 Schriever Wargame.
Photo: U.S. Space Force by Judi Tomich.
Similarly, the United States Space Command hosts the Global Sentinel event, an international
convention designed to advance international cooperation through data sharing and spaceflight
safety.99 In , 25 nations participated in the ninth iteration of Global Sentinel, including
The Evolution of French Space Security | 15

France, Germany, and Italy, among others from Europe.100 While not a wargame, this event has
participating nations work through potential scenarios in the space domain, enhancing cooperation
and information sharing and building reciprocal awareness of each countries’ space capabilities.
As collaborators and allies in many areas, space is becoming a higher-priority item between
France and the United States. After a meeting with President Macron, U.S. vice president Kamala
Harris announced new initiatives for cooperation in space and cybersecurity. The November 10,
2021, announcement indicated that the countries would come together to fortify comprehensive
dialogues on space, including climate change; access to and quality of education in science,
technology, engineering, and medicine; and norms and guidelines for the long-term sustainability
of the domain.101 The United States also committed to joining the Space Climate Observatory, an
international network that uses space assets to learn more about the impacts of climate change.102
As collaborators and allies in many areas, space is becoming a
higher-priority item between France and the United States.
In , the first U.S.-France Comprehensive Dialogue on Space was held in Paris
“pursuant to their shared goal of advancing bilateral space cooperation.”103 The dialogue was
cochaired by executive office representatives from the U.S. and French governments, resulting in a
joint resolve to strengthen the coordination of national security space capabilities both bilaterally
and within NATO. Both sides celebrated the signature to respective treaties earlier in the year:
France to NASA’s Artemis Accords and the United States to France’s Space for Climate Observatory
Charter. The latter highlights the importance of space science and Earth observation to both
nations, including climate change monitoring.104
Bilateral space cooperation has also extended to the industrial and technology sectors, including
through an initiative by CNES called Connect. Connect is a French initiative to foster space-
related industrial innovation. CNES plans to establish hubs in Denver, Colorado, and Houston,
Texas, to expand the industrial relationship between the two countries. The initiative aims to
provide entry points for French companies into the United States and for U.S. companies into the
European market.105
Areas of Potential Cooperation
In the near term, the countries may be able to come together through both public policy discussions
and technical developments. France and the United States will continue to build upon their
relationship through civil space missions such as the Artemis program, increased participation in
launch missions, and the development of coordinated military space strategy. Additionally, both
countries are regional leaders and should continue the multilateral development of space norms
and behaviors—both by acting responsibly in space and publicly discussing bad behavior in space.
This could include coordination of public and private messaging to Russia and China on their
Makena Young | 16

activities in space, including norm setting on defensive counterspace operations and appropriate
uses of active and passive capabilities. This could be strengthened by continued participation in
military wargames, exercises, training, and personnel exchanges that can solidify a joint operational
understanding. Joint coordination of space situational awareness operations for improved threat
detection and characterization is another capability which could help underscore public policy
decisionmaking. While Paris continues to strive to build its own autonomy, there will be natural
tensions and competition with partners and allies doing the same, including the United States. But
given shared threats and interests, there is more collaboration to be found than competition.
Given shared threats and interests, there is more collaboration
to be found than competition.
While France clearly values its partnerships with the United States in space, it is attempting to
develop independent capabilities in the military, civil, and commercial space sectors. French
strategy has defined success as operational independence, as Minister Parly has noted: “If we want
to be able to carry out real military operations in space, then we need to develop the ability to act
alone.”106 A key issue to watch is how quickly France moves to develop and operationalize these
capabilities. While French officials indicate a strong interest in working with others in Europe and
the United States, they are equally enthusiastic about guaranteeing that they can act independently.
The Evolution of French Space Security | 17

Conclusion
“I want a France that is faithful to its commitments in the Atlantic Alliance, but which is
also the engine of European strategic autonomy.”107
– French president Emmanuel Macron
France stands apart from other European nations in its desire for strategic autonomy in space and its
public desire to develop active defenses for its critical space systems. Other European actors in space,
such as Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom, are relatively more focused on cooperation and
maintaining sanctuary in space rather than gaining strategic independence as a space power. After
the announcement of the creation of French Space Command in 2019, Germany’s Thomas Jarzombek
stated, “We need a robust answer to the challenges in space, but I see this as a job for the European
Space Agency and the EU.”108 This sentiment indicates that France stands apart in its steadfast desires
for independent capabilities that can rival those of the major historic space powers.
In France, the combination of interest from a new president paired with repercussions from what
it considered to be Russian interference with a key military satellite propelled space to the top of its
military priorities. A similar incident in space perpetrated by either China or Russia that threatens
key space assets or access to space-based capabilities could propel other European countries to take
a stronger stance on space security and cause them to consider developing defensive counterspace
capabilities of their own—especially if they do not see the United States as capable or willing to
protect their space systems from attack. At the moment, however, most of France’s European
counterparts appear to place a higher priority on the advancement of NATO and EU space policies
and capabilities than on bolstering their own independent capabilities. As other European nations
Makena Young | 18

develop and update their national security strategies and space policies in particular, a key
indicator to watch is whether they follow France’s lead and begin talking publicly about the need
for defensive space capabilities.
In many ways, France appears to be looking to the United States as the model of a fully developed
space power, particularly for how the United States utilizes and empowers its commercial space
sector. While there are many successful private space companies in Europe, and France specifically,
they are less common, and the industry is not as nurtured as in the United States. As more national
budgets are allocated to encourage commercial growth, the European commercial space sector will
likely see the most change in the coming years. A EU Industrial Strategy recognized the
importance of space technologies to Europe’s industrial base and called for a decreased reliance on
non-European countries for technical expertise and services.109
This is a pressure point for France, as President Macron has spoken multiple times about the need to
strengthen the space industrial base in the country. A key issue to watch is the flow of private capital
into French and other European space companies, particularly start-ups, and whether it follows
trends seen in the United States, where a massive influx of venture capital funding has stimulated a
boom in commercial space innovation. France is making a concerted effort to build a space capital
in Toulouse. It plans to locate the French Space Command’s military headquarters, the NATO Centre
of Excellence, and substantial industrial parks for space companies. This indicates that space is
considered a vital industrial sector for France and that Toulouse will be at its center.
Space launch is a commercial sector that will likely continue to grow. The most notable milestones are
the high-profile launches and launch vehicles that have recently debuted: the successful launch of the
JWST from an Ariane 5 rocket on December 25, 2021, followed by the debut of the Vega-C light launch
vehicle. These may be indicative of future progress, as both projects overcame significant delays
spanning nearly a decade that resulted in a late but successful result. The ambitious timelines of these
planned next-generation launch vehicles will cement France’s role in the global launch market.
While commercial space capabilities have traditionally been focused on launch, communications, and
remote sensing, many private companies within the United States and in other nations are developing
and deploying a wide variety of new commercial space services, and some of these services have the
potential to provide important new military capabilities. For example, private companies are testing
active debris removal systems and on-orbit servicing satellites that could (in theory) be adapted to
serve as defensive counterspace capabilities.110 Private companies are also increasing the quality
of SSA data and frequency of its collection, including plans to deploy space-based SSA systems.111
These commercial space services could provide a relatively quick way for militaries to advance their
space capabilities in response to shifts in national space policy and strategy. It could also create
further justification for Russia, China, or other nations to accelerate counterspace programs if these
commercially derived capabilities are perceived as offensive or destabilizing.
As noted in France’s 2017 strategy, “Ambition must be twofold: to preserve its strategic autonomy
and to build a stronger Europe to face the growing number of common challenges.”112 France has
detailed threats from both Russia and China in its military planning documents, and both countries
The Evolution of French Space Security | 19

have significantly more advanced capabilities in space than European nations. Countering France
and other European nations in space is likely a lesser included case in the Russian and Chinese
space strategies, which are aimed primarily at the United States. However, countries such as Russia
and China could use the words and actions of France—and any other nations that follow suit—as an
excuse to justify bolstering their own space and counterspace capabilities.
Though officials have been outspoken about brazen counterspace actions in space, France
entertained the idea of partnering with Russia and China on their proposed International Lunar
Research Station in the summer of 2021.113 While this may only have been intended to signal a
degree of autonomy, French alignment with Russia or China for space missions could create
tensions with the United States and other Artemis partners. To date, there has been no signature
from China or Russia to establish plans to build the proposed International Lunar Research Station.
Partners from Russia’s lunar moon missions, including ESA, terminated agreements with Russia
after its invasion of Ukraine in early 2022.114 However, France has had partnerships with China
in space dating back to 1997. The countries have collaborated on a number of space missions,
including a joint oceanography satellite launched in 2018 by civil space leads, the China National
Space Administration and CNES, to monitor ocean and atmospheric science.115 The countries have
also held at least a dozen space cooperation meetings, the latest of which was held in 2019.116
Perhaps the most significant takeaway in the advancement of French space policy is France’s
willingness to speak openly and candidly about overarching goals in space—and the expectation
of being taken at its word. If French officials speak openly about the development of a security
technology or a worry of a particular kind of counterspace attack, it is a likely indicator that they
intend to address the issue proactively. This willingness to speak publicly and candidly about
specific defensive capabilities and military plans and postures in space may be one of the greatest
differences between the French and U.S. approaches to space policy. As France continues to bolster
every aspect of its space policy, officials seem to be making their playbook public. Major General
Friedling described the space philosophy in France quite succinctly: “We’re saying exactly what
we’re going to do, and we will do it. And this is not the case of many other actors in space.”117
Makena Young | 20

About the Author
Makena Young is a fellow with the Aerospace Security Project at the Center for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS). Her research interests include international collaboration, space
security, and orbital debris. Prior to joining CSIS, Ms. Young worked for the Federal Aviation
Administration as an aerospace engineer, focusing on automatic dependent surveillance-
broadcast certification and integration in small aircraft. She holds a BS in aeronautical and
astronautical engineering from Purdue University with minors in international relations and
environmental engineering.
The Evolution of French Space Security | 21

Endnotes
1 ”Aiming for the stars with Europe’s launch vehicles,” Airbus, n.d., 
history/space-history/aiming-for-the-stars-with-europes-launch-vehicles.
2 “Centre National D’Etudes Spatiales (CNES),” The European Space Agency, n.d., 
Enabling_Support/Space_Engineering_Technology/Centre_National_D_Etudes_Spatiales_CNES; and
“About CNES,” CNES, January 21, 2021, 
3 De Gouyon Matignon, “The Birth of the French Space Program.”
4 “2021 Space Symposium | Heads of Agency,” YouTube video, posted by NASA Video, August 31, 2021,
1:03:22, 
5 “CNES: open access to satellite data to protect Earth,” Activeeon, February 11, 2019, 
activeeon.com/blog/cnes-open-its-satellite-data/.
6 “Editorial | CNES Moves To Unlock Value of Spot Data Archives,” SpaceNews, February 24, 2014, https://
spacenews.com/39611editorial-cnes-moves-to-unlock-value-of-spot-data-archives/.
7 Laurence Nardon, “France Cedes Leading Role in Space to Europe,” Brookings Institution, April 1, 2001,

8 Gunter D. Krebs, “Helios 1A, 1B,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
1a.htm.
9 Nardon, “France Cedes Leading Role in Space to Europe.”
10 “History of Europe in space,” European Space Agency, n.d., 
History_of_Europe_in_space; and “European Commission,” European Union, n.d., 
union.europa.eu/institutions-law-budget/institutions-and-bodies/search-all-eu-institutions-and-bodies/
european-commission_en.
Makena Young | 22

11 “Europe’s Space Policy becomes a reality today (4th Space Council),” European Space Agency, May
22, 2007, 
today_4th_Space_Council.
12 Vincent Reillon, European space policy: Historical perspective, specific aspects and key challenges
(Strasbourg, France: European Parliament, ), 
etud es/IDAN/2017/595917/EPRS_IDA(2017)595917_EN.pdf#page=24.
13 “EU space policy,” European Council, Council of the European Union, last reviewed July 22, 2021,

14 Ibid.
15 “Timeline: EU space policy,” European Council, Council of the European Union, last reviewed
November 24, 2021, 
16 “NATO’s approach to space,” North Atlantic Treaty Organization, last updated December 2, 2021, https://

17 Lorne Cook, “NATO says attack in space could trigger mutual defense clause,” Defense News, June 14,
2021, 
trigger-mutual-defense-clause/.
18 Ibid.
19 Gunter D. Krebs, “Military Spacecraft - France,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
directories/sat_mil_fra.htm.
20 Gunter D. Krebs, “Satellites of France,” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
sat_c_france.htm.
21 John Davis Hamill, “The Grand Strategy of Charles de Gaulle,” National War College, September 8, 1989,

22 “President Macron gives speech on new initiative for Europe,” Elysee, September 26, 2017, 
elysee.fr/en/emmanuel-macron/2017/09/26/president-macron-gives-speech-on-new-initiative-for-europe.
23 “Panel 3: Everybody Wants a Space Force,” YouTube video, posted by Secure World Foundation,
September 25, 2020, 1:28:34, 
24 Republic of France, Defense and National Security Strategic Review (Paris: Republic of France, ), 76, 45.
25 Ibid., 33, 78.
26 Ibid., 76.
27 Ibid., 45.
28 Ibid., 90.
29 “France’s Macron announces creation of space force command,” DW, July 13, 2019, 
en/frances-macron-announces-creation-of-space-force-command/a-49581694.
30 Ministry for the Armed Forces, LPM 2024-2030: Les grandes orientations (Paris, France: Ministry for the
Armed Forces, 2023), 9-10, 
de%20pr%C3%A9sentation%20de%20la%20Loi%20de%20programmation%20militaire%202024-
2030%20%286%20avril%202023%29.pdf.
31 Todd Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2020 (Washington, DC: Aerospace Security Project, CSIS,
The Evolution of French Space Security | 23

), 
32 “France successfully launches cutting-edge military communication satellite,” France24, October
24, 2021, 
military-communications-satellite.
33 Jajeswari Pillai Rajagopalan, “Russian ASAT Test Highlights Urgent Need for Space Governance
Negotiations,” The Diplomat, November 19, 2021, 
highlights-urgent-need-for-space-governance-negotiations/.
34 “Space-France’s commitment not to conduct destructive direct-ascent anti-satellite missile tests (29
),” Ministry of Europe and Foreign Affairs, November 29, 2022, 
gouv.fr/en/french-foreign-policy/security-disarmament-and-non-proliferation/news/2022/article/space-
france-s-commitment-not-to-conduct-destructive-direct-ascent-anti.
35 Republic of France, Space Defence Strategy, (Paris: Republic of France, 2019), 8, 
gouvernement.fr/sites/default/files/locale/piece-jointe/2020/08/france_-_space_defence_strategy_2019.
pdf.
36 ”France to develop anti-satellite laser weapons: defence minister,” France24, July 25, 2019, 
france24.com/en/20190725-france-develop-anti-satellite-laser-weapons-defence-minister.
37 “France to launch ‘fearsome’ surveillance satellites to bolster space defenses,” Reuters, July 25, 2019,

satellites-to-bolster-space-defenses-idUSKCN1UK1TY.
38 Emmanuel Huberdeau, “France ramps up space capabilities,” Janes, September 10, 2020, 
janes.com/defence-news/news-detail/france-ramps-up-space-capabilities.
39 Ibid.
40 “DGA- Directorate General of Armaments,” Hipeac, n.d., 
institutions/8240/dga/.
41 Christina Mackenzie, “NATO names location for new military space center,” Defense News, February
5, 2021, 
center/.
42 Murielle Delaporte, “ASTERX 2021: French Space Forces Reach For Higher ‘Orbit’,” Breaking Defense,
April 9, 2021, 
orbit/.
43 “The French Military Space Exercise,” Ministry for the Armed Forces, , 
gouv.fr/sites/default/files/public/2023-02/AsterX_2023-ENGLISH.pdf.
44 “Contacts by department,” Airbus, n.d., 
45 “Airbus Defence and Space-built PeruSAT-1 delivers first images,” SpaceDaily, October 2, 2016, https://

46 “Space Systems,” Airbus, n.d., 
k1Cs6Soc33TSqDpnfWEZPjOkO1vzyaqfiHtL8cwCRWfN2La435Y21UaAlwQEALw_wcB.
47 “Explore,” Thales Alenia Space, n.d., 
48 “Safran in France: a history of excellence,” Safran Group, n.d., 
france.
49 “About Us, Our History,” ArianeGroup, n.d., 
Makena Young | 24

50 “Centre National D’Etudes Spatiales (CNES),” European Space Agency, n.d., 
Enabling_Support/Space_Engineering_Technology/Centre_National_D_Etudes_Spatiales_CNES.
51 “Ariane 5: The Heavy Launcher,” Arianespace, n.d., and
“Company Profile,” Arianespace, n.d. 
52 Ibid.
53 Elizabeth Howell, “1st launch of Europe’s Ariane 6 rocket finally has launch target,” Space.
com, December 3, 2023, 
54 “Vega: The Light Launcher,” Arianespace, n.d., 
55 Mike Wall and Tereza Pultarova, “Europe’s new Vega C rocket launches 7 satellites on debut mission,”
Space.com, July 13, 2022, 
56 “VEGA E,” Avio, n.d., 
57 “Soyuz: The Medium Launcher,” Arianespace, n.d., 
58 “Suspension of Soyuz launches operated by Arianespace & Starsem,” Arianespace, March 4, 2022,

starsem/.
59 “Company Profile,” Arianespace, n.d., 
60 “About Us,” Arianespace, n.d., 
61 Chris Forrester, “Macron’s €30bn includes Space Force,” Advanced Television, October 13, 2021, https://
advanced-television.com/2021/10/13/macrons-e30bn-includes-space-force/.
62 Ibid.; and “Macron insists Arianespace must compete with SpaceX,” Advanced Television, April 23, 2018,

63 “Our World,” Hemeria, n.d., 
64 “YODA,” Hemeria, n.d., 
65 Ibid.
66 “German Space Agency at DLR,” German Space Agency, n.d., 
aspx/tabid-2099/3053_read-4706/.
67 “Germany invests 3.3 billion euro in European space exploration and becomes ESA’s largest
contributor,” DLR, November 28, 2019, 
esa-ministerial-2019.html.
68 Elliot Douglas, “German Bundeswehr sets up space command center,” DW, July 13, 2021, 
dw.com/en/german-bundeswehr-sets-up-space-command-center/a-58250738.
69 Dominic Vogel, “German Armed Forces Approaching Outer Space,” German Institute for International
and Security Affairs, October 20, 2020, 
forces-approaching-outer-space/.
70 Vivienne Machi, “Germany establishes new military space command,” DefenseNews, July 13, 2021,

71 “Aerospace Policy,” Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action, n.d., 
de/Redaktion/EN/Dossier/aerospace-policy.html.
72 “NATO Space Centre,” Shape, n.d., 
The Evolution of French Space Security | 25

73 Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action, The German Federal Government’s Space
Strategy (Berlin: Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action, ), https://

strategy.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=1#page=39.
74 “SAR-Lupe Constellation,” eoPortal Directory, June 14, 2012,
satellite-missions/s/sar-lupe.
75 “France to launch ‘fearsome’ surveillance satellites to bolster space defenses,” Reuters, July 25, 2019,

satellites-to-bolster-space-defenses-idUSKCN1UK1TY.
76 “The Italian Space Agency in Brief: Profile and Activities,” ASI, November 18, 2021, 
the-agency/the-italian-space-agency-in-short-profile-and-activities/.
77 Alessandro Gili and Davide Fanciulli, “A Strategy for the EU and Italy in the Space,” Italian Institute for
International Political Studies, December 11, 2020, 
eu-and-italy-space-28632.
78 Federico Marini Balestra and Lucia Antonazzi, “Key highlights of the new Italian Space Strategy,” Bird
& Bird, , 
new-italian-space-strategy; and “Government guidelines on space and aerospace,” Prime Minister’s
Office, March 25 2019, 
ArticolazioneUffici/UfficiDirettaPresidente/UfficiDiretta_CONTE/COMINT/DEL_20190325_aerospazio-EN.
pdf.
79 “National security strategy for space,” Presidency of the Council of Ministers, July 18, 2019,

UfficiDirettaPresidente/UfficiDiretta_CONTE/COMINT/NationalSecurityStrategySpace.pdf.
80 Ibid.
81 Giacomo Cavanna, “The Italian Space Operations Command is getting ready,” Aresdifesa, February 27,
2021, 
82 European Space Policy Institute, Europe, Space and Defence: From “Space for Defence” to “Defence of
Space” (Vienna: European Space Policy Institute, ), 
uploads/2022/06/ESPI-Public-Report-72-Europe-Space-and-Defence-Full-Report.pdf; and “COSMO-
SkyMed,” eoPortal, May 30, 2012, 
capabilities.
83 “SPOT-5 Satellite Sensor (2.5m/5m) - Decommissioned,” Satellite Imaging Corporation, n.d., https://

84 “Sicral 2, the French-Italian Defense and Security Telecom Satellite, Reaches Guiana Space Center
Launching Site,” Thales, March 4, 2015, 
release/sicral-2-french-italian-defense-and-security-telecom-satellite-reaches.
85 “Franco Italian Declaration on the Future of the European Space Launchers,” Ministry of the Economy,
Finance, and Recovery, March 19, 2021, 
484c-a4e6-3ab69704a454/files/c7cf6804-aaaa-40f6-b366-02994896625d.
86 Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs, “United States-France
Framework Agreement Signed on Outer Space Cooperation,” U.S. Department of State Archive, January
23, 2007, 
87 Ibid.
Makena Young | 26

88 NASA, “U.S. and France Sign Agreements for Civil Space Cooperation,” Press release, September 18,
2009, 
89 Harrison et al., Space Threat Assessment 2020.
90 Sandra Erwin, “U.S. and France agree to expand cooperation on space issues,” SpaceNews, November
10, 2021, 
91 “Mid-Infrared Instrument (MIRI),” Goddard Space Flight Center, n.d., 
content/observatory/instruments/miri.html; and “MIRI Mission: France on Board the New James Webb
Space Telescope,” CNES, February 26, 2004, 
mission.php.
92 “About Webb Launch,” Goddard Space Flight Center, n.d., 
launch.html.
93 Jeff Foust, “NASA sees JWST success helping win agency support and funding,” SpaceNews, July 13,
2022, and
Jamie Adkins, “NASA’s Webb Detects Carbon Dioxide in Exoplanet Atmosphere,” NASA, August 25,
2022, 
atmosphere.
94 “Joint Statement of Intent by Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister of Defence of the French Republic, and the
Honorable Ashton Carter, Secretary of Defense of the United States of America,” Department of Defense,
n.d., 
France.pdf.
95 U.S. Space Command, “March 20 is French Language Day,” Facebook, March 20, 2020, 
facebook.com/USSpaceCom/videos/col-olivier-fleury-describes-frenchamerican-partnership-in-
space/165426564477676/?locale=ms_MY.
96 “Space Cooperation and NATO: Schriever Wargame 2012,” Natowatch, 2012, 
newsbriefs/2012/space-cooperation-and-nato-schriever-wargame-2012.
97 Tyler Whiting, “Schriever Wargame: Critical space event concludes,” Space Operations Command Public
Affairs, November 4, 2020, 
schriever-wargame-critical-space-event-concludes/.
98 Ibid.
99 U.S. Space Command Public Affairs, “USSPACECOM hosts 6th space experiment with 16 international
partners,” Spacecom, October 2, 2019, 
Article/1977997/usspacecom-hosts-6th-space-experiment-with-16-international-partners/.
100 “Global Sentinel 2022,” YouTube video, posted by U.S. Space Command, August 25, 2021, https://
 and “25 Nations Participate in Global Sentinel 22,” U.S.
Space Command, August 3, 2022, 
Article/3115832/25-nations-participate-in-global-sentinel-22/.
101 “FACT SHEET: Vice President Harris Announces Initiatives on Space and Cybersecurity,” White House,
November 10, 2021, 
sheet-vice-president-harris-announces-initiatives-on-space-and-cybersecurity/.
102 “SCO France,” Space Climate Observatory, n.d., 
103 “Joint Statement of the First Meeting of the U.S.-France Comprehensive Dialogue on Space,” U.S.
Department of State, November 17, 2022, 
The Evolution of French Space Security | 27

the-u-s-france-comprehensive-dialogue-on-space/.
104 Ibid.
105 Debra Werner, “France to establish NewSpace hubs in Denver and Houston,” SpaceNews, December 20,
2023, 
106 “France to launch ‘fearsome’ surveillance satellites to bolster space defenses,” Reuters, July 25, 2019,

satellites-to-bolster-space-defenses-idUSKCN1UK1TY.
107 “Draft Military Planning Law 2019/2025,” Ministry for the Armed Forces, , 
defense.gouv.fr/content/download/523961/9053454/file/MPL%202019-2025%20-%20Synopsis%20(EN).
pdf.
108 Joshua Posaner, “The race for Europe’s place in space,” Politico, August 13, 2019, 
eu/article/europe-space-race/.
109 Alessandro Gili and Davide Fanciulli, “A Strategy for the EU and Italy in the Space,” Italian Institute for
International Political Studies, December 11, 2020, 
eu-and-italy-space-28632.
110 Christopher R. May, “Triggers and Effects of an Active Debris Removal Market,” Aerospace Center for
Space Policy and Strategy, , 
pdf.
111 Jason Rainbow, “NorthStar SSA and Earth intelligence constellation gets key government approval,”
SpaceNews, August 24, 2021, 
gets-key-government-approval/.
112 Republic of France, Defense and National Security Strategic Review, 14.
113 “France may join Russia and China in effort to build lunar research station,” Global Construction Review,
June 10, 2021, 
luna/.
114 Tereza Pultarova, “Europe halts moon exploration partnership with Russia, looks to replace Ukraine-
buid rocket engines,” Space.com, April 13, 2022, 
russia-ukraine-rocket-engines.
115 “CFOSAT (Zhongfa Haiyangxue Weixing),” Gunter’s Space Page, n.d., 
sdat/cfosat.htm.
116 “China And France Hold Twelfth Space Cooperation Meeting In Shanghai,” Spacewatch Asia Pacific, , 
shanghai/.
117 “Panel 3: Everybody Wants a Space Force,” YouTube.
Makena Young | 28

COVER PHOTO AFP/VIA GETTY IMAGES
1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202 887 0200 |