Policy Brief
HAI Policy & Society

Walking the Walk
Key Takeaways
Technology companies often
“talk the talk” of AI ethics
of AI Ethics in
without fully “walking the
walk.” Many companies
have released AI principles,
Technology but relatively few have
institutionalized meaningful
change.
Companies
We interviewed 25 AI ethics
practitioners and found
that there are significant
roadblocks to implementing
Sanna J. Ali, Angèle Christin, Andrew Smart, and Riitta Katila
companies’ stated goals
regarding AI ethics.
THE FIELD OF AI ETHICS HAS GROWN RAPIDLY IN INDUSTRY AND
ACADEMIA, in large part due to the “techlash” brought about by
AI ethics and fairness
technology industry scandals such as Cambridge Analytica and growing considerations are
congressional attention to technology giants’ data privacy and other championed by individuals
who lack institutional support,
internal practices. In recent years, technology companies have published
rarely made a priority in
AI principles, hired social scientists to conduct research and compliance,
product development cycles,
and employed engineers to develop technical solutions related to AI disincentivized by metrics,
ethics and fairness. Despite these new initiatives, many private companies and disrupted by the frequent
reorganization of teams.
have not yet prioritized the adoption of accountability mechanisms and
ethical safeguards in the development of AI. Companies often “talk the
talk” of AI ethics but rarely “walk the walk” by adequately resourcing and
Government regulation
empowering teams that work on responsible AI.
could play a crucial role in
helping the AI ethics field
In our paper, “Walking the Walk of AI Ethics,” we present one of the first move toward formalization
by incentivizing leaders to
empirical investigations into AI ethics on the ground in a (thus far) fairly
prioritize ethical issues and
unregulated environment within the technology sector. Our interviews with
protecting AI ethics workers.
AI ethics workers in the private sector uncovered several significant obstacles
to implementing AI ethics initiatives. Practitioners struggle to have their

Policy Brief
Walking the Walk of AI Ethics
in Technology Companies
companies foreground ethics in an environment
centered around software product launches. Ethics
Many technology companies
are difficult to quantify and easy to de-prioritize in
a context where company goals are incentivized by have released AI principles,
metrics. And the frequent reorganization of teams at
but relatively few have made
technology companies makes it challenging for AI
ethics workers to access institutional knowledge and significant adjustments to their
maintain relationships central to their work.
operations as a result.
Our research highlights the stark gap between
company policy and practice when it comes to AI
ethics. It captures the difficulties of institutionalizing
change within technology companies and illustrates
the important role of regulation in incentivizing
AI ethics initiatives suffer from the same dynamic:
companies to make AI ethics initiatives a priority.
Many technology companies have released AI
principles, but relatively few have made significant
adjustments to their operations as a result. With little
buy-in from senior leadership, AI ethics workers
Introduction
take on the responsibility of organizational change
by using persuasive strategies and diplomatic
Previous research has criticized corporate AI ethics skills to convince engineers and product managers
principles for being toothless and vague, while to incorporate ethical considerations in product
questioning some of their underlying assumptions. development. Technology companies also seek
However, relatively few studies have examined the to move quickly and release products regularly to
implementation of AI ethics initiatives on the ground, generate investment and to outpace competitors,
let alone the organizational dynamics that contribute meaning that products are often released despite
to the lack of progress. ethical concerns. Responsible AI teams may be
siloed within large organizations, preventing their
Our paper builds on existing research by drawing on work from becoming integral to the core tasks of the
theories of organizational change to shed light on the organization.
ways that AI ethics workers operate in technology
companies. In response to outside pressure, such as To better understand the concrete organizational
regulation and public backlash, many organizations barriers to the implementation of AI ethics initiatives,
develop policies and practices to gain legitimacy; we conducted a qualitative study of responsible
however, these measures often do not achieve their AI initiatives within technology companies. We
intended outcome as there is a disconnect between interviewed 25 AI ethics practitioners, including
means and ends. New practices may also go against employees, academics, and consultants—many
the organization’s established rules and procedures. of whom are currently or were formerly employed

Policy Brief
Walking the Walk of AI Ethics
in Technology Companies
as part of technology companies’ responsible AI
initiatives—in addition to gathering observations
Product managers frequently
from industry workshops and training programs. Our
resulting analysis provides insight into the significant perceive responsible AI teams’
structural risks workers face when they advocate for
activities as stalling product
ethical AI as well as the hurdles they encounter when
incorporating AI ethics into product development. launches or putting revenue
generation at risk.
Research Outcomes
Our research uncovered a wide array of roadblocks
resource constraints. They have to worry about
that prevent technology companies from making
finding the time and funding to build new or improve
meaningful progress on AI ethics.
existing datasets, as well as conduct fairness
evaluations. Product managers frequently perceive
First, AI ethics is usually promoted within companies
responsible AI teams’ activities as stalling product
by individual workers—or, as we call them, “ethics
launches or putting revenue generation at risk, which
entrepreneurs”—who lack institutional support. Lack
may lead them to allocate inadequate time and
of buy-in often prevents them from being able to
resources to responsible AI initiatives.
ensure that AI products are developed responsibly.
It can also present considerable risks for these
Product teams are also resistant to ethics reviews
individuals, particularly those from marginalized
because they are often not conducted until a product
backgrounds, as they are tasked with speaking
is ready for launch, meaning that teams have to
up about ethical issues yet lack the authority to
course-correct just before a launch deadline. The
direct colleagues to make changes to the product
AI ethics workers we spoke with navigated these
development process. In the words of one AI ethics
challenges by reframing ethics-oriented interventions
worker, “Being very loud about putting more brakes
as a matter of product quality and, where possible,
on [AI development] was a risky thing to do. It was
working with teams at early stages of the product
not built into the process” and required appealing to
development cycle. Some have attempted to
leadership. Meanwhile, frequent team reorganizations
persuade product teams to use automated ethics
disrupt crucial peer relationships that AI ethic
tools to reduce friction.
workers rely on to make progress on their projects.
Finally, performance metrics, not ethical
Second, the goal of product innovation supersedes
considerations, determine a technology company’s
goals related to responsible AI. According to
behavior. Metrics around engagement or the
interviewees, while product managers “often bring
performance of AI models are so highly prioritized
all the right resources together to drive product
that ethics-related recommendations that might
development,” AI ethics workers frequently face

Policy Brief
Walking the Walk of AI Ethics
in Technology Companies
who have to make difficult trade-offs around fairness.
Without regulation, individuals are often left to their
Quantitative metrics of ethics or
own devices to navigate thorny decisions such as
fairness are hard to come by and how to ensure equitable representation of different
demographic groups in algorithmic promotion of
challenging to define.
content.
Given the premium companies place on product
innovation, government policies could also empower
AI ethics workers to limit the expansion of AI to new
use cases that raise major ethical concerns. Technology
negatively affect those metrics require irrefutable companies are eager to develop and apply new AI
quantitative evidence. Yet quantitative metrics of products or features, which makes it hard or even
ethics or fairness are hard to come by and challenging impossible for ethics workers to suggest that the
to define given that companies’ existing data company should not use a new AI feature. Widely
infrastructures are not tailored to such metrics. As accepted standards and norms could change this.
one interviewee noted, “No matter how much people Stronger whistleblower protections would help AI
want to do a good job, at the end of the day, quarterly ethics workers promote responsible AI without fear of
goals will get in the way.” retaliation; such protections should be adopted by both
companies and governments. Mandating the integration
of ethics initiatives at the early stages of projects could
also meaningfully advance responsible AI efforts.
Policy Discussion
Our research highlights that AI ethics work in
technology companies is predominantly conducted by Regulation would incentivize
individual AI ethics entrepreneurs who struggle to effect
leadership to take responsible
change through informal processes. The many systemic
barriers they face severely compromise companies’
AI seriously, especially if there
ability to address AI ethics issues adequately and
consistently. were financial penalties for
noncompliance.
Government regulation could play a crucial role in
helping the AI ethics field move toward formalization.
AI ethics workers consistently noted that regulation
would incentivize leadership to take responsible AI
seriously, especially if there were financial penalties
for noncompliance. Rules and legal standards would
also provide valuable guidance for AI ethics workers

Policy Brief
Walking the Walk of AI Ethics
in Technology Companies
At the same time, a one-size-fits-all regulatory approach
could make matters worse if, for instance, it requires
all technology platforms to collect demographic
information about their users. Government policies
that aim to standardize or mandate fairness by creating
technical toolkits and setting quantitative thresholds
could backfire; by formalizing complex processes, such
measures could flatten nuance and even introduce new
potentials for ethical harms since universal metrics may
not be appropriate for every context or application area.
Committed employees have the capacity to act as
catalysts for organizational change and help technology
companies “walk the walk” on AI ethics. But in order
to achieve meaningful implementation of AI ethics
initiatives, technology companies will have to grapple
with a variety of institutional barriers.

Reference: The original article is accessible Sanna J. Ali is a policy analyst at the
at Sanna J. Ali et al., “Walking the Walk of Cyber Policy Center and the Regulation,
AI Ethics: Organizational Challenges and Evaluation, and Governance Lab
the Individualization of Risk among Ethics (RegLab) at Stanford University.
Entrepreneurs,” FAccT ’23: Proceedings of the
2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
and Transparency (): 217–226, Angèle Christin is an associate
 professor of Communication and the
Faculty Director of the Digital Civil
Society Lab at Stanford University.
Andrew Smart is a sociotechnical
Stanford University’s Institute on Human- researcher in the Responsible AI
Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI) applies Impact Lab at Google.
rigorous analysis and research to pressing
policy questions on artificial intelligence.
A pillar of HAI is to inform policymakers, Riitta Katila is the W. M. Keck Sr.
industry leaders, and civil society by Professor of Management Science and
disseminating scholarship to a wide audience. Engineering, HAI Sabbatical Scholar,
HAI is a nonpartisan research institute, and Faculty Director of Stanford
representing a range of voices. The views Technology Ventures Program (STVP),
expressed in this policy brief reflect the views the Engineering Entrepreneurship
of the authors. For further information, please Center at Stanford University.
contact HAI-Policy@stanford.edu.
Stanford HAI: 353 Jane Stanford Way, Stanford CA 94305-5008
T 650.725.4537 F 650.123.4567 E HAI-Policy@stanford.edu hai.stanford.edu