Policy Brief
HAI Policy & Society

Labeling AI-Generated
Key Takeaways
In response to the rapidly
Content May Not Change improving ability of AI tools
to create persuasive content,
policymakers are increasingly
Its Persuasiveness calling for labels on AI-generated
content—but little research has
measured whether adding a label
impacts the persuasiveness of the
underlying messages.
Isabel O. Gallegos, Chen Shani, Weiyan Shi, Federico Bianchi,
Izzy Gainsburg, Dan Jurafsky, and Robb Willer
We surveyed how more than 1,500
people perceive AI-generated
policy messages when told the
content had been created by an
GENERATIVE AI TOOLS CAN NOW PRODUCE PERSUASIVE CONTENT AT
expert AI model, a human policy
PREVIOUSLY UNPRECEDENTED SCALE AND SPEED. There are many ways expert, or told nothing about its
in which these tools can be used for positive impact in the world. But authorship.
the emergence of persuasive, AI-generated content also makes possible
many negative uses — such as influence operations, misinformation Adding the label changed
people’s perceptions of whether
campaigns, and other kinds of deception — particularly in political
the author was AI or human but
contexts. These risks are compounded by a key issue: People struggle to
did not significantly change the
distinguish AI-generated content from content written by humans, which persuasiveness of the content
itself, regardless of the policy
helps influence campaigns and misinformation thrive.
domain (e.g., allowing colleges to
pay student athletes) or participant
demographics (e.g., political party).
These risks have led policymakers to call for authorship labels on AI-made
content. In the European Union, for instance, the AI Act requires that entities
Policy proposals requiring AI
deploying AI-generated or -manipulated content label it as such. In the content labels may enhance
transparency, but their inability to
United States, the AI Labeling Act and the AI Disclosure Act, both introduced
affect persuasiveness highlights
in Congress in 2023 but not passed, would have implemented similar rules. the need for complementary
Policymakers’ calls for labels on AI-made content raise a key question: Will a safeguards (e.g., media literacy
education) and ongoing research
label change how much the content influences people’s political and public
into how AI disclosure policies
policy views? shape the information ecosystem.

Policy Brief
Labeling AI-Generated Content May
Not Change Its Persuasiveness
Introduction
In our paper “Labeling Messages as AI-Generated
Does Not Reduce Their Persuasive Effects,” we
surveyed a diverse group of Americans to investigate
how adding authorship labels did or did not affect Previous work has explored the persuasiveness of
how they perceive AI-written policy appeals. Across AI-generated content without AI labels; perceptions
four less-polarized public policy topics, we found no of the credibility, reliability, or quality of labeled
significant difference between people’s support for information; and the effect of different labels for AI-
a policy argument when told the argument had been generated images on viewers’ beliefs. There remains
generated by an expert AI model, a human policy a gap when it comes to research on the impact of
expert, or told nothing about its authorship. The labels attaching labels to AI-generated text on the content’s
also had no significant effects on people’s judgments persuasiveness. We therefore chose to investigate how
of the content’s accuracy or people’s intentions to AI labels affect persuasiveness of messages on public
share the policy argument with others. policy issues.
There is good reason to assume that AI labels make
Policymakers’ calls for labels
people more skeptical of the underlying content.
on AI-made content raise a key
For instance, prior research has found that people
question: Will a label change generally prefer human content over AI content in
news, public health messaging, donation solicitation,
how much the content influences
and social media content because they perceive the
people’s political and public human content to be more trustworthy. On the other
hand, AI labels could trigger people’s perceptions of
policy views?
technological expertise and sophistication, making
them trust the AI-generated information more than if it
were written by a human.
Policymakers should continue studying and debating
effective AI disclosure policies, including how AI
Our study tested both these hypotheses through a
content labels may empower users to make more
randomized experiment with 1,500 U.S. participants.
informed decisions about content consumption. Yet,
We compared participants’ responses to AI-generated
while labels may enhance transparency, our work
policy messages when labeled as AI-created versus
suggests that on their own, they may be insufficient
human-authored versus unlabeled across four public
in addressing the challenges posed by AI-generated
policy domains: geoengineering, drug importation,
information. Policymakers need to conduct further
college athlete salaries, and social media platform
research and explore alternative interventions,
liability. We selected these four domains from
including media literacy education and deamplification
the persuasion dataset as they are neither widely
of AI-generated content.

Policy Brief
Labeling AI-Generated Content May
Not Change Its Persuasiveness
discussed nor highly polarizing policy issues — and
thus less likely to clash with people’s well-established
There remains a gap
or deeply held views.
when it comes to research on
the impact of attaching labels
After surveying participants’ prior knowledge about,
support for, and confidence in their beliefs about to AI-generated text on the
one of the four public policy topics, we showed them
content’s persuasiveness.
an AI-generated argument about that policy area.
We used OpenAI’s GPT-4o to generate the policy
messages, manually editing the text only to correct
factual errors. Examples of article titles include:
Research Outcomes
• “Geoengineering poses too many risks
and should not be considered.”
We found that adding labels changes people’s
• “Drug importation jeopardizes safety controls perceptions of whether the content was authored
and the domestic pharma industry.” by AI or a human — suggesting that labels improve
transparency — but there was no evidence that these
• “College athletes should be paid salaries.” labels significantly change the persuasiveness of the
content.
All participants were shown the same message
Of the participants who were told the message had
related to their assigned policy issue area. But they
been AI-written, 94.6% believed it, and of those told
were variably told, at random, either that the message
the message had been human-written, 89.3% believed
had been written by an expert AI model or a human
it. Of those shown no label, 39% thought it was
policy expert, or they were given no details regarding
human-written, 31% thought it was AI-generated, and
authorship. Participants then indicated their levels of
the remaining 30% were unsure.
support for the policies, confidence in their support,
their judgments of how accurate the message was,
The policy-related messages themselves were
and their intentions to share it with others. They were
persuasive, in that they increased people’s support for
also asked about their perceptions of the message’s
the policy as compared to their baseline support, but
source. We collected demographic data (e.g., political
participants’ support for policies did not significantly
party affiliation, education level, age) so we could test
differ when messages were labeled as human- versus
how background characteristics impact the effects of
AI-made — or when there was no label at all. This
AI labels.
trend persisted for the other three variables we
measured: Across people’s confidence in their policy

Policy Brief
Labeling AI-Generated Content May
Not Change Its Persuasiveness
Policy Discussion
We found that adding labels changes
people’s perceptions of whether The rapid proliferation of AI-made content continues
the content was authored by AI to provoke important questions about how we should
mitigate negative uses and whether we must provide
or a human — suggesting that
consumers of such content with more transparency
labels improve transparency — but
— including through authorship labels. However,
there was no evidence that these policy proposals that rely on AI labels alone to address
labels significantly change the the challenges of AI-generated information may be
insufficient.
persuasiveness of the content.
Based on our findings, telling a reader that text is
AI-composed is unlikely to substantially affect its
support, judgments of how accurate the message was, persuasiveness — meaning, for example, that placing
and intentions to share it with others, there was also no an “AI-authored” label on a misleading but well-written
meaningful difference between the label conditions. policy argument is unlikely to mitigate the message’s
These results may be attributable to the type of content harm. However, it is important to note that our study
we showed participants and the fact that we indicated did not provide participants with variable information
that the content had been generated by an expert quality and veracity, which means we did not measure
AI model. Because the advocacy messages were how labels reduce persuasiveness for one individual
evidence-based and logical, and built on expert-based viewing different policy arguments. Testing AI labels
persuasion techniques, the chances that the information with other kinds of information and in field settings
will be viewed skeptically are inherently lower. may lead to different results. Further research is
needed to better understand how AI disclosure policies
Even for different subgroups of participants, our shape trust and interactions within the information
labels did not significantly impact the persuasiveness ecosystem, so that policymakers can make more
of political messages. We tested whether political informed decisions about possible interventions and
party identity, prior knowledge about the topic, prior their impacts.
experience with AI tools, education level, and age
influence the labels’ impact on policy support. While Policymakers should also consider that our findings
participants on the whole were not affected by AI are influenced by the current state of LLM capabilities
labels, we did find that older individuals were less and their public perceptions. In the future, the style
persuaded by content labeled as being AI-generated and ability of AI-generated persuasive communication
compared to content labeled as having been authored could shift, as well as pervasive narratives around the
by a human. Otherwise, though, the labels had no trustworthiness of AI, potentially making AI labels more
effects in any subgroups of interest. or less persuasive for readers.

Policy Brief
Labeling AI-Generated Content May
Not Change Its Persuasiveness
Going forward, the impact of AI labels on
persuasiveness will likely change as regulation that
Further research is needed to
mandates disclosure develops — alongside people’s
acceptance of or aversion to AI in general. These better understand how
potential shifts, coupled with our study’s limitations
AI disclosure policies shape
— such as focusing on Americans, considering only
two types of content labels, and not accounting trust and interactions within the
for the other heuristics people may use to interpret
information ecosystem.
information (beyond its source) — underscore the need
for additional research as policymakers continue to
debate AI content labels. Crucially, these issues also
highlight the importance of implementing additional
interventions to curb the spread of AI-generated
material, such as media literacy education, which aims
to equip people with the tools to discern AI-generated
writing from human-authored writing as well as the
validity of the information itself.
Policymakers should continue to consider the potential
positive impacts of AI content label regulations and
standards. These include bringing more transparency
to online content, helping social media users make
informed decisions about content consumption, and
curbing the spread of AI-generated material in general.
But if the policy goal is to decrease the persuasive
effect of AI-generated messages, labels may not be the
complete solution.

Reference: The original article is Isabel O. Gallegos is a PhD student in computer
accessible at Isabel O. Gallegos, Chen science at the Stanford School of Engineering
and a JD candidate at Stanford Law School.
Shani et al., “Labeling Messages as
AI-Generated Does Not Reduce Their
Persuasive Effects,” arxiv.org, April 14,
2025, Chen Shani is a postdoctoral researcher
at Stanford University.
Stanford University’s Institute for Human-
Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI)
Weiyan Shi is an assistant professor at
applies rigorous analysis and research Northeastern University, jointly appointed by
to pressing policy questions on artificial the College of Engineering and Khoury College
intelligence. A pillar of HAI is to inform of Computer Sciences.
policymakers, industry leaders, and civil
society by disseminating scholarship to
Federico Bianchi is a senior ML scientist
a wide audience. HAI is a nonpartisan at TogetherAI.
research institute, representing a range of
voices. The views expressed in this policy
brief reflect the views of the authors.
For further information, please contact
Izzy Gainsburg is a research scholar at
HAI-Policy@stanford.edu. Stanford University’s Center on Philanthropy
and Civil Society.
Dan Jurafsky is the Reynolds Professor in
Humanities, a professor of linguistics, and
a professor of computer science at
Stanford University.
Robb Willer is a professor of sociology,
psychology (by courtesy), and organizational
behavior at the Graduate School of Business
(by courtesy) at Stanford University, director of
the Politics and Social Change Lab, and
co-director of Stanford’s Center on Philanthropy
and Civil Society.
Stanford HAI: 353 Jane Stanford Way, Stanford CA 94305-5008
T 650.725.4537 F 650.123.4567 E HAI-Policy@stanford.edu hai.stanford.edu