Benefits Stemming from
Space Exploration

International Space Exploration
Coordination Group

This page is intentionally left blank

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
Table of Content
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................... 1
1. Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 3
2. Fundamental Benefits of Space Exploration ......................................................................................... 5
2.1. Innovation ..................................................................................................................................... 7
Advances in Science and Technology .................................................................................................... 8
Global Technical Workforce Development ........................................................................................... 9
Enlarged Economic Sphere ................................................................................................................. 10
2.2. Culture and Inspiration ............................................................................................................... 11
2.3. New Means to Address Global Challenges ................................................................................. 12
3. Expected Benefits from Exploration Missions in the Next Ten Years ................................................. 15
3.1. Innovation ................................................................................................................................... 15
3.2. Culture and Inspiration ............................................................................................................... 19
3.3. New Means to Address Global Challenges ................................................................................. 20
4. Conclusion ........................................................................................................................................... 21
Image Credits .............................................................................................................................................. 22
Page iii

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
This page is intentionally left blank
Page iv

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
Executive Summary
More than fifty years of human activity in space have produced societal benefits that improve
the quality of life on Earth. The first satellites, designed to study the space environment and
test initial capabilities in Earth orbit, contributed critical knowledge and capabilities for
developing satellite telecommunications, global positioning, and advances in weather
forecasting. Space exploration initiated the economic development of space that today, year
after year, delivers high returns for invested funds in space1. The challenges of space
exploration have sparked new scientific and technological knowledge of inherent value to
humankind, leading to better understanding of our Universe and the solar system in which we
live. Knowledge, coupled with ingenuity, provides people around the globe with solutions as
well as useful products and services. Knowledge acquired from space exploration has also
introduced new perspectives on our individual and collective place in the Universe.
Future space exploration goals call for sending humans and robots beyond Low Earth Orbit and
establishing sustained access to destinations such as the Moon, asteroids and Mars. Space
agencies participating in the International Space Exploration Coordination Group (ISECG)2 are
discussing an international approach for achieving these goals, documented in ISECG's Global
Exploration Roadmap3. That approach begins with the International Space Station (ISS), and
leads to human missions to the surface of Mars.
Employing the complementary capabilities of both humans and robotic systems will enable
humankind to meet this most ambitious space exploration challenge, and to increase benefits
for society. These benefits can be categorized into three fundamental areas: innovation; culture
and inspiration; and new means to address global challenges.
Innovation. There are numerous cases of societal benefits linked to new knowledge and
technology from space exploration. Space exploration has contributed to many diverse aspects
of everyday life, from solar panels to implantable heart monitors, from cancer therapy to light‐
weight materials, and from water‐purification systems to improved computing systems and to a
global search‐and‐rescue system4. Achieving the ambitious future exploration goals as outlined
above will further expand the economic relevance of space. Space exploration will continue to
be an essential driver for opening up new domains in science and technology, triggering other
sectors to partner with the space sector for joint research and development. This will return
immediate benefits back to Earth in areas such as materials, power generation and energy
1 OECD Handbook on Measuring the Space Economy, .
2 ISECG space agencies include, in alphabetical order: ASI (Italy), CNES (France), CNSA (China), CSA (Canada), CSIRO
(Australia), DLR (Germany), ESA (Europe), ISRO (India), JAXA (Japan), KARI (Republic of Korea), NASA (United States
of America), NSAU (Ukraine), Roscosmos (Russia), UKSA (United Kingdom).
3 The Global Exploration Roadmap can be downloaded at 
4 Spinoff materials published by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (e.g. Spinoff database,
spinoff.nasa.gov/spinoff/database; Spinoff 2012, spinoff.nasa.gov/Spinoff2012);

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
storage, recycling and waste management, advanced robotics, health and medicine,
transportation, engineering, computing and software. Furthermore, innovations required for
space exploration, such as those related to miniaturisation, will drive improvements in other
space systems and services resulting in higher performance and lower cost. These will in turn
result in better services on Earth and better return of investment in institutional and
commercial space activities. In addition, the excitement generated by space exploration attracts
young people to careers in science, technology, engineering and mathematics, helping to build
global capacity for scientific and technological innovation.
Culture and Inspiration. Space exploration offers a unique and evolving perspective on
humanity's place in the Universe, which is common to all. Every day, space exploration missions
fulfill people's curiosity, producing fresh data about the solar system that brings us closer to
answering profound questions that have been asked for millennia: What is the nature of the
Universe? Is the destiny of humankind bound to Earth? Are we and our planet unique? Is there
life elsewhere in the Universe?
New Means to Address Global Challenges. Partnerships and capabilities developed through
space exploration create new opportunities for addressing global challenges. Space exploration
is a global endeavour contributing to trust and diplomacy between nations. Enhanced global
partnerships and exploration capabilities may help advance international preparedness for
protecting the Earth from catastrophic events such as some asteroid strikes, advancing
collaborative research on space weather and protecting spacecraft by developing new means
for space debris removal. Knowledge derived from space exploration may also contribute to
implementing policies for environmentally sustainable development.
In summary, space scientists and engineers who overcame past challenges could not have
predicted all the ways in which their innovations are now being used on Earth. Though the
precise nature of future benefits from space exploration is unpredictable, current trends
suggest that significant benefits may be generated in areas such as new materials, health and
medicine, transportation, and computer technology. New opportunities for job creation and
economic growth are being created by private enterprises that are increasingly investing in
space exploration and seeking ways to make space exploration more affordable and reliable,
and thus, more sustainable and profitable.
There is no activity on Earth that matches the unique challenges of space exploration. The first
fifty years of space activity have generated benefits for people around the globe. This past
record gives strong reason for confidence that renewed investments in space exploration will
have similarly positive impacts for future generations.

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
1. Introduction
For more than fifty years, humans have explored space, and this has produced a continuing
flow of societal benefits. By its very nature, space exploration expands the envelope of human
knowledge and presence throughout the solar system, and this process has been accelerated by
a combination of human and robotic activities. Experience has demonstrated that, as long as
humankind addresses the challenges of exploring mankind’s common frontier of space, many
tangible societal benefits are produced, and in addition to those most commonly anticipated, a
great variety of valuable innovations are generated serendipitously, for this is the nature of
discovery.
From the early days of space flight, it became apparent that space exploration was an efficient
driver for basic science and technology. The new challenges called for new approaches. The
cost of launches drove designers to make spacecraft computers lighter, smaller and with the
highest performance and dependability. Solar cells, batteries and fuel cells were driven by
space needs and benefitted many sectors on Earth5. The first satellites, designed to study the
space environment and test initial capabilities in Earth orbit, contributed critical knowledge for
developing space telecommunications, global positioning, and advances in weather forecasting.
The early missions also formed the technological basis for advanced space exploration, enabling
the first robotic and human missions to the Moon, as well as highly capable planetary
spacecraft and crewed space stations in orbit.
Over time, governments around the world increasingly cooperated to conduct complex space
missions, demonstrating the power of international partnerships to amplify accomplishments in
space.
The success has been impressive and space systems continue to drive innovation, support
world‐class science, provide vital services, and are part of the daily life of the common citizen.
Service‐driven space systems are the overwhelming part of space activity today6. Furthermore,
the legacy of these historical efforts to develop sophisticated and useful capabilities and
partnerships is evident in today's exploration programmes such as the International Space
Station (ISS), which continues to contribute significant benefits to humanity7. The ISS supports
5 Technology initiated by Space Exploration is often today driven by terrestrial mass market sectors. The space
sector can then spin‐in such technologies in effective ways. Renewed investments in achieving the ambitious
future exploration goals promise to increase the innovation factor of space exploration.
6 E.g. out of the 67 flights of Ariane 5 between and , 59 launches (88%) were commercial.

"International Space Station Benefits for Humanity", Ed. J.Robinson, developed by members of the Canadian
Space Agency (CSA), European Space Agency (ESA), Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and Russian Federal Space Agency (Roscosmos), 2012. Accessed at

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
investigations in life and physical sciences, as well as advancing research and technology to
solve problems associated with long‐duration human space flight that have many applications
on the ground.
Future space exploration goals call for sending humans and robots beyond Low Earth Orbit
(LEO) and establishing sustained access to space exploration destinations such as the Moon,
asteroids and Mars. Space agencies participating in the International Space Exploration
Coordination Group (ISECG)8 are discussing an international approach for achieving these goals,
documented in ISECG's Global Exploration Roadmap9, that begins with the ISS and advances
coordinated human and robotic exploration, leading, amongst other things, to human missions
on the surface of Mars.
Achieving these ambitious exploration goals requires researchers to surmount new challenges
and develop coordinated human and robotic exploration capabilities. As has been
demonstrated in the past, deploying the unique and complementary capabilities of both
humans and robotic space systems is not only essential for solar system exploration, but also
promises to expand many benefits provided to people on Earth.
While early space scientists and engineers expected that space exploration would have positive
impacts on humanity, they could not have foreseen all the specific social and economic benefits
that have flowed from their work. So too, the current generation cannot predict in detail what
benefits will eventually appear as a result of its efforts The unforeseen positive results of the
past five decades indicate the great potential for space exploration to continue producing a
wide range of applications and knowledge which will expand the space‐based economy even
further.
This paper, a collective effort by representatives of space agencies participating in ISECG,
articulates a shared perspective on the nature and significance of the benefits of space
exploration programmes, and on the potential for the future delivery of benefits. It summarizes
the fundamental benefits to humanity (Chapter 2) which could arise as space agencies
collectively work on achieving the ambitious future exploration goals outlined above. It also
provides a perspective on potential specific benefits to be achieved over the next ten years
(Chapter 3).
While this paper is not meant to provide a conclusive view on the societal relevance of future
space exploration, it documents a strong commitment of space agencies to deliver benefits to
8 ISECG space agencies include, in alphabetical order: ASI (Italy), CNES (France), CNSA (China), CSA (Canada), CSIRO
(Australia), DLR (Germany), ESA (Europe), ISRO (India), JAXA (Japan), KARI (Republic of Korea), NASA (United States
of America), NSAU (Ukraine), Roscosmos (Russia), UKSA (United Kingdom).
9 The Global Exploration Roadmap can be downloaded at 

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
society. It will aid space agencies in engaging relevant stakeholder communities in discussions
on how the flow of benefits to society can be further improved.
2. Fundamental Benefits of Space Exploration
To a great extent, the benefits from space exploration are rooted in the generation of
new knowledge, which is the first reward and which has inherent value to humankind.
Technological knowledge, generated when high‐performance space systems are
developed to address the extreme challenges of space missions, yields many innovations
that benefit the public. Scientific knowledge acquired from space expands humankind's
understanding of nature and frequently unlocks creative and useful Earth‐based
applications for society. In the longer term, the knowledge accumulated over many
missions and the expansion of human presence into the Solar System help people gain
perspective on the fragility and rarity of life in the Universe and on humankind's
accomplishments, potential, and destiny.
Space exploration stimulates the creation of both tangible and intangible benefits for
humanity. Tangible impacts include all the innovation‐related applications and benefits
resulting from investments in these programmes, such as new devices and services that
spin off into the marketplace. In addition, space exploration leads to advances in science
and technology, and furthers workforce development and industrial capabilities, thus
leading to an overall stimulation of private companies and industries, all of which
contributes significantly to the economic progress of space‐faring nations. Space
exploration is also known to attract young people into careers in science and technology
to the general benefit of society and the economy (see chapter 2.1). Space exploration
also results in various intangible impacts due to the social and philosophical dimensions
that address the nature and meaning of human life. Intangible benefits include the
enriching of culture, the inspiration of citizens, and the building of mutual understanding
as a result of international cooperation among space‐faring nations.
The fundamental benefits generated by space exploration are grouped in this document
as follows: (i) innovation; (ii) culture and inspiration; and (iii) new means to address global
challenges. The delivery of these benefits to society provides the main rationale for
investment in space exploration. An illustration on how these benefits are delivered by
space agencies is given in the box below.
Space exploration’s capacity to continue delivering significant benefits to humanity was
recognized by high‐level government representatives from around the world when they
convened in Lucca, Italy, in . They concluded that space exploration
provides:
unprecedented opportunities to deliver benefits to humanity on Earth … These

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
benefits include fuelling future discoveries; addressing global challenges in space
and on Earth through the use of innovative technology; creating global partnerships
by sharing challenging and peaceful goals; inspiring society and especially the
younger generations through collective and individual efforts; and enabling
economic expansion and new business opportunities. 10
How Space Exploration Delivers Benefits
The benefits of space can be categorized as either direct or indirect. The direct benefits of
exploration include the generation of scientific knowledge, the diffusion of innovation and
creation of markets, the inspiration of people around the world, and agreements forged
between the countries engaged in exploration.
Indirect benefits that result over time include tangible enhancements to the quality of life such
as improved economic prosperity, health, environmental quality, safety, and security. They also
include intangible philosophical benefits such as a deepened understanding and new
perspectives on humankind’s individual and collective place in the Universe.
Possibilities for benefit creation multiply rapidly when the products of space exploration
interact with the imagination and creativity present in other fields of endeavour. Cultural
benefits may depend on exploration mission stories and images spreading broadly across
society. Educational organisations, the media and communications industries play a role in
interpreting and amplifying exploration data, so that citizens may understand and appreciate
their significance. To maximize societal impact, space agencies share space exploration results
and collaborate with research institutions, businesses, universities, schools, museums, and
other organizations.
The figure below represents a model of the links between space activities and ultimate societal
benefits, and it helps space agencies explain and assess the unique contribution that space
exploration makes to producing benefits for humanity.
10 "Final Declaration of the First meeting of the High‐level International Space Exploration Platform", Lucca, Italy,
2011, 

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
2.1. Innovation
The challenge of space exploration drives a continuing effort to design ever more capable,
reliable, and efficient systems requiring the utmost ingenuity. Space exploration missions use
the unique capabilities of humans (e.g. on the spot
decision‐making, cognitive adaptability, versatility) and
robots (e.g. precision, sensory accuracy, reliability and
expendability) to achieve ambitious exploration goals.
Maximizing the productivity of these missions by
demanding an effective partnership between humans and
machines drives progress in human health care, robotics,
automation, and other domains. Figure 2. Exoskeleton to help
paraplegics walk, derived from space
Space exploration thus supports innovation and economic robotic systems
prosperity by stimulating advances in science and
technology, as well as motivating the global scientific and technological workforce, thus
enlarging the sphere of human economic activity.

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
Advances in Science and Technology
Overcoming the challenges of working in space has led to many technological and scientific
advances that have provided benefits to society on Earth in areas including health and
medicine, transportation, public safety, consumer goods, energy and environment, information
technology, and industrial productivity.
The wider list of technological
People often ask, If you like spin‐off products, why not just
benefits encompasses improved
invest in those technologies straightaway, instead of
solar panels, implantable heart
waiting for them to happen as spin‐offs? The answer: it just
monitors, light‐based anti‐cancer
doesn't work that way. Let's say you’re a thermodynamicist,
therapy, cordless tools, light‐
the world's expert on heat, and I ask you to build me a
weight high‐temperature alloys better oven. You might invent a convection oven, or an oven
used in jet engine turbines, that’s more insulated or that permits easier access to its
cameras found in today's cell contents. But no matter how much money I give you, you
phones, compact water‐ will not invent a microwave oven. Because that came from
another place. It came from investments in
purification systems, global
communications, in radar. The microwave oven is traceable
search‐and‐rescue systems and
to the war effort, not to a thermodynamicist.
biomedical technologies.1112131415.
Neil deGrasse Tyson, Space Chronicles, W.W.Norton & Company,
Scientific research founded on
2012, p.210.
data from space is also leading to
discoveries with benefits for life
on Earth. Ongoing research in the space environment of the ISS – in areas such as human
physiology, plant biology, materials science, and fundamental physics – continues to yield
insights that benefit society. For example, studies of the human body’s response to extended
periods in the microgravity environment of the ISS are improving our understanding of the
aging process. Fundamental scientific studies of the Martian environment, its evolution and
current state represent important benchmarks of terrestrial planetary evolution, and hence,
11 Down to Earth: Everyday Uses for European Space Technology, European Space Agency, 2001,

12 Spinoff materials published by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (e.g. Spinoff database,
spinoff.nasa.gov/spinoff/database; Spinoff 2012, spinoff.nasa.gov/Spinoff2012);
13 Spinoff from Japan's Aerospace Technology, aerospacebiz.jaxa.jp/en/spinoff; Aerospace Biz 2012, Japan
Aerospace Exploration Agency, 2012, aerospacebiz.jaxa.jp/jp/publish/data/aerospacebiz_2012.pdf
14"neuroArm: Robotic arms lend a healing touch", Canadian Space Agency, 
csa.gc.ca/eng/iss/benefits_01_neuroArm.asp.
15 “From Space to Earth”, B. Feuerbacher and E. Messerschmid , Schiffer Publisher, .

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
provide a model that some scientists believe will aid our growing understanding of climate
change processes on Earth.
Global Technical Workforce Development
Investment in the Apollo Moon exploration programme in the 1960s correlates with the
level of technical education later attained by students (Figure 3), suggesting that the
programme’s high public profile and dramatic achievements had a widespread influence
on the level of US technical education.
Figure 3. Space Exploration's Impact on Educational Achievement.16
A 2009 survey found that fifty percent of the internationally renowned scientists who published
in the prestigious journal Nature during the previous three years had been inspired by Apollo to
become scientists; 89 percent of the respondents also agreed that human spaceflight inspires
younger generations to study science.17
One of the lessons from Apollo is that having a visible space exploration programme is
important in encouraging young people to pursue science, technology, engineering, and
16 Siegfried, W.H., "Space Colonization—Benefits for the World", Space Technology and Applications International
Forum, 2003.
17 Nature 460, 314‐315 (2009); 

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
mathematics (STEM) fields. Such a programme will also send a message to students that they
have the possibility of long‐term exciting careers in science and technology.
Figure 4. Space exploration inspires students.
Today, many space exploration missions include components designed to stimulate young
people’s interest in STEM. More than 2 million teachers and 43 million students from 49
countries have participated in student experiments and activities associated with the
International Space Station (ISS)18. In some cases, scientists enlisted the help of students to
conduct their investigations aboard the ISS, and in other cases students designed space
experiments themselves. For example, a programme inviting students to design scientific
experiments for implementation on the ISS has attracted the interest of tens of thousands of
young people19.
Enlarged Economic Sphere
The early space activities have undoubtedly enlarged our economic sphere, which now extends
into space, including the low Earth orbit up to geostationary distances. Recently private
initiatives have been launched to extend the economic sphere even further, extending to the
Moon, asteroids, and even Mars. This relies on space exploration, which drives the
development of new technologies and capabilities (e.g. heavy lift launchers, human and robotic
servicing, and autonomous space operations). By developing reliable space exploration systems
that incorporate human decision‐making, troubleshooting, and flexibility, possibilities are
created for enhancing the economic development of space driven by private sector investments
(e.g. new means to service in‐space infrastructure for applications and science purposes can be
envisaged).
Furthermore, by deepening our understanding of how humans and machines function in space,
and developing technologies for space exploration, publicly funded space exploration has
18 "Inspiring the Next Generation: ISS Education Opportunities and Accomplishments 2000‐2012", ref:
 Education_Publication 2012_ final_100512.pdf
19 Student Spaceflight Experiments Program, an initiative of the National Center for Earth and Space Science
Education in partnership with NanoRacks, LLC and NASA, ssep.ncesse.org.

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
lowered the risks and costs associated with accessing and working in space. As a result private
investment is increasing in space‐based endeavours such as space transportation systems,
Earth‐orbiting habitats, space tourism and even planetary mining technologies to eventually
harvest precious materials thought to be present in asteroids20. Investment in space‐based
endeavours is becoming sufficiently attractive to private entrepreneurs, so that humankind may
be ready to "incorporate the solar system in our economic sphere"21.
Enlarging the Economic Sphere
 saw the first resupply mission to the ISS by a privately‐owned space vehicle22.
Hundreds of millions of dollars of private capital have been invested in the development of
human space transportation and habitation systems with relevance to potential future space‐
based industries such as tourism and resource mining. Apart from cargo vehicles to service the
ISS, early‐stage investments have also been made in the development of privately‐crewed
spacecraft and space stations. In the United Kingdom, private sector investment is targeting the
development of engine technology for a reusable space‐plane. International prize competitions
have also been established which stimulate private sector investments in space exploration23.
2.2. Culture and Inspiration
Space exploration missions offer a unique perspective on humanity’s place in the Universe,
satisfying our curiosity and inspiring wonder. They provide the best opportunities for
addressing questions such as “What is the nature of the Universe”, "Is the destiny of
humankind bound to Earth?", “Are we and our planet unique?”, and "Is there life elsewhere in
the Universe?”.
The first five decades of human activity in space had a profound impact on the social
development of humankind. Yuri Gagarin's first moments in space and Neil Armstrong's first
step on the Moon truly were “giant leaps for mankind” because they expanded our views about
the limits of human travel and planted seeds for new thinking about where beyond Earth
human existence might be possible. Stephen Hawking has argued that "to confine our attention
to terrestrial matters would be to limit the human spirit"24. Understanding whether sustained
human activity beyond Earth orbit is actually feasible will have a profound influence on cultural
and intellectual life around the world and on humanity’s views and expectations of itself.
20 See initiatives as those of Planetary Resources ( and Deep Space Industries
(
21 Marburger, J., keynote address, 44th Robert H. Goddard Memorial Symposium, American Astronautical Society,
Greenbelt, MD, 2006.
22 See: 
23 For example, the Ansari X‐Prize, space.xprize.org/ansari‐x‐prize; and the Google Lunar X‐Prize,

24 Stephen Hawking, Foreword to The Physics of Star Trek, by L.M. Krauss, Basic Books, 2007.

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
There may soon be news about environments that could have harboured life elsewhere in the
solar system. In early 2013 the Mars Curiosity Rover obtained preliminary evidence that the
Martian environment once had conditions favourable to supporting life. Discovery of signs of
past or present life in the solar system (or beyond25) would affect in unpredictable ways
humanity’s appreciation of life’s uniqueness on Earth. The impact on philosophy, culture,
religion, and politics could be comparable to that caused by Copernicus's heliocentric model of
the Universe.
Impact of Space Exploration on Culture
Earth
Figure 5. Earthrise seen from lunar orbit (a) Apollo 8, and (b) Kaguya as well as (c) picture of Earth taken by NASA’s
Cassini probe from more than 1.4 billion kilometers away in orbit around Saturn.
An iconic symbol of space exploration's capacity to alter humankind's perception of its place in
the Universe is the “Earthrise” photograph from the Apollo 8 mission in 1968 (Figure 5.a). Seen
from lunar orbit, our home planet appeared fragile and isolated. The photograph caused many
to develop a new perspective of our place in the cosmos and raised awareness of the need for
global solutions to environmental challenges. Earth was seen as a seamless whole without
national boundaries.
Space exploration has also inspired the development of various movies, bestselling books,
songs, photographs and paintings. Cultural products are a very visible symbol for how society
relates to space exploration.
2.3. New Means to Address Global Challenges
Partnerships and capabilities developed through human space exploration create new
opportunities for addressing global challenges. Space exploration is an inherently worldwide
endeavour that attracts broad international interest and affects people all across the globe by
producing knowledge, capabilities, and relationships that help society deal with some of the
most pressing long‐term global challenges. Space exploration is a catalyst for nations to build
25 Exploration beyond the solar system is discovering planetary worlds – “exoplanets” – with emphasis on finding
Earth‐like bodies that might support life.

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
mutual understanding and trust, and international partnerships that advance common
exploration goals help to align interests among nations and promote diplomacy. As
programmes become more ambitious, like the ISS (see text box below) and human missions to
the Moon, asteroids, and Mars, they require more extensive international cooperation, and this
creates opportunities to strengthen the capacity for peaceful, globally‐coordinated activities in
space and on Earth. Complex and demanding exploration missions will benefit from
contributions by a wide pool of partners. Future partnerships for space exploration will build on
existing partnership such as the one for the ISS, but will also be open to include new partners.
Partnership opportunities can be adapted to the needs and resources of developed as well as of
developing countries.
ISS and Global Partnerships
The ISS partnership, nearly thirty years old, is the pre‐eminent example of successful,
continuing international cooperation in space exploration. Fifteen nations signed the
intergovernmental agreement that established the partnership framework (Figure 6), and
cooperation has expanded over the years, resulting in 68 nations to date that have participated
in ISS activities. The ISS partnership demonstrates the functional dimension of international
cooperation in space as it enables partners with different levels of investments to gain access to
this unique laboratory, not affordable for any partner alone, and thereby share into the
benefits.
It also demonstrates the political aspect of exploration. To achieve its core mission, the ISS
partnership has overcome political and economic strains. It has demonstrated the diplomatic
value of international cooperation in space. An astronaut who served on the ISS has observed
that it has been “as much a foreign policy … achievement as it is a technical one.”26
Figure 6. International cooperation on the International Space Station builds trust among nations
International partnerships and technical capabilities for space exploration contribute to
developing new options for dealing with global challenges for which space activities offer
unique solutions. These include the challenges of dealing with hazardous near‐Earth asteroids
and managing the threat posed by solar storms to the people and equipment in space and on
26 Payette, Julie, “Research and Diplomacy 350 Kilometers above the Earth. Lessons from the International Space
Station,” Science and Diplomacy, .

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
Earth. Enhanced global partnerships and exploration capabilities may also contribute to
protecting spacecraft by developing new means for space debris removal. Furthermore,
knowledge gained from space exploration can also contributes to implementing policies related
to environmentally sustainable development. Earth can be regarded as a spaceship floating in
our solar system. Many aspects of sustainability, recycling, or efficient use of scarce resources
have to be tackled in the course of exploration missions and can be transferred to systems on
Earth.
Advancing Capabilities for Global Protection
Capabilities developed and knowledge gathered from space
exploration contribute to ongoing efforts to understand the
threat to Earth posed by asteroids, and to devise means for
protecting the planet. Scientists27 believe that a collision
between the Earth and one or more large asteroids about 65
million years ago caused the rapid mass extinction of most Figure 7. Chelyabinsk
plant and animal species on Earth. Worldwide awareness of the meteor
dangers posed by asteroids was raised by the close approach of a 40‐metre
asteroid and, on the same day, the unexpected explosion over Russia of a meteor (Figure 7)
believed to be about 17 metres wide and weighing 10,000 tonnes. The blast injured over 1,000
people and damaged over 4,000 buildings. The asteroid that missed Earth by only 27,000
kilometres was large enough to have caused catastrophic damage if it had entered the
atmosphere28.
These events triggered public concern about how to protect Earth from asteroid collisions. They
also underscored the significance of the work of the international space groups recently
endorsed for creation by the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space's
Working Group on Near‐Earth Objects29.
Space‐based systems that will be required to provide astronauts and exploration spacecraft
with early warning of solar events also provide direct benefit to people on Earth. Geomagnetic
27 Alvarez, LW, Alvarez, W, Asaro, F, and Michel, HV (1980). "Extraterrestrial cause for the Cretaceous–Tertiary
extinction". Science 208 (4448): 1095–1108; “Time Scales of Critical Events Around the Cretaceous‐Paleogene
Boundary”, by Paul. R. Renne et. al., Science, Vol. 339 no. 6120 pp. 684‐687, February 8, 2013; “Two large
meteorite impacts at the Cretaceous‐Paleogene Boundary,” by David Jolley, et. al., Geology, Vol. 38, no. 9, pp. 835‐
838, .
28 "NASA Releases Radar Movie of Asteroid 2012 DA14",
29 "Recommendations of the Action Team on Near‐Earth Objects for an international response to the near‐Earth
object impact threat", United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs, 20 Feb 2013,

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
disturbances caused by solar storms can severely damage electrical and radio transmission
grids on Earth. In 1989, a geomagnetic storm affected millions of people by knocking out the
electrical power grid in Quebec, Canada, and causing power grid problems across the United
States, including destruction of a key nuclear power plant transformer30. Adverse space
weather causes disruption of space services for global communications, navigation and search
& rescue on which society is ever more reliant.
3. Expected Benefits from Exploration Missions in the Next Ten Years
Benefits will materialize in the short‐term as agencies prepare for implementing human
missions beyond LEO. Space agencies have made public their collective intention to plan for
human and robotic missions beyond LEO to destinations including the Moon, asteroids and
Mars31. Agencies will conduct in the next ten years robotic missions to these destinations. They
will invest in the development and demonstration of advanced technologies and new human
transportation systems, conduct ground and space‐based research for ensuring human health
and performance in space and use the ISS for advancing global research and testing exploration
technologies, systems, and operational concepts. Early human missions beyond LEO are
expected to take place in the early 2020s. The next ten years will be essential for building the
global partnership required for achieving the ambitious goals of space exploration.
With this outlook in mind, this section describes some social and economic benefits that are
expected to result from space exploration in the near‐term in the three fundamental benefit
areas introduced in chapter 2.
3.1. Innovation
The challenges to achieving ambitious exploration goals are driven largely by the need to
enable reliable, safe and sustained operations of crew and machines in the harsh environment
of space. These challenges require solutions that will provide benefits on Earth even before
being employed in orbit, and they include:
 Development of highly reliable human and robotic systems interacting with each other
on Earth and in space with limited maintenance;
 Long travel time and operation in confined spacecraft and shelters;
 New transportation capabilities (e.g. launch, rendezvous, docking, refuelling, landing);
30 "Severe Space Weather Events‐‐Understanding Societal and Economic Impacts: A Workshop Report", National
Research Council, National Academy of Sciences, 2008 (). Accessed at 
31 “The Global Exploration Strategy. The Framework for Coordination”, 2007.

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
 Operations in extremely hostile environments;
 Autonomous operations with limited communications and logistical supplies from Earth;
 Miniaturization of components and development of new in‐situ capabilities.
Closed Loop Life Support System
While recycling is critical for limiting the costs of sustaining human operations in Low Earth
Orbit, it is an absolute requirement for enabling human missions beyond LEO. Life support
systems for future deep space missions will need to have nearly 100 % recycling capability.
The European MELiSSA project (Micro‐Ecological Life Support System Alternative32) is one
example of a project which aims at gaining knowledge and know‐how in the development a
closed loop sustainable habitat. In collaboration with the industry, it has developed technology
that purifies millions of cubic metres of water every day, in hundreds of towns33. Furthermore,
sensors developed to monitor the MELISSA recycling processes are now used in the processes
used by terrestrial food producers.
Many bacteria were studied for application within the MELiSSA project. One of those has been
shown to cut levels of LDL cholesterol – the ‘bad’ cholesterol ‐ and research on this bacterium
has now been taken over by the private sector34.
The very same solutions providing space exploration missions with improved technologies will
in turn lead to more efficient solutions in the commercial satellite market and the enabling of
new applications. Anticipated innovations include:
 miniaturization (mass, power, volume),
 increased lifetime and robustness for operations in a harsh environment,
 lower cost launchers,
 increased power efficiency,
 lighter and more efficient solar arrays and radiators,
 lighter structures, and
 higher energy‐density storage devices.
A human space mission of several months will require innovative health care and medical
diagnostic and therapy tools to work in confined spaces with limited in‐situ medical expertise.
32 
33 
34 

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
Telemedicine
Maintaining the health of astronauts as they explore beyond Low Earth Orbit and conduct
missions of many months or years will require increasingly sophisticated methods.
Telemedicine provides medical care to patients who may be located far away from medical
providers. It is critically important to the success of space exploration, and space agencies have
led much of the innovation in this field since its very beginnings. Meanwhile, the public is using
telemedicine capabilities more and more to send diagnostic images to doctors in other cities, to
allow patients in rural areas to remain at home while hospital nurses monitor vital parameters
such as heart rate or blood pressure, and to conduct interactive medical examinations and
diagnostic procedures. The convenience and efficiency provided by telemedicine provides
tangible benefits to society and is improving the quality of life for people around the globe.
The Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity (ADUM) developed by NASA in partnership
with a hospital in Detroit is one example of an exploration‐driven telemedicine innovation. This
portable ultrasound device being tested on the ISS may one day help crew members as far
away as Mars, and may also be particularly useful for emergency medical personnel on Earth.
The ADUM can diagnose a variety of ailments, including abdominal conditions, collapsed lungs,
and tooth infections, and it promises to save lives while lowering health care costs.35
Figure 8. Astronauts aboard the International Space Station use a compact ultrasound device to capture
and transmit to Earth high‐quality images of internal organs and structures, demonstrating a technology
that provides people in remote locations on Earth with efficient access to expert diagnosis and medical
treatment.
35 

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
The direct infusion of technological innovations from space into terrestrial markets will be
ensured by industrial entities operating simultaneously in space and terrestrial markets as well
as by the technology transfer programmes run by space agencies.
Continued missions on the ISS, as well as planned human and robotic missions beyond LEO to
the Moon, asteroids, and Mars will be key to generating scientific knowledge in the fields of
planetary science, astrobiology, astrophysics, fundamental physics, life sciences, and the social
sciences. For example, the ISS will continue to host studies to understand the physiological and
biological effects of space on humans, such as bone and muscle loss, diminished immune
efficiency, slower wound healing, and poorer cognitive performance. The results are helping
the medical community to provide better health care for remote communities and aging
populations.
More broadly, the growing capacity to work in space for extended periods of time is likely to
encourage further investment in the space economy – for example through mastery of
sophisticated and delicate repair and construction tasks such as the servicing of the Hubble
space telescope, and greater understanding of how to manage risks to human health and
safety. Specifically, developments in propulsion, transportation, and infrastructure systems may
lower the cost of space access and utilization, and thus enable expanded private investment in
space cargo transport, space tourism, and resource utilization.

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
3.2. Culture and Inspiration
In recent years, a number of agencies have conducted robotic space missions36 that have
uncovered new knowledge about the solar system's past and present and are providing clues to
help humankind understand how life began on Earth. In the coming decade, a variety of new
missions to the Moon, asteroids, and Mars37 will deepen that understanding and shed light on
the possibility of past or present life elsewhere in the solar system.
Exploring Mars: Inspiration for Humankind
The possibility of past or present life beyond Earth continues to inspire people to reflect on
humanity's place in the Universe. Since the 1970's, space agencies have sent a series of
spacecraft to explore Mars in the search for answers.
Scientists now believe that water may once have flowed
on the surface and that early conditions on the planet
could have supported life. NASA's Curiosity rover, which
has been exploring the Yellowknife Bay area on Mars
since 2012, has discovered new evidence that Mars could
have supported ancient microbial life. ESA and
Roscosmos plans for ExoMars missions in 2016 and 2018,
Figure 9. From NASA Curiosity Rover:
Martian landscape looking toward and NASA's plans for a Mars 2020 rover will make further
Mount Sharp near Yellowknife Bay, an progress in the search for signs of life. These missions set
area where researchers have found
the stage for what scientists agree will bring humankind
minerals indicating the past presence of
even closer to revealing whether Martian life ever
water.
existed: a mission to return Mars samples back
to Earth.
The renewed interest in space exploration, generated by work on human missions beyond LEO
is deeply inspirational. These missions will accelerate solar system exploration and discovery by
leveraging humankind's natural ability to analyze and adapt to unpredictable situations. Human
36 Recent lunar missions include CNSA's Chang'e 1 and 2, ESA's SMART‐1, ISRO's Chandrayaan‐1, JAXA's Kaguya,
and NASA's LRO, LCROSS, and GRAIL. Recent asteroid missions include ESA's Rosetta, JAXA's Hayabusa, and NASA's
Dawn. Recent Mars missions include ESA's Mars Express, and NASA's Phoenix, Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, and
Curiosity.
37 Planned lunar missions include CNSA's Chang'e 3, ISRO's Chandrayaan‐2, NASA's LADEE, and Roscosmos's Luna‐
Glob (Luna‐25 and 26)and Luna‐Resurs (Luna‐27). Planned asteroid missions include JAXA's Hayabusa‐2 and NASA's
OSIRIS‐REx. Planned Mars missions include ESA‐Roscosmos’s ExoMars, ISRO's Mangalyaan, and NASA's MAVEN,
InSight, and Mars 2020 mission.

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
missions to the lunar vicinity that are being considered for the next decade will lay the
groundwork for exploration of more distant destinations.
Exploring asteroids: Inspiration for Humankind
© Twentieth Century Fox JAXA’s HAYABUSA‐2
Figure 10. (a) Motion picture poster for the Japanese movie that followed the Hayabusa‐1 mission (b) JAXA
concept of Hayabusa‐2 mission.
Public excitement in Japan reached new heights in 2010 after JAXA's Hayabusa mission became
the first ever to return sample material from an asteroid back to Earth. After the spacecraft
suffered several near‐catastrophic technical problems, the public became enthralled with the
heroic efforts to revive the mission, which was treated as a top news story of the year and the
topic of 3 motion pictures. Samples returned from asteroid Itokawa are being analyzed by
laboratories in Japan, the USA, and other parts of the world.
As the follow‐on mission, Hayabusa‐2 is targeted to be launched in 2014 to asteroid 1999JU3. It
will carry an impactor to create an artificial crater on the asteroid and collect subsurface sample
material. It will also carry Japanese rovers and a lander built by a German‐French collaboration.
It is scheduled to come back to Earth in 2020 with its sample. Hayabusa‐2 will investigate the
origin of organic matter and water in the solar system and how they are related to life and
water in the oceans of Earth.
3.3. New Means to Address Global Challenges
The next ten years will be essential for building international partnership for exploration. This
will offer opportunities to developed and emerging space nations to contribute according to
their needs and capabilities.
The ability to operate and work with humans in the lunar vicinity will provide new means for
protecting the planet and servicing space‐based assets. NASA has begun planning for a robotic
mission to redirect a small asteroid into lunar orbit to allow for a human to visit it. Space

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
exploration missions such as this will contribute to already ongoing efforts to understand the
threat to Earth posed by asteroids, currently mostly implemented through ground and space‐
based telescopes, and to devise means for protecting the planet. Furthermore, stronger
cooperation in space exploration will create opportunities for enhanced international
coordination and cooperation on topics such as space debris management and space weather
monitoring
Cooperation between diverse nations on challenging space projects will showcase the ability to
jointly advance common goals and help to improve diplomatic ties and understanding between
nations.
4. Conclusion
Space exploration has produced an impressive record of benefits for humanity. This paper has
distilled a body of evidence of such benefits into a few key observations about the capacity of
future space exploration to contribute to innovation, culture and inspiration, and new means to
address global challenges.
Space exploration has driven scientific and technological innovation that benefits people
around the globe every day. Sending humans and machines into space presents challenges that
are overcome only by the utmost ingenuity; this leads to new knowledge and technical
innovations that are used on Earth in ways that can be dramatic and unpredictable.
Space exploration serves a cultural and inspirational purpose by fulfilling a deep need to
understand the world, address questions about the origins of life and the nature of the
Universe, and to expand the notion of what it means to be human.
Because space exploration stimulates significant global investment and international
partnerships, and because of its extremely challenging nature, demands the development of
cutting edge technical capabilities, it provides unique opportunities to address some of the
global challenges facing society today. When nations work together on challenging space
missions, this promotes international cooperation beyond the realm of space. It aligns interests
and forges relationships that further peace and stability on Earth.
There is no activity on Earth that matches the unique challenges of space exploration. The first
fifty years of space activity have generated benefits for people around the globe. This past
record gives strong reason for confidence that renewed investments in space exploration will
have similarly positive impacts for future generations.

ISECG – Benefits Stemming from Space Exploration
Image Credits
Figure 2: Exoskeleton (NASA and the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition); Figure 4:
Astronauts: NASA; students: commons.wikimedia; Figure 5: Apollo Earthrise (NASA), Kaguya Earthrise
(JAXA), Cassini (NASA); Figure 6: ISS Expedition 20 (NASA), ISS (NASA); Figure 7: Chelyabinsk meteor (AP
Photo/Nasha gazeta, Figure 8: Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity (NASA).;
Figure 9: NASA; Figure 10: JAXA; Twentieth Century Fox.