Harnessing the
Potential
Defense AI in Greece
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Nikolaos Karampekios, Konstantinos Sakalis, and Iraklis Oikonomou
DAIO Study 23|19

About the Defense AI Observatory
The Defense AI Observatory (DAIO) at the Helmut Schmidt University in Hamburg
monitors and analyzes the use of artificial intelligence by armed forces. DAIO comprises
three interrelated work streams:
Culture, concept development, and organizational transformation in the context of
military innovation
Current and future conflict pictures, conflict dynamics, and operational experience,
especially related to the use of emerging technologies
Defense industrial dynamics with a particular focus on the impact of emerging
technologies on the nature and character of techno-industrial ecosystems
DAIO is an integral element of GhostPlay, a capability and technology development
project for concept-driven and AI-enhanced defense decision-making in support of fast-
paced defense operations. GhostPlay is funded by the Center for Digital and Technology
Research of the German Bundeswehr (dtec.bw). dtec.bw is funded by the European Union
– NextGenerationEU.
Imprint
Nikolaos Karampekios, Konstantinos Sakalis, and Iraklis Oikonomou, Harnessing the Poten-
tial. Defense AI in Greece. DAIO Study 23/19 (Hamburg: Defense AI Observatory, 2023).
Defense AI Observatory | Chair of Political Theory | Helmut Schmidt University
Holstenhofweg 85 | 22043 Hamburg | T +49 40 6541 2776
 | contact@defenseai.eu | @Defense_AIO
ISSN (online): 2749-5337
ISSN (print): 2749-5345
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von

Harnessing the
Potential
Defense AI in Greece
Nikolaos Karampekios, Konstantinos Sakalis, and
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Iraklis Oikonomou
DAIO Study 23|19

About the Authors
Nikolaos Karampekios, PhD in technology policy, NTUA – UoA, is the Head of the Innova-
tion and Networking Unit of the Research, Development, Innovation Services and Metrics
Department at the National Documentation Centre (EKT). His work has appeared, among
others, in Science and Public Policy, Journal of Scientometrics, Quantitative Science Studies,
International Journal of Manpower, SN Social Sciences, International Migration, Population,
Space and Place; Defence and Peace Economics; Collection and Curation; Journal of Knowl-
edge Economy; Science and Diplomacy; Science Diplomacy Review. On defense, Nikos has
explored (among others) the knowledge capital of the Greek defense industrial base (Defence
and Peace Economics), the rise of the European defence R&D funding (The Emergence of EU
Defense Research Policy. From Innovation to Militarization, Springer Press) and the institution-
alization of EDA (The European Defence Agency. Arming Europe, Routledge Press). Nikolaos
participates in a number of OECD, JRC and EU working groups. ORCID account: orcid.
org/0000-0002-4906-9557. He can be reached at: nkarampekios@ekt.gr
Konstantinos Sakalis is a PhD Candidate at the Department of History and Philosophy of
Science, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens. Currently, he works on his thesis
on the “History of artificial intelligence in Greece” following undergraduate studies in
electronics and telecommunications engineering (BSc, Hellenic Air Force Academy, 2005)
and economics (BA, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 2010), and graduate studies in
information systems (MSc, Hellenic Open University, 2015) and philosophy (MA, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, 2016). Konstantinos has been assigned to various posts at the
Hellenic Air Force General Staff, having served as an aide-de-camp and technology advisor
to three different Alternate Ministers of the National Defense.
Iraklis Oikonomou is an independent researcher based in Athens, Greece. He holds a
PhD in International Politics from the University of Wales Aberystwyth and has conduct-
ed post-doctoral research at Ghent University and the University of Sussex. His research
interests include EU armaments and space policies, and the militarization of European
integration. He has co-edited the following volumes: (with T. Hoerber, 2023, Routledge)
The Militarization of European Space Policy; (with N. Karampekios & E. G. Karayannis, 2018,
Springer), The Emergence of EU Defense Research Policy: From Innovation to Militarisation;
(with N. Karampekios, 2015, Routledge), The European Defence Agency: Arming Europe,
Routledge; (with H. Golemis, 2012, Nissos), Poulantzas Today. He has published articles,
among others, in Space Policy, Studia Diplomatica, Rethinking Marxism, and Monthly
Review, and book reviews of his have appeared in European Security and Intelligence and
National Security. Also, he has co-edited three special issues of the Greek journal Utopia
and has contributed one dozen chapters in edited volumes.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, Joseph Verbovsky and the
participants at the 2023 DAIO International Defense AI Conference for valuable comments and
suggestions. Thanks also extended to Dimitris Nodaros for insights on the domestic industrial
ecosystem. The authors are solely responsible for any errors in fact, analysis or omission.
4 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

Content
1 Summary ..................................................................................................................... 6
2 Thinking About Defense AI ....................................................................................... 7
3 Developing Defense AI. ........................................................................................... 12
3.1 Defense AI Ecosystem ...............................................................................................13
3.2 Important Defense AI Projects in Development ..........................................................17
4 Organizing Defense AI ............................................................................................. 23
5 Funding Defense AI ................................................................................................. 27
6 Fielding and O perating Defense AI ............................................................................................................. 30
6.1 Situational Awareness and Situational Understanding .................................................31
6.2 Augmenting Existing Capabilities ..............................................................................31
6.3 Border Security ..........................................................................................................32
7 Training for Defense AI ............................................................................................ 35
7.1 Simulation-Based Training..........................................................................................36
7.2 Military Education......................................................................................................37
7.3 Conferences ..............................................................................................................39
7.4 Entrepreneurial-minded training activities ..................................................................39
8 Conclusion. ................................................................................................................ 40
Literature ...................................................................................................................... 43
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 5

1 Summary
Greek defense policy officials have recognized Artificial Intelligence (AI) as a po-
tential force enabler/disabler on the modern battlefield. Considering the country’s
geostrategic risk landscape and in view of harnessing technological opportunities,
the Greek defense ecosystem – i.e., the armed forces and the defense industry
– has launched three main lines of effort to prepare for and adopt defense AI:
research and development (R&D) collaboration, procuring defense AI from key
partners, and providing a holistic approach to training and education.
First, Greece makes maximum use of actively participating in European defense
research, development, and innovation (RDI) projects and launching national R&D
initiatives to enable the domestic ecosystem to get access to cutting-edge knowl-
edge and technologies and/or tests them under real operational conditions.
Second, procuring top-notch defense material (including land, air and naval
assets) that exploits AI techniques and processes will enable the armed forces to
understand its operational capabilities, significantly expediting the learning curves
of both military officers and engineers as well as closing capability gaps that
emerged from the country’s systematic underinvestment during the 2009–2018
economic crisis. In addition, the defense industry will benefit as well. As subcon-
tractors to international procurement projects or as main contractors to various
export cases, exploiting AI will increase their production capacity and upgrade
their list of products.
Finally, Greek is stepping up efforts to advance the education of its military
personnel. Both within the confines of standard military education or subsequent
civilian post-graduate degrees, a growing AI-related educational, research and
entrepreneurial ecosystem to which they can link to and get hands-on experience
is becoming visible, thus creating beneficial feedback loops.
In line with the platonic “necessity being the mother of invention,” the Greek de-
fense establishment has been a quick adopter of AI and its defense promises, for
several reasons, both negative and positive. Long-standing bilateral problems with
neighboring countries, the potential to apply defense-related AI into the civilian
realm and vice versa, as well as an innate understanding of the need to ride the
current scientific and technological wave are some of them.
6 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

2 Thinking
About
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 7

AI is defined as the next general-purpose technology that will shape the tech-
nological and economic evolution of the 21st century, affecting a wide range of
industries and societies at large. Increasingly seen as an enabling condition, AI
boosts and heightens the performance of other cutting-edge technologies, such
as robotics, in addition to ‘educating’ decision support systems linked to applica-
tions, such as autonomous vehicles, by way of crunching ever increasing amounts
of classifiable data. This reality has been well recognized at the top political level
in Greece1 and initial exercises mapping the domestic AI-related capabilities have
been initiated.2
Defense is a field that could not remain immune to the potential benefits of AI.
This has not evaded Greek policy makers, both civilian and defense alike. Addi-
tionally, AI has been recognized as one of the main strategic axes of the Digital
Transformation Bible, the flagship policy report that drives the digital transfor-
mation in Greece developed by the Ministry of Digital Governance.3 As for the
definition of AI, the document refers to it as “a collection of technologies that, by
combining data, algorithms and increased computing power, is able to learn and
make decisions that until recently were made solely by humans, with the aim of
achieving defined goals.”4
At the time of writing this study, the Ministry of Digital Governance is preparing a
National Strategy on AI (NSonAI) scheduled to be published by the end of 2023.5
While the NSonAI has not been made public yet it is believed that it touches
upon the relevant security and military challenges and offers strategic outlines for
developing a robust defense AI strategy. The NSonAI is expected to
set a framework for a holistic policy on the future development and application
of AI in Greece, which will be structured in a set of coordinated and interrelat-
ed actions. It will set out the conditions for the development of AI, including
the skills and trust framework, data policy and ethical principles for its safe
development and use. It will outline national priorities and areas for maximis-
ing the benefits of AI to address societal challenges and economic growth.6
Additionally, a high-profile team of experts was created at end of ,
under the auspices of the Prime Minister’s office. It has been tasked with offering
1 Mitsotakis,“ΗΕλλάδατο2040,μιαχώραστηνπρώτηγραμμήτηςΕυρώπης,”p.4.
2 Sahinietal.,ΕντοπισμόςκαιανάλυσητωνελληνικώνεπιστημονικώνδημοσιεύσεωνστοντομέατηςΤεχνητήςΝοημοσύνηςμε
τεχνικέςΜηχανικήςΜάθησης.
3 MinistryofDigitalGovernance,“DigitalTransformationBible2020–2025.”AccordingtoOECD’sAIObservatory,AIhasbeen
includedasoneofthemain“strategicinterventionaxes”intheDigitalTransformationBible,thepublishedreferencedocument
thatdrivesthedigitaltransformationofthecountry.Availableat:
2Faipo.oecd.org%2F2021-data-policyInitiatives-26788(lastaccessed9October2023).
4 MinistryofDigitalGovernance,“DigitalTransformationBible2020–2025,”p.158.
5 VanRoyetal.,AIWatch-NationalstrategiesonArtificialIntelligence:AEuropeanperspective,pp.70–71.
6 MinistryofDigitalGovernance,“DigitalTransformationBible2020–2025,”pp.159–160.
8 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

propositions on how Greece should best position itself in relation to AI, exploring
avenues for the latter to be incorporated into multiple policy domains, including
defence. While announcing the establishment of the advisory team, PM Mitsotakis
referred explicitly to “artificial intelligence and the armed forces” as “a great
challenge for the transformation of the deterrent capacity of our country.”7
Development and implementation of a Greek defense AI strategy must center
on the key specificities and considerations, including external threats, as laid out
by the Ministry of National Defense (MoD). Indeed, traditional security consider-
ations loom large in the country’s decision to embrace AI. As AI is considered a
game-changer and Greek’s competitors have already adopted and implemented
defense AI strategies, Athens has embarked on a path to incorporate AI in de-
fense as well. Although a comprehensive defense AI strategy has not yet been
published, this view is reflected in two preceding MoD documents: the National
defense Industrial Strategy8 and the Strategic Analysis of Developments after
2030.9 Authored in the previous decade, both documents seek to position the
domestic defense industrial base and the force structure (respectively) in relation
to cutting edge technologies that can influence defense affairs. As of , both are being updated.
While such systemic documents are being re-authored, they indicate an oper-
ational reality that domestic defense policy makers have been quick to grasp
and appreciate. In numerous high-profile meetings, AI has been pointed out
by high-ranking officials as a key technological objective,10 an objective that
Greek Armed Forces should be increasingly aligning with in order to address the
challenges emanating from its geostrategic environment. Therefore, Greece is
preparing to incorporate AI into 21st century defense scenarios and projections,
attribute robotics and other unmanned vehicles a larger role in warfare and paving
the foundation to accomplish military objectives in multi-domain operations. Or, as
former Deputy Defense Minister Nikos Hardalias, pointed out:
The importance of new technologies, and in particular Emerging and Disrup-
tive Technologies, is crucial, and we need to exploit them at all levels. These
technologies, such as quantum technologies, AI, robotics and autonomous
weapon systems can have a catalytic effect on the battlefield as we know it…
We see how important weapons systems and technologies such as drones,
satellite internet and cyber weapons have become today.11
7 HellenicRepublic,“ΕνημερωτικόσημείωμαγιατησυνεδρίασητηςΣυμβουλευτικήςΕπιτροπήςγιατηνΤεχνητήΝοημοσύνη.”
8 GeneralDirectorateforDefenseInvestmentandArmaments,“NationalDefenceIndustrialStrategy.”
9 HellenicNationalDefenceGeneralStaff,“ΣτρατηγικήΑνάλυσηΕξελίξεωνγιατηνΕλλάδαμετάτο2030,ΣΑΕ2030.”
10 HellenicNationalDefenceGeneralStaff,“ΟμιλίατουΑρχηγούΓΕΕΘΑστοΠανεπιστήμιοΠειραιώςμεθέμα“Σύγχρονες
ΑπειλέςκαιΠροκλήσειςΑσφάλειας””;MinistryofDefence,“ΣυμμετοχήΥΕΘΑκ.ΝίκουΠαναγιωτόπουλουστηνΆτυπηΣύνοδο
ΥπουργώνΆμυναςτηςΕ.Ε.;“ΣυμμετοχήΥΕΘΑΝικόλαουΠαναγιωτόπουλουστηΣύνοδοΥπουργώνΑμύνηςτουΝΑΤΟ.
11 Hardalias,“ΟμιλίαΥΦΕΘΑΝικόλαουΧαρδαλιάστηνΗμερίδα“Τεχνολογία-Καινοτομία,Άμυνα&Στρατηγική.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 9

Significantly, this rationale has been taken up by the incoming Minister of National
Defense Nikos Dendias, who has already signalled his acute understanding of the
need for Greek armed forces to continue strengthening their digital and tech-
savvy footprint in relation to AI and cybersecurity. Indeed, enhancing the produc-
tion capabilities of the domestic industrial sector and a much more holistic and
institutionally rounded approach on innovation has been indicated. As of Novem-
ber 2023, a dedicated legislation is in the making.
Another prominent individual whose strategic thinking can be seen as reflecting
the broader understanding of the Greek techno-military establishment is Panagi-
otis Kikiras, Head of Unit, Innovative Research, at the European Defence Agency.
In the absence of a formal strategic document, it is worth quoting his thinking in
detail
AI has the potential to be a game changer for the defence sector (…). Today,
changes at the technological, operational and economic levels are leading
to the emergence of all those technologies that can optimise functionality
and minimise technological and economic risk. The application of AI shares
the above characteristics, reducing the risk of loss of human lives on the
battlefields, offering better efficiency than human soldiers, and the cost of its
introduction is 10 times less than the corresponding cost of training soldiers.
Moreover, today AI technologies are more mature and driven by investments
in non-military sectors. This trend, and because of the rapid maturation rates
of products in consumer markets, has led to the exponential growth of AI tech-
nologies, which has allowed its immediate introduction into defence without
the slow and short maturation time of typical military products.12
As addressed in the following chapters, Greek defense planning has been sys-
tematically incorporating AI in its daily business in the form of developing and
participating in AI-related research, development, and innovation (RDI) projects
to get access to cutting-edge knowledge and/or testing this new technology
under real operational conditions. Importantly, policy makers have realized that
such cutting-edge technologies are being developed by both the defense and
civilian ecosystem, thus trying to “spin-in” commercial solutions into their wider
military planning by way of instigating synergies within the domestic civilian R&D
ecosystem.13
Also, the Greek Armed Forces seek to acquire operational application(s) of AI by
way of procuring top-notch defense material from global industry players. A third
channel, and perhaps more important since it points to sustainability, is through
12 Kikiras,InterviewtoGiannisMouratidis.
13 Hardalias,“ΟμιλίαΥΦΕΘΑΝικόλαουΧαρδαλιάστηνημερίδα“ΣυνδέονταςτηνΈρευναμετηνΑμυντικήΒιομηχανία”.”
10 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

educating personnel. Seeking to expand knowledge boundaries, personnel of
the armed forces are presented with a pluralism of study options in relation to AI.
Either within the confines of standard military education or subsequent civilian
post-graduate degrees military personnel are faced with a growing AI-related
educational, research and entrepreneurial ecosystem to which they can link to and
get hands-on experience, thus, obtaining relevant skills and dexterities.
In advancing national defense AI capabilities, Greek takes a slightly different path
on one important aspect: ethics. Although ethical considerations on the wider
use of AI have been pointed out in Greek society, on its military applications a
much more pragmatic approach has been the norm. Overcoming a decade of
near-zero new entries of defense equipment and the continuous strategic rivalry
with Turkey are the key considerations for policy makers. These have sidelined any
societal debate about ethical questions surrounding defense AI. Nevertheless,
MoD should keep track of the international debate on the ethics of defense AI and
in-house reflections on the ethical challenges of AI during warfare.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 11

3 Developing
Defense AI
12 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

3.1 Defense AI Ecosystem
While a defense AI strategy is still in the making, it should be noted that parallel
digitalization-relevant steps are being institutionalized within MoD. Accordingly, a
Data Protection Officer has been named by the Army, signaling a more up-to-date
approach in relation to data protection. However, there is no defense data strate-
gy in place by the MoD.
Greek’s defense AI ecosystem consists of two broad groups. First is the public
administration mainly comprising the national armed forces and the homeland
security (roughly falling under the auspices of the Ministry of Citizen Protection)
apparatus, not the least because many foreign threats are inextricably linked with
civilian security considerations. The second group consists of private and publicly
owned firms engaged in providing the “tools” for defense. All in all, the common-
ly accepted understanding is that the country
consistently supports cooperation with the private sector and the academic
community to promote innovation and the exploitation of Emerging and Dis-
ruptive Technologies to the maximum extent possible, in line with the opera-
tional requirements and specifications of the armed forces14
Obviously, this macro-analysis can be broken down. The armed forces are not just
a “consumer” of AI products. With a highly educated profile and increased oper-
ational experience and participation in NATO and EU agencies the armed forces
actively shape the AI-related discussion in relation to needs and requirements.
Moreover, as an end-user of cutting-edge RDI projects, officers get to test AI-en-
hanced equipment and acquire first-hand experience during the development
phase. As their exposure to AI increases, their proficiency in evaluating the pros
and cons of this new technology will mature as well.
Equally, defense firms constitute an important aspect of the defense AI ecosys-
tem. Increasingly active in RDI activities and starting to capitalize on their export
potential, Greek firms are engaged in the production of defense services and
products of various technological levels and capabilities. With an industry structure
having a few large companies that are export oriented and/or work as contractors
for global defense firms, most are SMEs focused on the delivery of specific parts in
the domestic defense value chain. Most established companies are active in both
civilian and defense markets. This is not only a consequence of the growing focus
on providing dual use technology. Furthermore, the decision to serve two different
14 Hardalias,“ΟμιλίαΥΦΕΘΑΝικόλαουΧαρδαλιάστηνΗμερίδα“Τεχνολογία-Καινοτομία,Άμυνα&Στρατηγική.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 13

markets also originates from the fact that during the decade-long economic crisis,
firms had to diversify in order to survive. Moreover, established companies operate
parallel to start ups and spin offs offering innovative new products and solutions.
Among others, the following defense companies have been active in the field of
defense AI:
Hellenic Instruments is a specialized defense electronics company15
Planetek offers remote sensing solutions16
Intracom Defense works on missile electronics, tactical communications, C4I
systems, and unmanned systems17
Space Hellas designs and supports integrated ICT and security solutions18
Terra Spatium offers remote sensing and geoinformation solutions19
Eight Bells is a research and consulting company focusing on AI, cybersecurity,
optical networks, and sensors20
FEAC Engineering provides virtual engineering services through computer
aided engineering and simulation techniques21
Lambda Automata develops advanced sensor-fusion capabilities to combine
legacy and novel sensing solutions22
Olympia Electronics offers electronic safety and security solutions23
Prisma Electronics develops smart sensor wireless network technology24
Spirit Aeronautical Systems develops unmanned systems technology25
Satways develops integrated geospatial C2 solutions26
In addition to these companies, the Greek defense AI ecosystem also includes
several leading research institutes, different directorates of the Greek MoD and
the armed forces as well as international partners as highlighted in Figure 1 and
Table 1.
15 Formoreinformation,see:
16 Formoreinformation,see:
17 Formoreinformation,see:
18 Formoreinformation,see:
19 Formoreinformation,see:
20 Formoreinformation,see:
21 Formoreinformation,see:
22 Formoreinformation,see:
23 Formoreinformation,see:
24 Formoreinformation,see:
25 Formoreinformation,see:
26 Formoreinformation,see:
14 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

Figure 1: Conceptualizing the national defense AI ecosystem
EUanddomesticRDI
projects.Civilianacademic
Overallgoverment
andresearchactivities–
priorities(eg.Digital
domesticandinternational.
Transformation,
Entrepreneur-enhancing
NationalSecurity).
actions,valorizationof
researchresults.
Government Academic
(Defenseand andresearch
defense-related activities
policy-making) (defense)
Domestic
defense
industry
Atriplehelix
Europeandefense
approach(inner
industrialcollaboration.
circles).
(Sub)contractorsin
Includingaselect
hightechprocurement
listofvariables
opportunities.
superimposingthe
ecosystem(outer
circles).
Source:Authors
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 15

Table 1: Actors in the Greek defense AI ecosystem
• NATO • Lockheed Martin (USA) • NATO’s Defence
• EU Directorate-General • Dassault Aviation Innovation Accelerator
for Defence Industry (France) for the North Atlantic
and Space (DGDEFIS) • MBDA (France) (DIANA)
• European Defense • Israel Aerospace • National Centre of
Agency (EDA) Industries (IAI) Scientific Research
“Demokritos”
• Rafael Advanced De-
• Elevate Greece
fense Systems (Israel)
• Hellenic Manufacturers
of Defense Materiel
Association (SEKPY)
• GeneralDirectoratefor • HellenicAerospace • HellenicArmyAcademy
DefenseInvestmentsand Industry(HAI) • NavalCadetsSchool
Armaments(GDDIA) • HellenicInstruments • HellenicAirForce
• DirectorateforDefense • Planetek Academy
InvestmentsandTechno-
• IntracomDefense • NationalTechnicalUniver-
logicalResearch
• SpaceHellas sityofAthens(NTUA)
• DirectorateforDefense
• TerraSpatium
ProgramsandPrincipal
Contracts • EightBells
• GeneralDirectorate • LambdaAutomata
ofNationalDefense • OlympiaElectronics
PolicyandInternational
• PrismaElectronics
Relations(GDNDPIR)
• Sunlight
• LandForces:Communica-
• Satways
tionsDivision
• SKYTALIS
• HellenicAirForce:C’
Branch(Support)D’Branch • THEON
(PolicyandPlanning)
Source:Authors
16 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

3.2 Important Defense AI Projects in Development
Currently, several AI-related defense projects are in various stages of develop-
ment. A useful distinction for the purposes of this analysis is the source of funding
with projects being funded by European competitive funds, co-funded by Euro-
pean and national funds, including Recovery and Resilience Facility, and nationally
funded projects including procurement contracts.
International Development Projects
By way of international development projects, the lion’s share refers to European
projects aiming at establishing a common defense R&D and industrial capability.
Indeed, it should be noted that participation in EU projects is a significant pathway
for Greek actors to obtain both funds (this holds also for those co-funded projects)
and top-tier know-how. This pathway is more important in relation to other EU coun-
tries, and a pathway wherein Greek actors exhibit particular success.27 The following
overview includes projects with Greek partners as coordinators and/or members:28
CTIRISP (Cyber Threats and Incident Response Information Sharing Platform)
focuses on sharing cyber threat intelligence through a networked member-
state platform, with the aim of strengthening cyber defense capabilities.29
DECISMAR (Development of a Decision Support Toolbox for enhancing the
feasibility study of the Upgrade of Maritime Surveillance) aims at developing a
decision support toolbox (DSTx), implemented as a cyber-secured and fu-
ture-proofed integrated IT environment.30
d-THOR (Digital Ship Structural Health Monitoring) develops a system based
on innovative utilization of large amounts of load and response measurements
from robust and advanced sensors, a digital framework complying with recog-
nized open standards for data exchange, and hybrid analysis and modelling
which combines physics-based and data-driven models.31
FaRADAI (Frugal and Robust AI for Defence Advanced Intelligence) focusses
on frugal learning, i.e., the ability of a system to adapt and learn from its en-
vironment, including from user supervision, for a reasonable cost and without
intervention from expert developers. Within the FaRADAI project, current
advances in AI technologies will be thoroughly researched in parallel with a
27 DefenceRedefined,“Greecein5thplaceforfundingfromEuropeanDefenceFund.”
28 WechosetoincludeprogramsthatcapturethedominantperceptionofdefenseAIinrelationtothesetofemergingtechnolo-
giesinthefieldofdefense,i.e.,developmentofUAVsanddecision-makingprocessautomationsystems,ratherthanprojects
inwhichGreekinstitutionsparticipatesolelybasedonthedescriptionsusingthetermAI.Thelengthofthelistisindicativeof
Greece’semphasisonsecuringEuropeanfundingandexpandingthenetworkofinternationalpartnerships.
29 PESCO,“CyberThreatsandIncidentResponseInformationSharingPlatform(CTIRISP).”
30 EuropeanCommission,“DECISMAR.”
31 EuropeanDefenceFund,“dTHOR.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 17

detailed study of the main challenges imposed by a defense system. FaRADAI
is coordinated by the Center for Research & Technology Hellas (CERTH).32
GEOMETOC (Geo-Meteorological and Oceanographic Support Coordination
Element) enhances the acquisition of geospatial, meteorological and ocean-
ographic data through Geo-Data Infrastructure and the provision of related
services through Services based on advanced analytics and big data.33
HARMSPRO (Harbour & Maritime Surveillance and Protection) provides
Member States with the ability to conduct surveillance and protection of
specified maritime areas, from harbors up to littoral waters, to obtain security
and safety of maritime traffic and structures. It delivers an integrated system
of maritime sensors, software and platforms (surface, underwater and aerial
vehicles), which fuse and process data, to aid the detection and identification
of a range of potential maritime threats.34
LOTUS (Low Observable Tactical Unmanned air System) addresses feasibility
issues, including the detailed design, prototyping and testing of a low-observ-
able, airworthy and interoperable tactical Remotely Piloted Air Systems system
targeted at ISR missions with increased data processing capabilities.35
MAS MCM (Maritime Semi Autonomous Systems for Mine Countermeasures)
will develop autonomous vehicles, using cutting-edge technology and an
open architecture to counter the threat of sea mines. Indeed, the technologies
were tested in the field during the Robotic Experimentation and Prototyping
Augmented by Maritime Unmanned Systems (REPMUS22) exercise.36
MIRICLE (Mine Risk Clearance for Europe) addresses the main components
of a stand-off mine warfare solution such as a mission system, communication
network, mine countermeasures vessel and robots, using AI for supporting
decision making.37
PANDORA (Cyber Defence Platform for Real-time Threat Hunting, Incident
Response and Information Sharing) contributes to EU cyber defense capacity
building, by designing and implementing an open technical solution for re-
al-time threat hunting and incident response, focusing on endpoint protection,
as well as information sharing.38
PRIVILEDGE (PRIVacy and homomorphic encryption for artificiaL intelligence)
focuses on developing encryption techniques of confidential military data by
way of exploiting AI.39
32 EuropeanDefenceFund,“FaRADAI.”
33 PESCO,“Geo-MeteorologicalandOceanographic(GEOMETOC)SupportCoordinationElement(GMSCE).”
34 PESCO,“Harbour&MaritimeSurveillanceandProtection(HARMSPRO).”
35 EuropeanCommission,“LOTUS.”
36 PESCO,“Maritime(Semi-)AutonomousSystemsforMineCountermeasures(MASMCM);DefenceIndustryEurope,“PESCO
maritimeminecountermeasuresprojecttestedinmultinationalexercise.”
37 EuropeanCommission,“MIRICLE.”
38 EuropeanCommission,“PANDORA.”
39 EuropeanCommission,“PRIVILEDGE”
18 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

USSPS (Development of Unmanned Semi-fixed Sea Platforms for Maritime
Surveillance) develops a system to improve Maritime Surveillance by exploiting
unmanned semi-fixed platforms at sea.40
National Development Projects
Through several co-funded operational programs, such as the 2021–2027 Partner-
ship and Cooperation Agreement, the Recovery and Resilience Facility as well as
national funds, Greece has invested in developing systems related to security and
defense AI along three lines of efforts: big data and data fusion to enhance situa-
tional awareness, unmanned systems, and safety and predictive maintenance.41
Big Data and Data Fusion
The THORAX integrated information system is one of the flagship projects.42
The system aspires to provide “an ‘umbrella’ of protection, combining all kinds
of information and will contribute to the defense armoring of the country,” as
the Deputy Minister of Research and Technology has said on multiple occasions.
THORAX aims to connect domestically produced research, innovation, and
technology with the pillars of National Defense, Security and Civil Protection. The
system will transmit real-time information concerning search and rescue opera-
tions, border security, illegal immigration or earthquakes to the MoD’s National
Operational Center, thus enabling decision-making at the government level
commensurate with the needs of emerging crisis situations. AI will be used for
real-time data fusion of information obtained through multiple, air, land, and sea-
based sensors.
Unmanned Systems
Greece has been aspiring to develop unmanned systems for use in different
military domains.43 First, Greek needs to leap-frog to cover the lost as use of
unmanned systems in various operation theaters is widening. In addition, Turkey,
Greece’s strategic competitor, has become highly adept at developing and using
these systems thus raining global prominence. The Greek inability to counter
these systems entails a tactical disadvantage in addition to know-how deficiency
in a cutting-edge field. Moreover, Greece has established a privileged partnership
with both the United States and Israel to make use of their unmanned systems to
cover the country’s tactical deficiencies as a short-term, stop-gap measure. Against
this background, the following projects are worth mentioning:
40 EuropeanCommission,“USSPS.”
41 Theselectionprocessishighlydependentuponenduserrequirements.Thatis,theGreekMoD,afteraninternalreviewpro-
cess,haspushedforwardforaselectlistofprojectsbaseduponitstacticalandfutureorientedneedsandpriorities.
42 MinistryofDevelopment&Investments,“ΜνημόνιοσυνεργασίαςμεταξύτωνΥπουργείωνΑνάπτυξης&Επενδύσεωνκαι
ΕθνικήςΆμυνας;Nedos,“‘Thorax’κατάυβριδικώναπειλών–ΝέοσύστημαστοΓΕΕΘΑ.”
43 EllinikosStratos,“ΠρογράμματαανάπτυξηςελληνικώνUAV.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 19

Efforts to develop Greek unmanned aerial vehicles go back to 1982, with the
first flight of the HAI E1-79 Pegasus followed by its second version (Pegasus
II) in 2005 which is currently part of the arsenal of the Hellenic Air Force.44
The HCUAV RX-1 was developed in the context of a collaborative project in
the 2007–2013 National Strategic Reference Framework, led and coordinated
by Fluid and Turbine Engineering Laboratory of the Mechanical Engineering
Department of AUTH.45 The DELEAR RX-3 platform which emerged from RX-1
was produced as part of the above mentioned LOTUS project.46 The RX-3
vehicle will adopt AI to perceive the environment (situational awareness) and
to autonomously execute parts of its mission (autonomy).
A second and parallel attempt emerged from a joint venture project involving
the Naval Cadets School, the National Technical University of Athens and the
EFA Group of Companies,47 which strive to develop the Greek UAV ARCHY-
TAS.48 According to public sources, a TRL-8 prototype is expected within Q4 of
2023 and industrial production is expected within Q1 of 2024.49
A third attempt concerns the development of the first Greek UCAV. Named
GRYPAS, it was initialized in with the signing of a Memorandum of
Cooperation between the Ministries of Finance (financial provider) and National
Defense, the Hellenic Aerospace Industry, and several Greek universities.50 This
development project takes into consideration the operational needs of the
armed forces for a medium-altitude long-endurance UAV, specifically for intelli-
gence missions (detection of enemies) or strike missions. AI will be implemented
for automated navigation and/or recognition of certain (types of) targets.
Predictive Maintenance and Safety
An additional source of European and national co-funding comes from the Hel-
lenic Foundation for Research and Innovation. A relevant project of the Naval
Cadet School is NAVMAT. A knowledge-based system that goes beyond simple
keyword-based indexing and retrieval, NAVMAT is a platform for recording,
indexing, comparing, assessing, and retrieving information, history of operations
and maintenance, evidence and testimony for incidents of failure in the Naval en-
vironment. Based on materials failure ontology, it makes use of AI algorithms and
cutting-edge approaches in data handling and aims at optimizing naval materials
failure management and supporting decision making in Maintenance and Repair
Operations by the Naval Cadets School.51
44 HellenicAirForce,“PegasusII.”
45 DefencePoint,“ΑερόχημαHCUAVRX-1απότηνελληνικήεταιρίαSpaceSonicμεηλεκτρονικάIDE.”
46 DELAER,“TheDELAERconcept”;IntracomDefense,“LOTUS:NextGenerationTacticalUAVfromINTRACOMDEFENSEforISRmissions.”
47 ThisconsortiumincludesTheon(electro-opticalsensors),SCYTALIS(datalinks),andUCANDRONE(designandmanufacturing
oftheaircraft).
48 Nikitas,“ΤοελληνικόUAV‘ΑΡΧΥΤΑΣ’τηςEFAVENTURES.
49 MinistryofDefence,“ΑπάντησηΥΕΘΑΝικόλαουΠαναγιωτόπουλουσεερώτησηΚοινοβουλευτικούΕλέγχου.
50 DefenceReview,“ΤοελληνικόUCAVμετηνονομασία“Γρύπας”ανακοίνωσαναπόκοινούταΥπουργείαΕθνικήςΆμυναςκαι
ΥπουργείοΟικονομικών.”
51 NAVMAT,“ΑΙ-poweredNAVMATprototypeatICEAFVII.”
20 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

Procurement Projects
During the last three to five years, Greek has signed approximately 200 major
defense procurement contracts.52 The need to overcome a decade of near-zero
new entries of defense equipment and a long standing strategic rivalry with Turkey
have been the main drivers to sign these contracts. These external drivers have
been coupled with a more utilitarian approach: procuring ready-to-use high tech
defense systems from foreign contractors requires the national defense industrial
base to be involved to ensure smooth operation. In addition, there is a growing in-
terest in using international procurement projects as avenues to help mature local
defense companies and provide them springboards into entering more digital
product segments.
Importantly, these objectives are in line with a wider political understanding with
the governments of the states where the respective industrial groups, from which
the procurement(s) will take place, are headquartered. Countries such as the
United States, France, and Israel have recognized the increased geopolitical sig-
nificance of Greece and maintain strategic interests that are in line with Greece’s
objectives. In the words of former Deputy Defence Minister Hardalias, exploring
the possibilities and investing in AI-related systems and technologies
is a security issue that is both national and supranational, and therefore
concerns both NATO and the EU. But it can only be carried out effectively
through international cooperation with partners with whom we share common
principles and values.53
This has dripped down to a more collaborative approach in matters of industrial
production. Importantly, a conscientious effort is being undertaken to transform
this “one-way street” of high-tech procurement from such countries to an industri-
al production scheme wherein Greek defense industry will participate in product
development for the purposes of the specific procurement contract and as part of
the production value chain globally. It is to be noted that this geopolitical align-
ment is further exhibited in EU RDI projects, wherein Greek entities extensively
collaborate with French, Italian and Spanish actors.
Regarding industrial production, Naval Group’s 3 Belharra-type frigates (FDI-HN),
Dassault Aviation’s 24 Rafale, the modernization of 4 MEKO-type frigates as well as
the acquisition of 20 Lockheed Martin-made F-35 fighter jets are of special interest as
most of these assets are/will be data-powered and sensor-enabled. These projects will
require the local industry to make substantial efforts in view of sensor fusion capabili-
52 e-Amyna,“Συμβάσεις-συμφωνίεςΥΠΕΘΑ/ΓΔΑΕΕ2019–2023.”
53 Hardalias,“ΟμιλίαΥΦΕΘΑΝικόλαουΧαρδαλιάστηνΗμερίδα“Τεχνολογία-Καινοτομία,Άμυνα&Στρατηγική.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 21

ties and other types of decision support tools operators can use for integrating dispa-
rate sensor and information data, optronics for target acquisition, as well as parsing of
Failure, Reporting, Analysis, and Corrective Action (FRACAS) data. However, if and to
what extent local industry partners can contribute is still under discussion and needs
to be assessed in view of local competencies and international supplier requirements.
This includes a detailed understanding of the domestic defense industry’s research
and technological capabilities – a task that is currently being undertaken and aims to
map the technological, innovation and industrial existing potential.
In addition, MBDA’s contract to provide ASTER 30 B1area air defense and MM40
Exocet Block 3C anti-ship missiles for the FDI-HN as well as the Meteor air-to-air
missile, the SCALP cruise missile, the MICA air-to-air missile, and the AM39 Exocet
anti-ship missile in Rafale are linked to collaborating with domestic parties. One
such case is, for example, the contribution of the National Technical University
of Athens to develop AI-relevant technologies. This case, as well as the case of
MBDA seeking to establish R&D partnerships with the domestic industry and aca-
demia through its “R&D Booster” initiative, indicates the aforementioned geopo-
litical alliance between France and Greece, through which France as the supplier
is seeking to broaden its footprint in Greece’s defense relevant ecosystem for the
purposes of knowledge transfer.54
54 MBDAi“MBDAawardedtwocontractsbyGreecefornavalandaircraftweaponry”;MBDA,“MBDAtoboostcooperationwith
GreekDefenceindustry.”
22 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

4 Organizing
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 23

Greek’s defense institutions are reorganizing for the advent of defense AI. As
discussed above, the new NSonAI will be published later this year. But early
indications suggest that this strategy will cover defense AI issues in relation to
inter-ministerial and cross-departmental arrangements as well as security and
military considerations. These aspects notwithstanding, the MoD currently lacks
a single, unitary coordinating authority responsible for defense AI. Rather the
respective policies as well as the gathering of knowledge related to defense AI are
being carried out within multiple centers within MoD structure:55
The General Directorate for Defense Investments and Armaments (GDDIA),
and more specifically the Directorate for Defense Investments and Technolog-
ical Research (DDITR), is responsible for managing state-funded and European
R&D projects, including those that are AI-focused. As such, this Directorate
is familiar with the EU’s AI-related priorities, the capabilities of participating
Greek actors, and the respective project results.
In collaboration with DDITR, the Directorate for Defense Programs and Prin-
cipal Contracts within the same General Directorate manages major procure-
ment projects, including sub-contracting the domestic industrial base. Given
that most – if not all – of the current procurement projects, including those
that were detailed in chapter 3, do entail a domestic co-production aspect,
GDDIA is highly engaged in organizing technological and industrial actions on
defense AI.
Moreover, given the hybrid security threats posed by both state and non-state
actors in Greece’s land and sea borders, additional operational centers and
assets performing multiple data-collection missions are being operated in
tandem by defense, police, and coast guard forces. Thus, the Hellenic Nation-
al Defense General Staff is also exposed to AI-relevant assets and technolo-
gies that are being deployed within the context of security-relevant R&D and
procurement projects.
As of end of , a new Joint Center for Research and Technological
Development & Innovation (KETAK) has been established by the MoD that
seeks to address real, operational requirements by all branches of the armed
forces. Although only few details have been revealed, one can assume that
setting up KEΤAK was a way to create economies of scale among the R&D
centers of each branch and pool resources.
Lastly, the General Directorate of National Defense Policy and International
Relations (GDNDPIR) is responsible for addressing the policy-relevant issues
on AI, as well as other cutting-edge technologies, thereby considering the
55 TheMoD’sNationalDefenceIndustrialStrategyandtheStrategicAnalysisofDevelopmentsafter2030donotmentionAIas
partofthecuttingedgetechnologiesthatcaninfluencedefenseaffairs.Itshouldbenotedthatthefirstwasauthoredin2017,
whilethesecondin2015.Atthetimeofwritingthisstudy,bothpaperswereunderreview.
24 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

country’s international relations, allied obligations, and requirements stemming
from bilateral defense cooperation agreements.
This multiplicity of administrative entities within MoD creates several inroads for
the MoD to be educated on defense AI and to reflect on how operational needs
shape Greece’s defense AI understanding and approach. In addition, there are
several service-specific inroads via the Communications Division of the Land
Forces, the Submarine Directorate of the Hellenic Navy and C’ Branch (Support) in
coordination with the D’ Branch (Policy and Planning) of Hellenic Air Force Gen-
eral Staff. Service-specific insights gained through these avenues can – at a later
stage – inform the set up and implementation of new R&D projects, thus creating
a positive feedback loop. Although this decentralized and horizontal approach
is beneficial, thought should be given to setting up an overarching single point
of entry within the MoD. As our concluding chapter will argue, such an approach
could also streamline inter-agency interaction and help overcome institutional
inertia.
As argued before, the defense industry is an important economic and policy actor
in relation to defense AI and an essential part of the defense ecosystem. Firms are
engaged in several ways in organizing AI-relevant defense activities:
First, by participating in and, thus, acquiring know-how on such matters
through EU, national and in-house R&D projects. In addition to funding and
know-how, being part of EU RDI consortia offers significant networking and
collaboration opportunities. Indeed, certain private firms have been exhibiting
a steady participation in such projects. These companies can serve as national
“transmission mechanisms” that help diffuse international experience among
national partners and enable them to develop competitive future products and
services.
Second, by participating as a (sub)contractor to the domestic procurement
process. Being part of the production pipeline, Greek firms stand to gain by
becoming trusted partners of the main contractor(s) on similar procurement
contracts globally.
Third, by participating in global tenders. This is due to the in-house innova-
tion and technological prowess. Defense is a highly regulated market. As the
GDDIA is responsible to regularly update the Registry of Manufacturers of
Defense Material,56 the MoD is familiar with each firm’s AI-related capabili-
ties. This is also relevant for the Hellenic Manufacturers of Defense Material
Association (SEKPY), which is the largest national defense cluster with more
than 200 member companies. To further promote the commercial interest of
56 GeneralDirectorateforDefenseInvestmentsandArmaments,“RegistryofManufacturersofDefenseMaterial.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 25

their members, industrial associations should undertake all relevant measures
to regularly map, increase and disseminate the technological capabilities and
skills of its members in relation to such cutting-edge technologies. This syncs
with GGDIA’s objectives and offers a validated set of data to be incorporated
to the country’s (defense) technology and industrial policy. Even though the
MoD maintains an overview of available technological capabilities, such map-
ping would bring added value to the equation. For instance, an industry-led
initiative could help highlight faster the strong innovative elements of the
sector, thereby informing dual-use industrial policy. Also, attracting talent and
locating skills gaps will also be assisted, enabling the provision of additional
training / upskilling opportunities. Lastly, potential bureaucratic obstacles in
the effective and timely monitoring of industrial capabilities by the MoD can
be more effectively bypassed in this way.
Being knowledgeable about the AI capabilities of the domestic defense indus-
trial base is important, as a new AI-focused domestic ecosystem is emerging.
Dedicated platforms such as Elevate Greece and a renewed emphasis on innova-
tion, as set out by the Minister of National Defense Nikos Dendias, and his explicit
aim to set up a dedicated Project Management Office in his upcoming legislation,
will potentially streamline and boost existing good practices, such as the MoD’s
defense-related start-up competitions and Defense Innovation Challenge, thus
providing a comprehensive overview of the national defense AI ecosystem.
Moreover, the new NATO Defense Innovation Accelerator for the North Atlan-
tic (DIANA) is expected to provide Greece’s ecosystem with a further boost.
Operating as a start-up incubator/accelerator and building on existing test
facilities,57 DIANA has enlisted four Greek research centers.58 These will focus on
AI, autonomous technologies, quantum technologies, biotechnology, and novel
materials. In combination with new NATO Innovation Fund, the objective is to
kick-start deep-tech startups, including spin offs, and to bring them into technolo-
gy development projects relevant for NATO. Thus, it is to be hoped that activities
at the four Greek research centers will help create operational, educational, and
entrepreneurial synergies.
57 NATO,“NATOsharpenstechnologicaledgewithinnovationinitiatives.”
58 FoundationforResearchandTechnology-Hellas(inCreteandinPatras),NationalCentreforScientificResearchDemokritos
(inAthens),CentreforResearchandTechnologyHellas(inThessaloniki).
26 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

5 Funding
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 27

Broadly speaking, an increase in R&D investment has been the new norm within
the Greek RDI ecosystem. Despite the existing shortfalls that originate from the
fallout of the economic crisis 2009–2018, political decision-makers agree on the
need and the relevance of increasing Greece’s participation in European RDI
projects and advancing the proficiency of the local workforce as key enablers of
the country’s long-term economic vitality. Or, as the National Defense Industrial
Strategy puts it:
Regardless of the type of research, the participation of the armed forces in
research programs, funded either by the state budget or externally, as a stra-
tegic partner or contractor with significant operational experience, specialized
personnel, infrastructure and means should be encouraged.59
Among other things, this understanding has become the guiding principle to set
up the Hellenic Foundation for Research and Innovation and the Deputy Ministry
of Research and Technology, the creation of Elevate Greece, a state registry on
startups and an informed gateway for potential investors, a large portion of the
2021–2027 Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, the Recovery and Resilience
Facility as well as other national funds being directed towards R&D. A pro-business
climate spurred domestic R&D spending (from 0.68% of GDP in 2011 to 1.45%
of GDP in 2021), which, in turn, helped renew the attention of global investors to
engage in Greece’s high-tech sector.
Consistent with the abovementioned pattern, spending on defense procurement
and R&D has been on the rise as of recently. Historically, Greek Armed Forces
has been a procurer of foreign defense material, but even defense purchases
plummeted during the crisis years. Similarly, R&D activities attracted low interest
from policy officials. As indicated in Figure 2 and Figure 3, both trends have been
reversed. Procurement has spiked since 2020 with the government signaling its
willingness to buy top defense equipment. Overall, awareness of the importance
of RDI as a “vertical” theme of activities has increased. To be part of global value
chains and long-term partners of global firms, domestic companies have realized
they need to engage in knowledge-intensive activities that initiate in-house learn-
ing processes that are critical for product/services development. However, despite
a general uptick in defense RDI spending it is impossible to provide a financial
breakdown of Greece’s spending on defense AI as the respective figures are classi-
fied. Nonetheless, the projects discussed in chapter 3.2 underline the seriousness
with which the country strives to engage on defense AI and expand the armed
forces respective knowledge and capabilities.
59 GeneralDirectorateofDefenseInvestment&Armaments,2017,p.2.
28 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

Figure 2: Greece’s Defense Equipment Procurement Expenditure 2006–2021
in million Euros
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Source:EDA;authors’calculation
Figure 3: Greece’s Defense R&D Expenditure 2006–2021 in million Euros

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Source:EDA;authors’calculation
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 29

6 Fielding and
Operating
Defense AI
30 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

Gauging the true state of fielding and operating defense AI is difficult. Although
Greece participates in AI-relevant R&D activities, the production and operation of
AI systems is not particularly developed. Based on open-source information we
contend that some of the R&D projects discussed in chapter 3 have been turned
into field experiments. In addition, Greece’s purchase of off-the-shelf defense
systems and future defense procurement plans include integrated AI components.
Both lines of effort thus serve as proxy indicators for the primary use cases of
defense AI solutions that are about to be fielded. In this regard we see three focus
areas for the use of defense AI: improving situational awareness and situational
understanding, augmenting existing defense capabilities, and advancing border
security. Defense AI also becomes more important to enhance training as we will
discuss in chapter 7.
6.1 Situational Awareness and
Situational Understanding
A case in point here concerns the streamlining and operationalizing of multiple
data sources for real-time command and control. This has been the focus of the
new Intelligence Fusion Cell (IFC) of the Special Warfare Command, funded by the
Hellenic National Defense General Staff. Populated by personnel from the coun-
try’s security and defense establishment, IFC focuses on providing full-spectrum,
multi-domain operational and strategic intelligence through AI and upgraded
equipment, thus achieving interoperability and enabling intelligence sharing
among multiple authorities within the country as well as NATO allies.60
6.2 Augmenting Existing Capabilities
Like other countries, Greece also strives to advance existing defense capabili-
ties with the use of defense AI. In this regard, the following projects are worth
mentioning:
Press statements issued by the Greek MoD61 during the Parmenion-21 exercise
in suggest that the ARCHYTAS UAV has significantly matured
and is ready for operational demonstration. Transferring this system into the
60 HellenicNationalDefenseGeneralStaff,“ΕγκαίνιατουΚόμβουΠληροφοριώνΔυνάμεωνΕιδικώνΕπιχειρήσεωντης
ΔιοίκησηςΕιδικούΠολέμουτουΓΕΕΘΑ.”
61 MinistryofDefense,“ΠαρουσίαΥΦΕΘΑΝικόλαουΧαρδαλιάστηντελικήφάσητηςΤΑΜΣ‘ΠΑΡΜΕΝΙΩΝ-21’.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 31

portfolio of the Greek Armed Forces will significantly advance intelligence
collection and assessment capabilities.
Also, the Hellenic Air Force, in , procured HERON UAV from Israel
Aerospace Industries62 to conduct intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition
and reconnaissance (ISTAR) missions.63 These missions are built upon the
ability to combine and enhance open-source maritime (as well as other types
of terrain) data with AI-driven insights to quickly identify patterns of vessel
behavior and anomalies. This advances the tipping and cueing capabilities of
the Greek Armed Forces to identify and track large objects such as ships and
calculate mission-relevant risk levels.
The Hellenic Air Force is using IRIS-T missiles.64 These missiles are carried by
F-16BLK 52+ and F-16BLK 52+ADV aircraft. They provide improved accuracy
as the imaging IR seeker head in conjunction with intelligent image process-
ing allows for autonomously identifying the target in order to select the best
aiming point.
Sixth generation SPIKE non-line of sight (NLOS) missiles provide a similar
capability improvement. This advanced electro-optical/infrared missile system
can integrate data through machine-learning techniques with multiple ground,
aviation, or maritime platforms, enabling a highly accurate target image acqui-
sition process even for NLOS targets. Coupled with Orbiter 3 UAV systems as
target designators, SPIKE NLOS systems will increase the operational capabili-
ties of the Greek defense force.65
6.3 Border Security
At the intersection of defense and national security, border security is a strategic
priority for Greece as the prevention of irregular immigration proves most chal-
lenging. Consequently, Greece is emphasizing deterrence through introducing
border surveillance technologies. These systems implement automated informa-
tion management in the field through data collection. Surveillance solutions, which
were field-tested in 2021, consist of a network of long-range cameras and radars
installed along the Greece-Turkey border, transmitting real-time image and data
on border conditions.66
Due to the increased pressure by irregular immigration, the land border with
Turkey in Evros is heavily populated with advanced technological products and
62 IAI,“HeronMulti-RoleMALEUAS.”
63 Nikitas,“UAVHeron:Άριστηηπρώτηεμπειρίαεπιχειρησιακήςαξιοποίησης.”
64 HellenicAirForce,“AIM-2000(IRIS-T)InfraredImagingSeeker–Tail.”
65 Egozi,“AeronauticstodeliverOrbiter3dronestoGreece.”
66 Souliotis,“ΗλεκτρονικήασπίδαστονΕβρο–Σελειτουργίακάμερεςκαιραντάρ.”
32 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

know-how exploited by the Greek police and border control. For example, RE-
ACTION (Real-time ArtifiCial InTellIgence for Borders Surveillance via RPAS data
aNalytics to support Law Enforcement Agencies) is a follow-up of multiple EU
projects (CERETAB, AIDERS and ROBORDER). Operated by the Ministry of Migra-
tion and Asylum and developed by CERTH-ITI, REACTION aims to build a com-
prehensive platform and intelligence architecture for border surveillance by way of
fusing multiple data streams obtained from UAVs through AI (Ministry of Migration
& Asylum, undated). AKRITAS and NESTOR are two further cases of advanced
border surveillance systems in use by Greek security forces. Both aim to provide
pre-frontier situational awareness beyond maritime and land borders for early
warning through thermal imaging and AI-enhanced radio frequency spectrum
analysis technologies.67
Similarly, sea borders are being monitored by the Hellenic Coast Guard making
use of advanced EU projects such as PROMENADE (Artificial intelligence and big
data for improved maritime awareness).68 It focuses on automatic vessel detection,
tracking and behavior analysis based on machine-learning. This multi-sensor and
multi-source environment is being streamlined with AI-data fusion techniques to
operational rooms operated in tandem by defense, police and coast guard forces
to provide for increased situational awareness against state and non-state actors,
among others. A further case in point is ARESIBO, a research project in which the
Naval Cadet School participates in conjunction with the National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens and CERTH. This project is meant to
enhance the current state-of-the-art through technological breakthroughs in
Mobile Augmented Reality and Wearables, Robust and Secure Telecommuni-
cations, Swarm Robotics and Planning of Context-Aware Autonomous Mis-
sions, and Artificial Intelligence (AI), to implement user-friendly tools for border
and coast guards.69
Although these systems mostly concern officials of the Ministry of Citizen Pro-
tection and the Immigration Policy, they do not exclude the participation of the
Ministry of National Defense, since Greek Army personnel is involved in joint
patrols with the police, as press reports covering the immigration situation in Evros
suggest. Obviously, joint patrols offer the armed forces opportunities to gain first-
hand experience in operating non-defense electronic surveillance systems used by
the Greek State. In addition, the External Border Control and Surveillance System,
estimated to cost almost €30M, is a very important project aimed at strengthening
the national ability to control and monitor the external borders and, by extension,
67 Frontex,“Horizonprojects,NESTOR;”Cordis,“aNEnhancedpre-frontierintelligencepicturetoSafeguardTheEurOpeanboR-
ders.
68 Cordis,undatedb.
69 ARESIBO,“ARESIBO-ARforfieldandC2activities.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 33

the security of the country. It concerns the supply of equipment, accompanied by
the necessary software. Media reports also suggest that officers belonging to the
security and defense branches of the Greek state are jointly working in the re-
spective control rooms. This suggests a need for inter-agency information sharing
mechanisms and interoperability requirements. Moreover, the operational deploy-
ment of THORAX (see chapter 3.2) will advance data sharing as defense, police,
and coast guard forces will use a common approach to data dissemination.
34 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

7 Training for
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 35

Training for and with AI has been high on the MoD’s priorities list. On several
public occasions, top civilian and military decision-makers of the MoD have under-
lined the value of AI (as well as quantum technologies, robotics, and autonomous
weapon systems) as a means towards enabling military prowess and turning the
tables on the battlefield. Subsequently, they have emphasized the value of lifelong
learning, continuous education, and training as a means for countering modern
threats and gearing up for the complexity of modern operations.70
Against this background, MoD personnel are actively encouraged to seek rele-
vant educational opportunities. Training for and with AI takes place via simula-
tion-based training, in operational settings, within the military academies, at the
postgraduate level, through conferences as well as other entrepreneurial-minded
activities.
7.1 Simulation-Based Training
A case in point regarding enhanced operational training has been the inauguration
of the Synthetic Training Squadron (Moira Epixeirisiakis Synthetikis Ekpaideysis) on
Andravida Air Base.71 The squadron aims at enhancing interoperability between
Special Forces and air power by way of exploiting the operational characteristics
of its eleven simulators. Making use of Augmented Reality technology coupled
with AI allows for the training squadron to offer for a richer and more realistic
behavior of simulated individuals, teams and platforms in target-rich and complex
environments as well as enabling network-centric operations.
It is noteworthy that Hellenic Air Force personnel has completed the operational
deployment of the simulators, thus underlining the proficiency of the staff in using
and developing advanced technology systems. In addition to the launch of the
Synthetic Training Squadron, the establishment of the Flight Training Center (FTC)
in Kalamata Air Base with its Mission Training Center will upgrade the operational
training of aircrew by way of using new technologies and flight simulators.72 Cut-
ting-edge technologies exploited in FTC will use data-driven tools for optimizing
training delivery built on adaptive training platforms that are powered by AI.
70 HellenicNationalDefenseGeneralStaff,“ΟμιλίατουΑρχηγούΓΕΕΘΑστοΠανεπιστήμιοΠειραιώςμεθέμα“Σύγχρονες
ΑπειλέςκαιΠροκλήσειςΑσφάλειας”.”
71 HellenicAirForce,“ΕγκαίνιατωνΕγκαταστάσεωντηςΜοίραςΕπιχειρησιακήςΣυνθετικήςΕκπαίδευσηςτουΚέντρου
ΑεροπορικήςΤακτικής”;HellenicAirForce,“ΜοίραΕπιχειρησιακήςΣυνθετικήςΕκπαίδευσης.”
72 Mononews,“ElbitSystems:ΠροχωράτοέργοτουΔιεθνούςΚέντρουΕκπαίδευσηςΠιλότωνστηνΚαλαμάτα.”
36 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

7.2 Military Education
Education in military academies, participation in postgraduate programs on new
technologies, the development of educational programs for officer schools, as
well as the organization of conferences currently constitute the main avenues for
the personnel of the Hellenic Armed Force to acquire (new) skills and resources,
including AI.
Training and Education at Military Academies
The Hellenic Army Academy, Hellenic Naval Academy, Hellenic Air Force Academy
provide the basic education of new officers. These academies have incorporated
themes of disruptive and emerging technologies in their educational programs.
In addition to acquiring advanced mathematical skills (as the necessary scientific
prerequisite for AI) in functional analysis, numerical methods, or probability theory
during early semesters, students proceed to advanced AI-relevant topics such as
optimization problems by way if using neural networks, distributed systems, signal
processing and data fusion.73 Respective theses treat the subject placing emphasis
on making use of AI in applied subjects such as detection of noise propagation,
data distribution and border control systems.
Post-Graduate Training and Education
Historically, Greek military officers have been actively seeking postgraduate edu-
cational opportunities both within and outside of their core military competencies
and stages of the operational training necessary for their grade. As such, officers
study at purely civilian university schools and departments obtaining postgraduate
degrees that treat the mathematical aspects of AI (i.e., degrees in Applied Mathe-
matics), seek optimization in real-life problems (e.g., Machine Learning and Deep
Learning in structural engineering, geotechnical engineering, bridge engineering)
as well as its core IT-relevant aspects (in multiple Computer Science departments).
The Hellenic Army has formalized cooperation agreements with Greek Universities
for offering postgraduate opportunities to its personnel. A case in point is the
Hellenic Army Academy’s participation in two Masters of Science with the School
of Production Engineering and Management of Technical University of Crete.74
Entitled “Master of Science in Intelligent Systems Engineering” and “Master of
Science in Operation Research and Decision Making” both treat AI within the
scope of computational intelligence, machine learning, big data analytics, and
73 HellenicAirForceAcademy,UndergraduateStudyProgramme2022–2023;HellenicArmyAcademy,UndergraduateStudy
Programme2022–2023;HellenicNavalAcademy,ΠρόγραμμαΣπουδώνΣΝΔ–ΚατεύθυνσηΜάχιμων–ΈτοςΕισαγωγής
2023–2024.”
74 HellenicArmyAcademy&TechnicalUniversityofCrete,‘MasterinIntelligentSystems’.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 37

data science in relation to real-life operational conditions such as tracking of un-
manned systems. A “Master of Science in Cryptography, Security and Information
Systems” is offered by the Hellenic Army Academy to its army officers. Herein,
analysis and evaluation of symmetric crypto methods using AI (cryptanalysis) as
well as methods for privacy-preserving machine learning and inference are a few
domains of cryptography that are addressed through AI.75 Also, the Hellenic Naval
Academy has recently signed a cooperation agreement with the National Centre
of Scientific Research “Demokritos,” a leading Greek research center, for educa-
tional and R&D purposes in the fields of AI, machine-learning, big data analytics
and new materials.76 Indicative of the increased focus on AI by the academic and
research community has been the recent foundation of the “Archimedes” Center
for Research in Artificial Intelligence, Data Science and Algorithms. Operating as
a Research Unit of the Athena Research Center it can provide research capabilities
on relevant issues.77
The Senior War Colleges of the three military services as well as other educa-
tional institutions Supreme Joint War College (Anotati Diakladiki Sxoli Polemou
– ADISPO) and National Defense College (Sxoli Ethnikis Amynas - SETHA) provide
extra avenues to educate active-duty senior officers. These educational institutions
provide courses that cover a wide range of topics related to national defense and
security, military strategy in conjunction with defense AI and new technologies.
An equally important avenue for attaining educational experience is through
NATO’s postgraduate opportunities offered to Greek officers. While there is no
open-source data on the number of the officers attending such courses nor the
exact subject(s) of the offered post-graduate courses, a simple digital search, for
example, in Monterey’s Postgraduate School indicates that AI has been introduced
as a key subject.78 In the EU context, AI-relevant educational opportunities should
be explored in the context of the European Security and Defence College (ESDC).
Extracurricular Training and Education
In relation to extracurricular activities, one case has been the Common Module on
Unmanned Aerial Systems provided by the Hellenic Air Force Academy in collab-
oration with the ESDC.79 Therein, the technological principles of Unmanned Aerial
Systems and their applications, specifications and classification of different catego-
ries, types and sensors were presented.
75 HellenicArmyAcademy,PostgraduateStudyProgramme.
76 HellenicNavalAcademy,“ΥπογραφήΠρωτοκόλλουΣυνεργασίαςμεταξύΣχολήςΝαυτικώνΔοκίμωνκαιΕΚΕΦΕ
“Δημόκριτος”.”
77 ATHENAResearchCenter,“ARCHIMEDESUnit.”
78 NavalPostgraduateSchool,AIforMilitaryUseCertificate;America’sNavy,“ArtificialIntelligenceSummitatNPSAccelerates
CriticalCapabilities.”
79 HellenicAirForceAcademy,CommonModuleonUnmannedAerialSystems.
38 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

7.3 Conferences
Educational activities in the form of conferences on topics related to defense AI
have been taking place. For example, the Hellenic Air Force has been organizing
its Annual Air Power Conference, inter alia, with the goal to discuss early tech-
nology adoption to preserve operational advantage. The topic of AI has received
attention in multiple conferences.80 In a special section entitled “Artificial Intelli-
gence and Man in the Loop: Opportunities - Capabilities - Prospect” the panel
discussed how AI can influence developments in military conflicts and delved into
relevant topics such as Machine Learning Methods on Noisy and Sparse Data.
An additional conference entitled “Technology – Innovation, Defense and Strat-
egy,” aimed at senior officers, was organized in 2023 by the National Defense
College. The purpose was to broaden the knowledge of the participants with an
emphasis on the impact of innovation and the application of new technologies in
the armed forces. The conference also addressed the use of AI in defense.81 The
topic was presented by researchers at the National Centre of Scientific Research
“Demokritos” further indicating the formal and informal links between the domes-
tic research ecosystem and armed forces.
7.4 Entrepreneurial-minded training activities
In 2022, the MoD conducted the Defense Innovation Challenge focusing on
situational awareness. The overall goal was to stimulate innovative in-house ideas
that can help transform the operational horizon.82 AI-related projects that sought
to identify submarines (Submarine Identification with Artificial Intelligence) were
shortlisted for future proofing.83 In addition, the challenge made it clear that of-
ficers and their innovative ideas constitute a valuable source that the MoD should
systematically tap into to enhance ongoing force transformation activities.
80 HellenicAirForce,“8oΣυνέδριοΑεροπορικήςΙσχύος.”
81 HellenicNationalDefenseGeneralStaff,“ΗμερίδαμεΘέμα“Τεχνολογία–Καινοτομία,ΆμυνακαιΣτρατηγική”.”
82 GeneralDirectorateforDefenseInvestmentsandArmaments;“1stCompetitionofInnovationandTechnologyoftheMinistryof
NationalDefence.”
83 AssociationofGraduatesofHellenicAirForceTechnicalNCOAcademy,“ΥΠΕΘΑ:1οςΔιαγωνισμόςΚαινοτομίαςκαι
Τεχνολογίας.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 39

8 Conclusion
40 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

This report shows that Greek defense policy officials have actively taken steps to
harness the potential of the technological and operational “window of opportu-
nity” that AI presents. Several factors – such as long-standing bilateral problems
with neighboring countries, looming tactical and operational gaps coupled with
technological obsolescence due to the decade-long economic default – have
prompted the MoD to actively seek industrial and defense materiel upgrades. In
combination with the strive to revitalize the dormant defense industry and cap-
italize upon the highly educated military personnel, these drivers have pushed
the defense establishment towards riding the current scientific and technological
wave. Despite notable progress, several long-term challenges remain to be tack-
led to seize AI’s potential for the Greek military ecosystem.
First and foremost, Greek defense planners and officers should remain alert of the
scientific breakthroughs in the field. Operating a “black box” where algorithms
and key optimization techniques remain unknown to military engineers, data
scientists, and mathematicians is problematic for sustaining long-term operational
advantages. Enhanced cooperation with the science establishment, focused bib-
liometric and technometric analysis and network and centrality analysis to locate
knowledge-rich areas of expertise should be the norm.
Second, participating in collaborative RDI projects is an important avenue to
access top-notch know-how and accumulate experience. Importantly, current
and future operational requirements should systematically guide the selection of
RDI projects the Greek Armed Forces want to participate in. While such a future
oriented, technology-based, tactical list is currently not publicly available, the
aforementioned actions indicate a conscientious approach in both closing existing
operational gaps and leveraging technologies to leapfrog. This pattern should
continue, and such know-how should start being transposed into the strategic and
tactical planning of the country’s defense forces and the production lines of Greek
firms.
Third, procuring cutting-edge defense material, among others, entails a signifi-
cant learning curve for military personnel. Thus, the MoD should move swiftly to
become a proficient end user in current and future R&D projects. To the extent
possible, Greek defense procurement officials should actively negotiate with
foreign contractors specific conditions to ensure that Greek Armed Forces are
granted “enhanced” user rights related to new defense equipment. In addition,
domestic defense contractors should be given access to proprietary know-how
in case they engage with international partners in co-production agreements.
Enabling an operational relationship with domestic civilian universities and the
country’s highly performant science diaspora is yet another channel to gather
cutting-edge scientific and technological information on AI. This will also advance
Greece’s understanding related to increasing vulnerabilities that are bound to
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 41

appear to interconnected systems – ranging from cyber-attacks, manipulated and
corrupt data as well as data transmission flows.
Fourth, the MoD should adopt a more systemic view to monitor defense AI-rel-
evant policy discussions in NATO, European agencies, and in other bilateral and
multilateral formats. Greek military delegates should “tag” and send AI-related in-
formation to a single point within the ministry for the latter to keep track of all con-
current activities. Indeed, this international aspect of accumulating AI knowledge
is important. For example, NATO’s new Data and Artificial Intelligence Review
Board (DARB) is a key forum to exchange best practices and views on AI.84 Greece
will be appointing a representative to DARB and should thus use this forum to
systematically gather information on international defense AI developments. The
same holds true for European institutions like EDA, the European Space Agency
(ESA) and the European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) that
have begun incorporating AI as key missions within their scope.85
Finally, while multiple military units engage in AI for a number of both narrow and/
or wider objectives, establishing a new function similar to the US DoD’s Chief
Digital and Artificial Intelligence Office should be explored. A single administrative
point would help to establish and implement a unified defense AI vision in line
with the wider national ambition, collect and document all relevant information
in a structured manner and – potentially – recognize and streamline interagency
overlap and push back organizational inertia and institutional turf war. Further,
this office can push towards greater collaboration with domestic academic and
research institutions as well as international partners.
In addition to AI being a scientific, technological, and operational challenge, first
and foremost it presents a learning challenge. This report has discussed the Greek
defense establishment’s ability to ‘learning to learn’. While much remains to be
done, there is reason to be optimistic.
84 NATO,NATO’sDataandArtificialIntelligenceReviewBoard.
85 Seerespectively:EuropeanSpaceAgency,“Artificialintelligenceinspace”;ArtificialIntelligenceApplications&Innovations,
“The2ndWorkshoponDefenseApplicationsofAI(DAAI)”;ENISA,“Ad-HocWorkingGrouponArtificialIntelligenceCybersecurity.”
42 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

Literature
America’sNavy,“ArtificialIntelligenceSummitat aerochima-hcuav-rx-1-apo-tin-elliniki-space-sonic-me-ile-
NPSAcceleratesCriticalCapabilities,”19January ktronika-tis-ide(lastaccessed9October2023).
2023,
Article/3272831/artificial-intelligence-summit-at-nps-ac- DefenceRedefined,“Greecein5thplaceforfunding
celerates-critical-capabilities/(lastaccessed9October fromEuropeanDefenceFund,”27July2022,https://
2023). defenceredefined.com.cy/edf-greece-in-5th-place-for-
funding-from-european-defence-fund/(lastaccessed9
ARESIBO,“ARESIBO-ARforfieldandC2activities,” October2023).
undated,
2023). DefenceReview,“ΤοελληνικόUCAVμετην
ονομασία“Γρύπας”ανακοίνωσαναπόκοινού
ArtificialIntelligenceApplications&Innovations, ταΥπουργείαΕθνικήςΆμυναςκαιΥπουργείο
“The2ndWorkshoponDefenseApplicationsofAI Οικονομικών,”12January2023,
(DAAI),”undated, gr/new-hellenic-ucav-grypas/(lastaccessed9October
daai/(lastaccessed9October2023). 2023).
AssociationofGraduatesofHellenicAirForce DELAER,“TheDELAERconcept,”DELAERproject
TechnicalNCOAcademy,“ΥΠΕΘΑ:1οςΔιαγωνισμός website,undated,
ΚαινοτομίαςκαιΤεχνολογίας,”27May2022, laer-concept/(lastaccessed9October2023).
 e-Amyna,“Συμβάσεις-συμφωνίεςΥΠΕΘΑ/
onismos-kainotomias-kai-texnologias(lastaccessed9 ΓΔΑΕΕ2019–2023,”Listofmajordefensecontracts
October2023). awardedintheperiod2019–2023,compiledby
e-Amyna,16May2023,
ATHENAResearchCenter,“ARCHIMEDESUnit,” status/1658400669752074241?ref_src=twsrc%5Etf-
undated, w%7Ctwcamp%5Eembeddedtimeline%7Ctwterm%5E-
accessed9October2023). screen-name%3Ae_amyna%7Ctwcon%5Es1(last
accessed9October2023).
Cordis,“aNEnhancedpre-frontierintelligence
picturetoSafeguardTheEurOpeanboRders-Project Egozi,Arie,“AeronauticstodeliverOrbiter3drones
Description,”undated, toGreece,”DefenceIndustryEurope,17April2023,
id/101021851(lastaccessed9October2023). 
er-3-drones-to-greece/(lastaccessed9October2023).
Cordis,“imPROvedMaritimeawarENessbymeans
ofAIandBDmEthods-ProjectDescription,”undated, ElevateGreece,“RegisteredStartupDatabase,”
 undated,
accessed9October2023). (lastaccessed9October2023).
DefenceIndustryEurope,“PESCOmaritimemine EllinikikosStratos,“Προγράμματαανάπτυξης
countermeasuresprojecttestedinmultinational ελληνικώνUAV,”Ellinikos-Stratos.com,undated,https://
exercise,”28November2022, 
eu/pesco-maritime-mine-counter-measures-project-test- accessed9October2023).
ed-in-multinational-exercise/(lastaccessed9October
2023). ENISA,“Ad-HocWorkingGrouponArtificialIntel-
ligenceCybersecurity,”undated,
DefencePoint,“ΑερόχημαHCUAVRX-1απότην europa.eu/topics/iot-and-smart-infrastructures/artifi-
ελληνικήεταιρίαSpaceSonicμεηλεκτρονικάIDE,” cial_intelligence/ad-hoc-working-group(lastaccessed9
23March2019, October2023).
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 43

EuropeanCommission,“PRIVILEDGE,”Factsheet,29 highlightsolutions,ideasandapplicationsinthefield
June2021, ofdefence,”15May2021,
eu/priviledge_en(lastaccessed9October2023). en/1st-competition-of-innovation-and-technology-of-the-
ministry-of-national-defence-to-highlight-solutions-ideas-
EuropeanCommission,“USSPS,”30June2021, and-applications-in-the-field-of-defence/(lastaccessed
 9October2023).
(lastaccessed9October2023).
GeneralDirectorateforDefenseInvestmentsand
EuropeanCommission,“MIRICLE,”Factsheet,30 Armaments,“NationalDefenceIndustrialStrategy,”
June2021, March2017,
eu/miricle_en(lastaccessed9October2023). uploads/2021/09/NDIS-ENGLISH.pdf(lastaccessed9
October2023).
EuropeanCommission,“DECISMAR,”Factsheet,15
June2020, Hardalias,Nikos,“ΟμιλίαΥΦΕΘΑΝικόλαου
corner/detail/en/fs_20_1078(lastaccessed9October ΧαρδαλιάστηνΗμερίδα“Τεχνολογία-Καινοτομία,Άμυνα
2023). &Στρατηγική”τηςΣχολήςΕθνικήςΆμυνας,”Ministry
ofNationalDefence,16February2023,
EuropeanCommission,“LOTUS,”Factsheet,15June mod.mil.gr/omilia-yfetha-nikolaoy-chardalia-stin-imeri-
2020, da-technologia-kainotomia-amyna-amp/(lastaccessed
detail/en/fs_20_1086(lastaccessed9October2023). 9October2023).
EuropeanCommission,“PANDORA,”Factsheet,15 Hardalias,Nikos,“ΟμιλίαΥΦΕΘΑΝικόλαου
June2020, Χαρδαλιάστηνημερίδα“ΣυνδέονταςτηνΈρευναμετην
corner/detail/en/fs_20_1089(lastaccessed9October ΑμυντικήΒιομηχανία”,”MinistryofNationalDefence,9
2023). May2023.
EuropeanDefenceFund,“FaRADAI,”Factsheet,2022, 
 laoy-chardalia-stin-imerida-syndeontas-tin-ereyna-tin/
files/2022-07/Factsheet_EDF21_FaRADAI_0.pdf(last (lastaccessed9October2023).
accessed9October2023).
HellenicAirForce,“ΕγκαίνιατωνΕγκαταστάσεων
EuropeanDefenceFund,“dTHOR,”Factsheet,2022, τηςΜοίραςΕπιχειρησιακήςΣυνθετικήςΕκπαίδευσης
 τουΚέντρουΑεροπορικήςΤακτικής,”12December
uploads/2023/08/dTHOR.pdf(lastaccessed9October 2022,
2023).

EuropeanSpaceAgency,“Artificialintelligencein seon-tis-moiras-epicheirisiakis-synthetikis-ekpaideysis/
space,”2023, (lastaccessed9October2023).
Preparing_for_the_Future/Discovery_and_Preparation/
Artificial_intelligence_in_space(lastaccessed9October HellenicAirForce,“PegasusII,”undated,https://
2023). 
October2023).
FRONTEX,“Horizonprojects,NESTOR,”3September
2022, HellenicAirForce,“AIM-2000(IRIS-T)Infrared
horizon-projects/nestor-MDU4gJ(lastaccessed9 ImagingSeeker–Tail,”undated,
October2023). equipment/aim-2000-iris-t-infrared-imaging-seeker-tail/
(lastaccessed9October2023).
GeneralDirectorateforDefenseInvestmentsand
Armaments,“RegistryofManufacturersofDefense HellenicAirForce,“ΜοίραΕπιχειρησιακής
Material,”18May2023, ΣυνθετικήςΕκπαίδευσης,”undated,
registry-of-manufacturers-of-defense-material/(last structure/ata/keat/squadrons-schools/moira-epicheiri-
accessed9October2023). siakis-synthetikis-ekpaideysis/(lastaccessed9October
2023).
GeneralDirectorateforDefenseInvestments
andArmaments,“1stCompetitionofInnovationand
TechnologyoftheMinistryofNationalDefenceto
44 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

HellenicAirForce,“8oΣυνέδριοΑεροπορικής το2030,ΣΑΕ2030,”July2015,
Ισχύος,”undated, gr/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/sae2030.pdf(last
(lastaccessed9October2023). accessed9October2023).
HellenicAirForceAcademy,UndergraduateStudy HellenicNavalAcademy,“ΥπογραφήΠρωτοκόλλου
Programme2022–2023,February2023, ΣυνεργασίαςμεταξύΣχολήςΝαυτικώνΔοκίμωνκαι
google.com/file/d/1vCAa5yNM3aGdbqjAESe9aHa- ΕΚΕΦΕ“Δημόκριτος”,”4April2023,
kIAP6Tbas/view(lastaccessed9October2023). gr/el/activities/recent-activities/item/20230421b(last
accessed9October2023).
HellenicAirForceAcademy,“CommonModuleon
UnmannedAerialSystems(UASs)atHellenicAirForce HellenicNavalAcademy,“ΠρόγραμμαΣπουδώνΣΝΔ
Academy(HAFA),”4July2023, –ΚατεύθυνσηΜάχιμων–ΈτοςΕισαγωγής2023–2024,”
en/2023/04/common-module-on-unmanned-aerial-sys- 2023,
tems-uass-at-hellenic-air-force-academy-hafa-2/(last programma_spoudon/max_2023_2024.pdf(lastac-
accessed9October2023). cessed9October2023).
HellenicArmyAcademy,UndergraduateStudy HellenicRepublic,“Ενημερωτικόσημείωμαγιατη
Programme2022–2023,October2022, συνεδρίασητηςΣυμβουλευτικήςΕπιτροπήςγιατην
gr/odigos-proptychiakon-spoydon/(lastaccessed9 ΤεχνητήΝοημοσύνηυπότονΠρωθυπουργόΚυριάκο
October2023). Μητσοτάκη,”25October2023,
ister.gr/2023/10/25/32870(lastaccessed27October
HellenicArmyAcademy,PostgraduateStudyPro- 2023).
gramme,undated,
IAI,“HeronMulti-RoleMALEUAS,”
 co.il/p/heron(lastaccessed9October2023).
accessed9October2023).
IntracomDefense,“LOTUS:NextGenerationTactical
HellenicArmyAcademy&TechnicalUniversityof UAVfromINTRACOMDEFENSEforISRmissions,”30
Crete,‘MasterinIntelligentSystems’,undated,http:// November2020,
 lotus-next-generation-tactical-uav-from-intracom-de-
fensefor-isr-missions/(lastaccessed9October2023).
HellenicNationalDefenceGeneralStaff,“Ημερίδα
μεΘέμα“Τεχνολογία–Καινοτομία,Άμυνακαι Kikiras,Panagiotis,InterviewtoGiannis
Στρατηγική”,”17February2023, Mouratidis,Netweek,29June2017,
gr/imerida-me-thema-technologia-kainotomia-amy- gr/%CF%80%CE%B1%CE%BD%CE%B1%CE%B3%CE%B9%
na-kai-stratigiki/(lastaccessed9October2023). CF%8E%CF%84%CE%B7%CF%82-%CE%BA%CE%AF%CE%
BA%CE%B9%CF%81%CE%B1%CF%82-%CE%B5%CF%80%
HellenicNationalDefenceGeneralStaff,“Ομιλίατου CE%B9%CE%BA%CE%B5%CF%86%CE%B1%CE%BB%CE%
ΑρχηγούΓΕΕΘΑστοΠανεπιστήμιοΠειραιώςμεθέμα AE%CF%82-%CF%84%CE%B7%CF%82-%CE%BC%CE%BF/
“ΣύγχρονεςΑπειλέςκαιΠροκλήσειςΑσφάλειας”,”5 (lastaccessed9October2023).
May2022,
MBDA,“MBDAawardedtwocontractsbyGreecefor
 navalandaircraftweaponry,”PressRelease,28March
panepistimio-peiraios-me-thema-sygchrones-apeiles-kai- 2022,
prokliseis-asfaleias/(lastaccessed9October2023). mbda-awarded-two-contracts-by-greece-for-naval-and-
aircraft-weaponry/(lastaccessed9October2023).
HellenicNationalDefenceGeneralStaff,“Εγκαίνια
τουΚόμβουΠληροφοριώνΔυνάμεωνΕιδικών MBDA,“MBDAtoboostcooperationwithGreek
ΕπιχειρήσεωντηςΔιοίκησηςΕιδικούΠολέμουτου Defenceindustry,”PressRelease,10May2023,https://
ΓΕΕΘΑ,”19September2022, newsroom.mbda-systems.com/mbda-cooperates-close-
inia-toy-komvoy-pliroforion-dynameon-eidikon-epicheiri- ly-with-greek-defence-industry/(lastaccessed9October
seon-tis-dioikisis-eidikoy-polemoy-toy-geetha/(last 2023).
accessed9October2023).
MinistryofDevelopment&Investments,“Μνημόνιο
HellenicNationalDefenceGeneralStaff, συνεργασίαςμεταξύτωνΥπουργείωνΑνάπτυξης&
“ΣτρατηγικήΑνάλυσηΕξελίξεωνγιατηνΕλλάδαμετά
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 45

ΕπενδύσεωνκαιΕθνικήςΆμυναςγιατηνυλοποίηση implementationoftherelevantinteroperabilitylegal
τουπρογράμματος‘ΘΩΡΑΞ–THORAX’,”2October2020, framework,”undated,
 
C%CE%BD%CE%B7%CE%BC%CF%8C%CE%B- accessed9October2023).
D%CE%B9%CE%BF-%CF%83%CF%85%CE%BD%CE%B5%
CF%81%CE%B3%CE%B1%CF%83%CE%AF%CE%B1%CF% Mitsotakis,Kyriakos,“ΗΕλλάδατο2040,μιαχώρα
82-%CE%BC%CE%B5%CF%84%CE%B1%CE%BE%CF%8D- στηνπρώτηγραμμήτηςΕυρώπης,”Βουλή-Επίτου
%CF%84%CF%89%CE%BD-%CF%85%CF%80%CE%B- Περιστηλίου,12April2023,pp.4–5,
F%CF%85/(lastaccessed9October2023). lenicparliament.gr/userfiles/ebooks/periodiko_t061/4/
index.html(lastaccessed9October2023).
MinistryofDefense,“ΑπάντησηΥΕΘΑΝικόλαου
ΠαναγιωτόπουλουσεερώτησηΚοινοβουλευτικού Mononews,“ElbitSystems:Προχωράτοέργο
Ελέγχου(υπ.Αριθμ.1901/24–01–2023)μεθέμα: τουΔιεθνούςΚέντρουΕκπαίδευσηςΠιλότωνστην
“Προβληματισμοίσχετικάμετηνυλοποίησητου Καλαμάτα,”21October2022,
πολύ-προβεβλημμένουπρογράμματοςανάπτυξηςUAV gr/business/elbit-systems-prochora-to-ergo-tou-dieth-
Αρχύτας”,”21February2023, nous-kentrou-ekpedefsis-piloton-stin-kalamata(last
apantisi-yetha-nikolaoy-panagiotopoyloy-se-erotisi-koi- accessed9October2023).
novoyleytikoy-elegchoy-yp-arithm-313/(lastaccessed9
October2023). NATO,“NATOsharpenstechnologicaledgewith
innovationinitiatives,”7April2022,
MinistryofDefense,“ΣυμμετοχήΥΕΘΑΝικόλαου int/cps/en/natohq/news_194587.htm(lastaccessed9
ΠαναγιωτόπουλουστηΣύνοδοΥπουργώνΑμύνηςτου October2023).
ΝΑΤΟστιςΒρυξέλλες(16–17Φεβ22),”17February
2022, ΝΑΤΟ,“NATO’sDataandArtificialIntelligence
laoy-panagiotopoyloy-sti-synodo-ypoyrgon-amynis-na- ReviewBoard:Summaryoftheestablishmentofthe
to-stis/(lastaccessed9October2023). Board,”13October2022,
en/natohq/official_texts_208374.htm(lastaccessed9
MinistryofDefense,“ΠαρουσίαΥΦΕΘΑΝικόλαου October2023).
ΧαρδαλιάστηντελικήφάσητηςΤΑΜΣ‘ΠΑΡΜΕΝΙΩΝ-21’
στηΧίο–ΕπίσκεψησεΕΦ‘Οινουσσών’,‘Παναγιάς’και NavalPostgraduateSchool,“AIforMilitaryUse
‘ΑγίαςΕλένης’,”30September2021, Certificate,”undated,
mil.gr/paroysia-yfetha-nikolaoy-chardalia-stin-teliki-fasi- tificate(lastaccessed9October2023).
tis-tams-parmenion/(lastaccessed9October2023).
NAVMAT,“ΑΙ-poweredNAVMATprototypeatICEAF
MinistryofDefense,“ΣυμμετοχήΥΕΘΑκ.Νίκου VII,”23June2023,
ΠαναγιωτόπουλουστηνΆτυπηΣύνοδοΥπουργών ered-navmat-prototype-iceaf-vii-june-23(lastaccessed9
ΆμυναςτηςΕ.Ε.στοΕλσίνκι,”29August2019,https:// October2023).

otopoyloy-stin-atypi-synodo-ypoyrgon-amynas/(last Nedos,Vassilis,“‘Thorax’κατάυβριδικώναπειλών
accessed9October2023). –ΝέοσύστημαστοΓΕΕΘΑ,”ΗΚαθημερινή,18
Φεβρουαρίου2022,
MinistryofDefense,“DefenceInnovationChallenge,” tics/561722623/thorax-kata-yvridikon-apeilon-neo-systi-
undated, ma-sto-geetha/(lastaccessed9October2023).
 Nikitas,Giannis,“ΤοελληνικόUAV‘ΑΡΧΥΤΑΣ’
camp/en/(lastaccessed9October2023). τηςEFAVENTURES:Πολλαπλασιαστήςισχύοςτων
ΕλληνικώνΕνόπλωνΔυνάμεων,”DefenceReview,10
MinistryofDigitalGovernance,“DigitalTransforma- May2022,
tionBible2020–2025,”June2021, chytas-tis-efa-ventures-pollapl/(lastaccessed9October
egy.gov.gr/en/vivlos_pdf?page=158(lastaccessed9 2023).
October2023).
Nikitas,Giannis,“UAVHeron:Άριστηηπρώτη
MinistryofMigration&Asylum,“Reaction-Call: εμπειρίαεπιχειρησιακήςαξιοποίησηςμεεπίκεντροτη
BMVI/2021/SA/1.5.4:Supporttocomplywiththe διακλαδικότηταστηνΤΑΜΣ‘ΠΑΡΜΕΝΙΩΝ2021’,”De-
fenceReview,8October2021,
46 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

hellenic-armed-forces-operational-experience-uav-heron/
(lastaccessed9October2023).
PESCO,“CyberThreatsandIncidentResponseInfor-
mationSharingPlatform(CTIRISP),”undated,https://

cident-response-information-sharing-platform/(last
accessed9October2023).
PESCO,“Maritime(Semi-)AutonomousSystemsfor
MineCountermeasures(MASMCM),undated,https://

tonomous-systems-for-mine-countermeasures/(last
accessed9October2023).
PESCO,“Geo-MeteorologicalandOceanographic
(GEOMETOC)SupportCoordinationElement(GMSCE),”
undated,
teorological-and-oceanographic-geometoc-support-co-
ordination-element-gmsce/(lastaccessed9October
2023).
PESCO,“Harbour&MaritimeSurveillanceandProtec-
tion(HARMSPRO),undated,
eu/project/harbour-and-maritime-surveillance-and-pro-
tection/(lastaccessed9October2023).
Sachini,Evi,Malliou,Nena,Chrysomallidis,Charalam-
bos,Karampekios,Nikos,Sioumalas-Christodoulou,
Konstantinos,Christopoulos,Stefanos,Εντοπισμόςκαι
ανάλυσητωνελληνικώνεπιστημονικώνδημοσιεύσεων
στοντομέατηςΤεχνητήςΝοημοσύνηςμετεχνικές
ΜηχανικήςΜάθησης.(Athens:NationalCenterof
Documentation,2022),
tions/633(lastaccessed9October2023).
Souliotis,Giannis,“ΗλεκτρονικήασπίδαστονΕβρο
–Σελειτουργίακάμερεςκαιραντάρ,”ΗΚαθημερινή,
22October2021,
ty/561551092/ilektroniki-aspida-ston-evro-se-leitoy-
rgia-kameres-kai-rantar/(lastaccessed9October2023).
VanRoy,Vincent,Rossetti,Fiammeta,Perset,Karine,
Galindo-Romero,Laura,AIWatch-NationalStrategies
onArtificialIntelligence:AEuropeanperspective
(Luxemburg:PublicationsOfficeoftheEuropeanUnion,
2021).
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 47

48 HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL

Defense AI Observatory Studies
23|19 Nikolaos Karampekios, Konstantinos Sakalis, and Iraklis Oikonomou, Harnessing the
Potential. Defense AI in Greece
23|18 Andreas Graae, Servers Before Tanks? Defence AI in Denmark
23|17 Kévin Martin and Lucie Liversain, A Winding Road Before Scaling-Up? Defense AI in
France
23|16 Sami O. Järvinen, Cautious Data-Driven Evolution. Defence AI in Finland
23|15 Inbar Dolinko and Liran Antebi, Embracing the Organized Mess. Defense AI in Israel
23|14 Alastair Finlan, A Fertile Soil for AI? Defense AI in Sweden
23|13 John Lee, “Overtaking on the Curve?” Defense AI in China
23|12 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, and Joseph Verbovszky, Master and Servant. Defense
AI in Germany
23|11 Katarzyna Zysk, High Hopes Amid Hard Realities. Defense AI in Russia
23|10 Yvonne Hofstetter and Joseph Verbovzsky, How AI Learns the Bundeswehr’s
“Innere Führung.” Value-Based Engineering with IEEE7000™-2021
23|09 Robert C Engen, When the Teeth Eat the Tail: A Review of Canada’s Defence Artificial
Intelligence
23|08 Çağlar Kurç, Enabling Technology of Future Warfare. Defense AI in Turkey
23|07 Lauren A. Kahn, Risky Incrementalism. Defense AI in the United States
22|06 Yvonne Hofstetter, Wie KI Innere Führung lernt. Wertbasierte Technik mit
IEEE7000™-2021
22|05 Andrea Gilli, Mauro Gilli, and Ivan Zaccagnini, Exploring the Benefits of a New Force
Enabler: Defense AI in Italy
22|04 Kenneth Payne, Bright Prospects – Big Challenges. Defense AI in the United
Kingdom
22|03 Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber, Armin Brandstetter, and Gary S. Schaal, Free
Jazz on the Battlefield. How GhostPlay’s AI Approach Enhances Air Defense
22|02 Peter Layton, Evolution not Revolution. Australia’s Defence AI Pathway
21|01 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, Joseph Verbovszky, Beware the Hype. What Military
Conflicts in Ukraine, Syria, Libya, and Nagorno-Karabakh (Don’t) Tell Us About the
Future of War