A Winding Road
Before Scaling-Up?
Defense AI in France
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Kévin Martin and Lucie Liversain
DAIO Study 23|17

About the Defense AI Observatory
The Defense AI Observatory (DAIO) at the Helmut Schmidt University in Hamburg
monitors and analyzes the use of artificial intelligence by armed forces. DAIO comprises
three interrelated work streams:
Culture, concept development, and organizational transformation in the context of
military innovation
Current and future conflict pictures, conflict dynamics, and operational experience,
especially related to the use of emerging technologies
Defense industrial dynamics with a particular focus on the impact of emerging
technologies on the nature and character of techno-industrial ecosystems
DAIO is an integral element of GhostPlay, a capability and technology development
project for concept-driven and AI-enhanced defense decision-making in support of fast-
paced defense operations. GhostPlay is funded by the Center for Digital and Technology
Research of the German Bundeswehr (dtec.bw). dtec.bw is funded by the European Union
– NextGenerationEU.
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von

A Winding Road
Before Scaling-Up?
Defence AI in France
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Kévin Martin and Lucie Liversain
DAIO Study 23|17

About the Authors
Kévin Martin has been a research fellow at the Fondation pour la Recherche Stratégique
since 2012 specializing in the analysis of industrial strategies and defense industrial and
technological bases (DITBs). He won the French Air Force’s René Mouchotte prize in 2013.
His research focuses on the French defense industry, the impact of new digital technologies
on the defense industrial and technology base (organization, players, changing landscape,
etc.), and the impact of emerging defense exporters such as South Korea, Turkey, Brazil,
and Singapore on the international arms market. He is also responsible for the “French
defense industries” and “Emerging DTIB (Defense Technological and Industrial Base)”
modules in the Paris Sorbonne Continuing Education Program (FCPS) Defense Industries
and Markets. His X/Twitter account is @kmartin_FRS.
Lucie Liversain is a PhD student at Ecole Polytechnique’s Management Research Center (I³-
CRG*). Her work in collaboration with the Interdisciplinary Center of Defense and Security
Studies (CIEDS) has led her to delve into the heart of tech ventures looking to scale up their
dual use technology in the defense sector. She is currently investigating how deep tech
ventures make the tricky transition from exploration to profitable and full-scale exploitation
of their technology, based on case studies, including those in the defense sector. Her X/
Twitter account is @LLiversain.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr. Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, and Joseph Verbovszky for their
valuable comments and suggestions. The authors are solely responsible for any errors in
fact, analysis, or omission.
Design
Almasy Information Design Thinking
Imprint
Kévin Martin and Lucie Liversain, A Winding Road Before Scaling-Up? Defense AI in France.
DAIO Study 23/17 (Hamburg: Defense AI Observatory, 2023)
Defense AI Observatory | Chair of Political Theory | Helmut Schmidt University
Holstenhofweg 85 | 22043 Hamburg | T +49 40 6541 2776
 | contact@defenseai.eu | @Defense_AIO
ISSN (online): 2749-5337
ISSN (print): 2749-5345
4 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

Content
1 Summary ..................................................................................................................... 6
2 Thinking about Defense AI . ...................................................................................... 8
2.1 A National Strategic Vision Including Defense ..............................................................9
2.2 The Challenges of Defense AI ....................................................................................10
3 Developing Defense AI. ........................................................................................... 15
3.3 France’s AI Innovation Base ......................................................................................16
3.4 Adaptation of France’s Traditional Defense Players .....................................................19
3.5 Defense AI R&D Strategy ...........................................................................................23
3.6 Priority Application Areas ..........................................................................................23
3.7 ARTEMIS.IA: Ambition and Reality of Building a Defense AI Ecosystem ......................25
4 Organizing Defense AI ............................................................................................. 28
4.1 Defense AI Governance .............................................................................................29
4.2 Data Governance and Data Sharing: A Policy Yet to be Confirmed .............................29
5 Funding Defense AI ................................................................................................. 32
6 Fielding and Operating Defense AI. ....................................................................... 35
6.1 A Wide Range of Initiatives .......................................................................................36
6.2 Development through Experimentation: A New Approach to Deploy AI Solutions ......38
7 Training for Defense AI ............................................................................................ 42
8 Conclusion. ................................................................................................................ 44
Literature ...................................................................................................................... 47
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 5

1 Summary
The French Armed Forces treat artificial intelligence (AI) as a disruptive innova-
tion. AI influences belligerents’ behavior by accelerating operational pace across
multiple domains, thereby creating a combat environment of several simultaneous
confrontations. Since the mid-2010s, AI development is progressing more rapidly
thanks to advances in deep neural networks, distributed computing, and increased
computing capacity.
France recognized the importance of AI in 2017 when it launched a national
strategy to become a world leader in AI. The French Ministry of the Armed Forces
published the strategy “AI in service of defense” in 2019, outlining ethical frame-
works, infrastructure development, research priorities, and international collabo-
ration. This strategy aimed to create trustworthy AI for defense applications while
also embracing dual-use advances on AI in the commercial sector.
The first phase of this strategy saw the construction of a sovereign AI ecosystem
focused on research and innovation. This ecosystem established connections
between the French Ministry of the Armed Forces, research institutions (INRIA,
CEA, CNRS, etc.), traditional defense prime contractors (Thales, Airbus, Dassault
Aviation, Safran, MBDA, Naval Group, NExter/KNDS) and non-traditional defense
contractors such AI ventures and SMEs. The second phase, launched in 2022,
currently focuses on accelerating AI’s integration into key application areas such as
decision support, collaborative combat, cybersecurity, logistics, intelligence, and
robotics.
France’s major procurement efforts, AI studies and research (such as the
ARTEMES.IA Program) are earmarked with an average budget of €100M/year.
These initiatives seek to harness AI for massive data processing and build a
sovereign solution for operational data. But these efforts have faced challenges in
integrating non-traditional defense players, aligning timeframes, and addressing
varying levels of end-user maturity.
The Armed Forces Ministry is particularly conscious of the ethical and legal issues
that may be raised by AI in defense applications. A permanent multidisciplinary
ethics committee has been established at the ministry level for emerging tech-
nologies in defense. It has already published reports on the use of AI in critical
systems.
6 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

The French Armed Forces have undertaken various initiatives to integrate and
operationalize AI technologies through experimentation. These initiatives aim to
help gain operational efficiency and performance, as well as support future organ-
izational change. They explore the challenges of integrating AI on the battlefield,
along with accelerating innovation through experimental labs, and co-innovation
projects between startups and end-users. Nevertheless, one of the major obsta-
cles to the operationalization of AI in the Armed Forces is the human resource
challenge: the ability to attract and retain sufficient AI talent.
Considering the current state of the French defense AI ecosystem, it is possible to
imagine several avenues of improvement. These could include supporting efforts
to raise awareness for AI investments within defense programs, increasing funding
capacities to scale up AI development and a higher R&T budget to fund defense
applications of emerging civilian technologies. Finally, it would be possible to
facilitate agile co-development between the Armed Forces and industry to build
solutions rapidly in response to use cases.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 7

2 Thinking
about
Defense AI
8 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

2.1 A National Strategic Vision Including Defense
The development of AI accelerated worldwide in the mid-2010s, mainly due to
related advances in deep neural networks, optimized distributed computing, and
the increase in available computing capacity. This new wave of technology has
seen the deployment of the first commercial solutions by major digital players,
particularly from the United States. Questions related to its impact on the evo-
lution of digital value chains and on the growth of the sector’s economic weight
have led many countries to reflect on the issue.
France is no exception. French authorities already fully embraced the topic of AI
in 2017. After launching #FranceIA in , the Prime Minister appoint-
ed Cédric Villani,1 a scientist and newly elected deputy, to head a parliamentary
commission. In , the commission published its report “For a meaningful
artificial intelligence: towards a French and European strategy.”2 Using the report as
a basis, French President Emmanuel Macron announced the launch of a dedicated
national strategy on 29 , aimed at making France (and Europe) a leader
in AI.3 The strategy primarily focused on France’s research sector, one of France’s
main strengths and considered to be among the global benchmarks in the field.
While emphasizing research, the preparatory report for the national strategy clearly
identified defense as one of the sectors in which the development and deployment
of AI should play a key role. “AI in support of Defense,”4 published in , constitutes the strategy of the Ministry of the Armed Forces (henceforth the
French MoD) for AI, providing an ambitious roadmap around six themes:
Establish a robust ethical and legal framework for the use of AI
Develop the infrastructure needed to deploy AI
Define priority research areas
Establish an AI governance framework
Innovation, Research and Development Strategy
International collaboration and export strategy
In addition, the strategy set out the broad outlines of a ministerial policy in this
area, based on three pillars:
Governance: Formalization of a strategic-level departmental data policy,
organization and distribution of data-related responsibilities, management of
roadmaps
1 Philippe,“MissionletterfromtheFrenchPrimeMinistertoCédricVillani.”
2 Villani,For a meaningful artificial intelligence: towards a French and European strategy.
3 SpeechbyFrenchPresidentEmmanuelMacron#Aiforhumanity.
4 AI in Support of Defense.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 9

Architecture: Adoption of specific solutions adapted to the constraints of
the Armed Forces in the context of data storage, collection, processing, and
exploitation
Culture: Continuous and/or specific training in the use of AI and its challenges,
recruitment of specialized personnel
Finally, the key objective of this strategy is to develop trusted AI that meets the
unique and strict requirements of the defense world.
2.2 The Challenges of Defense AI
The rise of AI not only accelerates defense developments, but it also takes place
against the backdrop of intense global competition. The French Armed Forces do
not wish to miss out on developments in AI that primarily derive from the com-
mercial sector. As a result, the French Armed Forces dedicated efforts to define
a strategy adapted to the constraints and specificities of the defense sector. This
strategy is based on two main lines of effort:
Integrating new technologies, mainly from the civilian sector
Adapting doctrines and operational concepts to the issues raised by automa-
tion, with particular attention to issues of command responsibility.
A Defense AI Strategy Geared Towards Interaction with the Civilian World
The work on defense AI is part of a global review of the French MoD’s strategy,
aimed at adapting its structure to the accelerating technological cycles coming
from the civilian world. Here the focus is on digital technologies (cybersecurity,
cloud computing, AI, semiconductors, quantum computing, etc.), as well robotics,
energy, and many others (Figure 1).
Digital innovation, including AI, is enabling spin-in technology transfers, i.e., the
capture of innovations developed in a civilian context for integration into a de-
fense system. This is a major paradigm shift after a long period in which spin-out
transfers tended to benefit national economies (GPS, radar, etc.). Consequently,
the French General Directorate for Armament (DGA), which constitutes France’s
defense planning and procurement authority, set up the new Defense Innovation
Agency (AID) in . AID’s mission is four-fold:
Lead and drive defense innovation
Stimulate and capture innovation from the non-defense civilian world
10 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

Improve, transfer and accelerate innovation for the benefit of the Department’s
users and warfighters
Identify and implement an innovation approach to prevent strategic surprise
AI is naturally one of the agency’s technological priorities.
Figure 1: Defense AI in France – Context and Key Initiatives
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
President
#FranceIA
speechonAI
NationalAIresearchstrategy,Phase1(1,5Md€) Phase2(1,5Md€=>2025)
National Villani
Parliamentary
mission
ReportFor a Primeminister,Circularondatapolicy,
meaningful AI algorithmsandpublicsourcecodes
Ambition Numérique DefenseMinister DefenseMinisterSpeech
for Digital Ambitions SpeechonAI onAIProgressupdate Defense
AIstrategy
French MoD AIdiagnostics AIEthic FrenchMoDdataroadmap update?
forDefense AI in support Committee 2021–2023
of Defense
DefenseArtificial
Armed force, AID(creation) IntelligenceCoordination AND(creation)
Directorate & Unit(CCIAD)
services DGNUM(creation) NavyDataservice
center(CSD-M)
firstdiscussions AID-INRIA ASTRIDAIprojects JointR&DLabon
R&D on AI
aroundARTEMIS.IA agreement (ANR – AID AIforDefense
for Defense partnership) withSingapore
ManMachine AID-CNRS
support*
Teaming agreement
Defense
industrial Definvest
Innovation
ecosystem
DefenseFund
support
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
*selectionofmajorAI-relatedprojectsandinitiative.Doesnotincludechallengesandexperiments
Source:Authors
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 11

Adapting AI to Defense Constraints
While opening to the civilian world seems inevitable, the establishment of a
cognitive framework adapted to the requirements of the defense sector remains
paramount. This is particularly vital given that while there are many opportunities
for the use of AI applications in defense, their level of integration and maturity
remains highly variable.
Elementary applications such as automatic classification and object recognition,
that have matured in the civilian world, are now fully integrated into the military
domain. However, this is not always true for “functional” or even “system”-level
applications. The latter are still at an early stage of technological maturity (e.g., au-
tonomous robots capable of sensing and performing multiple tasks in an uncertain
environment).
The timing of technological developments is also tied to the changing nature of
conflicts. The move towards high-intensity conflict, with battlefield robotization, AI
integration, data/sensor fusion, and the quest to saturate the battlefield through
mass effect, have all guided defense technology development in recent years.
This applies both to the launch of the latest major multi-application projects (Man
Machine Teaming, ARTEMIS.IA, etc.) as well as to programs started prior to the
launch of the defense AI strategy (Scorpion,5 Rafale F4,6 SAIM7 and SLAMF8).
These initial efforts and development projects served as a keystone for a national
AI defense strategy. Several key success factors were identified:
The need to increase the maturity and robustness of technologies for critical
applications.
The availability and accessibility of data needed to explore use cases.
Infrastructure for AI development, such as clouds. As cloud outsourcing
presents a risk to the confidentiality, integrity and availability of data, sover-
eign combat cloud projects are underway within the French Armed Forces,
such as within the new generations of air (SCAF/FCAS) and land (SCORPION)
programs. Additionally, the digital transformation of the Armed Forces follows
a process launched several years ago and formalized in 2017 with the publica-
5 TheSCORPIONprogram(standingforsynergyofcontactreinforcedbyversatilityandnetwork-enabledcapability)renews
theArmy’scontactcombatthroughnewgenerationarmoredvehicles,modernizedequipmentandanewinformationsystem
optimizingthenetworkingofsystems.
6 TheRafaleisatwin-jetfighteraircraftabletooperatefrombothanaircraftcarrierandashorebasetocarryoutallcombat
aviationmissions.Capabilitiesaredevelopedincrementallyandreleasedinpackages(“standards”).ThefirstStandardF4Rafale
fightersweredeliveredtoboththeFrenchAirandSpaceForceandtotheFrenchNavyinearly2023.
7 TheSAIMplatformisdesignedtodigitallyprocessreal-timedatafeedsfromalltypesofsensors—satellite,airborne,deployed
ontheground—usingadvancedprocessingtoolstoaddressissuesarisingfromthevolumeofdataanddiversityofsources.
8 FutureMineCountermeasuresSystem(SLAMF–Systèmedelutteanti-minesfutur)withautonomousunderwatervehiclesand
unmannedsurfacevehicles,deployedfromaland-basedoperationscenteroraminewarfarevesselatsea.
12 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

tion of the strategic document “Ambition Numérique for Digital Ambitions” by
the French MoD.9
The ability to adapt the workforce (recruitment, profile) of the defense ecosys-
tem to not only develop innovative AI-based solutions, but also to debate and
measure needs – both with the defense prime contractors for implementation
and integration as well as within the Ministry for specification and deployment.
A Clear Ethical and Legal Framework to Develop Defense AI
AI raises unique issues when used in defense. Unlike most civilian applications
(with a few exceptions, such as health), the use of AI in defense systems requires a
particularly rigorous processes to ensure necessary reliability. It also raises ques-
tions about responsibility and its division between humans and machines. How-
ever, the French defense minister’s speech on 5 is very clear about the
framework for the development of AI-related technologies:
We will develop artificial intelligence for defense according to three main
principles: respect for international law, the maintenance of sufficient human
control, and the permanence of command responsibility.10
Precautions on ethics have been taken from the start, even if they are state-centric
and did not come out of a broader social debate. As far as autonomy is con-
cerned, the minister stated in the same speech that “France refuses to entrust
the decision of life or death to a machine, a machine that acts in a completely
autonomous manner and is beyond any human control.” It reaffirms the need for
human control in all weapon systems to be developed in the future. This position
has been codified through Instruction 1618 on the implementation of programs11
and is also supported by the creation of a ministerial ethics committee on defense
issues in 2020. Chaired by Bernard Pêcheur, Honorary President of the Council
of State, and vice-chaired by General Henri Bentégeat, former Chief of Staff of
the French Armed Forces, the Ethics Committee is made up of 18 members of
the Armed Forces as well as external experts. These external experts include a
wide range of professions such as lawyers, professors, and researchers. The ethics
committee, which has no equivalent in other Western nations, issues advice (e.g.,
SALA or LAWS – lethal autonomous weapons systems, augmented soldier) while
ensuring that the red line – “keep the human element in the loop and do not
influence the leader’s decision” – is respected.
9 Bômont,“Leclouddéfense :défiopérationnel,impératifstratégiqueetenjeudesouveraineté,”p.31.
10 Parly,“StatementbytheMinisteroftheArmedForcesonDefenseAIinSaclay.”
11 Instructionn°1618/ARM/CABonarmamentoperations.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 13

According to the reports of this committee, the degree of autonomy of an AI-
integrated system can only be determined by considering several inseparable
dimensions: the design, the deployment, and the use of weapon systems. This is
even more important given the length of the operational life cycle of the equip-
ment, which spans a decade for the most agile systems and several decades for
the heaviest equipment. Questions about deployment and doctrine arise more
frequently in the development loop due to a goal of accelerating digital procure-
ment programs.
The Ethics Committee further added that the design phase requires in-depth
reflection on the future use of the system and its rules of engagement. This allows
planners and operators to determine the tasks that will be entrusted to AI and
the degree of autonomy it will have to perform. As with vehicles and their level
of autonomy, this is not a binary characteristic, but a continuum that needs to be
quantified according to progressive levels. The definition and relevance of such a
scale in defense has not yet been fully debated, but the need is certain to arise.
14 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

3 Developing
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 15

Following Villani’s work and the President’s speech, France has adopted a national
AI research strategy and corresponding funding plan. This strategy is managed by
a national coordinator and is part of the management of credits from the “Invest-
ment for the Future Program” (PIA) and “France 2030” by the General Secretary
for Investment (SGPI). As the Cour des Comptes12 recalled in , as part
of its evaluation of public policies,13 the primary objective of France’s AI strategy
at the time was to avoid falling scientifically behind. As a result, the investments
made were initially (2018-2022) concentrated on research and innovation, with a
total investment of €1.5bn.
The second phase of the national AI strategy was launched mid-2022, with the
aim of accelerating the diffusion of AI in the economy and arranging it so that AI
can meet the need to automate ancillary tasks.14 To achieve this, the acceleration
strategy is based on investment to support the deep tech of embedded AI, trust-
ed AI, and frugal AI. The aim is to remove certain scientific hurdles on decentral-
ized or embedded AI. A prominent example is energy-efficient hardware for data
processing with AI models at the near-edge with a high-level of trust on high-risk
applications.
3.3 France’s AI Innovation Base
France benefits from a relatively dense academic and research base including insti-
tutions such as the National Institute for Research in Digital Science and Technolo-
gy (INRIA), the French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA)
or the National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS).15 Since AI is not considered
a discipline, the research component of the French national strategy launched in
2018 has focused on structuring the ecosystem with the creation of AI centers of
excellence, through the designation of interdisciplinary AI institutes (3IA), the estab-
lishment of individual chairs (43), as well as the identification of centers of excel-
lence outside the 3IA institutes.16 Cooperation in AI research not only takes place
through research projects with public research institutes, but also with universities
and engineering schools. For example, the Ecole Polytechnique (Centre Interdisci-
plinaire de Défense et de Sécurité, CIEDS) launched an R&D center in 2021. With
an annual budget of €10M the center shall conduct cutting-edge scientific research
in areas of defense interest and connect communities of researchers, students,
Ministry of Armed Forces staff, funding agencies, companies, and more.
12 CourdesComptesisthesupremebodyforauditingtheuseofpublicfundsinFrance.
13 Nationalartificialintelligenceresearchstrategy:astrategytobestructuredandsustained.
14 AINationalstrategy.
15 Ezratty,TheUsesofArtificialIntelligence,p.606.
16 Ibid.,p.12.
16 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

According to Bpifrance, there are almost 470 French startups specialized in AI.
In 2020, the Ministry of Defense reported that around 100 SMEs and AI startups
were involved in French MoD projects. The level of fundraising is an indicator of
these startups’ attractiveness. For example, 223 deep-tech AI startups have raised
a cumulative €3.7bn between 2017 and mid-2022 through 391 funding rounds,
including €2.3bn in 2021.17 Despite this, lack of access to this type of investment
for French startups, especially those dedicated to AI, is regularly seen as a hurdle,
especially at later project stages (late stage and IPO).18 However, measures have
been taken to encourage innovative players to emerge, for example, by creating
Definvest19 and Fonds Innovation Défense (FID).20 Since its creation, Definvest has
made 18 investments, including Kalray and Preligens, while FID has made seven
public investments (including Outsight and XXII). In both cases, the objective is to
invest alongside private funds. 21
SME’s specializing in AI involved in defense programs are mostly spinoffs from
French research laboratories like CEA or INRIA (Figure 2).22 The respective network
of French AI startups and SMEs is unique in that its members cover all the different
technological segments of AI: AI hardware, language processing, data mining sys-
tems, voice processing, image processing and data from 3D sensors, right through
to autonomy for robotics. The following examples illustrate these capabilities:
Kalray (founded in 2008) and NanoXplore (2010), for example, specialize in the
development of FPGA processors and SoCs
Outsight (2019) develops software for LIDAR data analysis.
XXII (2015) offers a software platform for AI video analysis
Numalis (2015) provides tools and services to help design and validate artificial
intelligence systems
Bloom (2016) develops algorithms for social network investigation
Delfox (2018) develops a platform to train AI models to train autonomous
decision-making systems
17 Ibid,p.53.
18 “Webconferenceonfundingandstartupdevelopmentindefensesector.”ThequestionofexitisthereforecrucialforAI
Frenchstart-ups.Asareminder,therearethreepossibleoptions:(1)Acquisitionbyalargeindustrialgroup;(2)Entryinto
thecapitalofprivateequityandspecializedinvestmentfunds;(3)Initialpublicoffering.Whilethefirstoptionhasoftenbeen
possible,therearefewexamplesofIPOsorFrench/Europeancapitalpositionedtofinancethefinalstagesofstart-ups.This
isanobstacletothedevelopmentoftheindustrialecosystem.Thisquestionofexitisallthetruerandmoreproblematicfor
companiespositionedintechnologiesthatareconsideredcriticaltonationalsecurity.Multipleroundsoffinancingcanbea
double-edgedsword.Ontheonehand,it’sanindicatorofastartup’sattractiveness(andthereforethemarket-accesspotential
ofitssolutionsand/orinnovations)andthepossibilityofnotmissingthe“time-to-market.”Butitcanalsobesynonymouswith
alossofcontrol(dissolutionofcapital)andareorientationofthecompany’sstrategy.
19 With€100MprovidedbytheFrenchMinistryoftheArmedForces,DefinvestaimstoacquireequitystakesinstrategicDTIB(Defense
TechnologicalandIndustrialBase)SMEs,alongsidefinancialandindustrialinvestors,toenablethemtodevelopindependently.
20 TheFIDisendowedwith€200M.ItsaimistocontinuetheMinistryoftheArmedForces’drivetodevelopandsupportofinno-
vation.Itisdedicatedtothedevelopmentofdualandcross-disciplinarytechnologies(outsidethetraditionalDITBplayers).
Thefundcaninvestamaximumof30%and€20Mpercompany.
21 Montaufray-Bureau,“TheFrenchMinistryofDefense,viaBpifrance,investsinstrategicSMEsinWesternFrance.”
22 Parly,“StatementbytheMinisteroftheArmedForcesonDefenseAIinCreil.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 17

Shark Robotics (2016) has rapidly become a key player in the French robotics
sector and a benchmark internationally, developing software, hardware and
batteries.
Chapsvision (2019) has established itself as a consolidator in the sector
through a highly ambitious external growth policy (more than a dozen compa-
ny acquisitions in 4 years).
In addition, SME’s established in the early 2000s are noteworthy as well. Among
them there are, for example, Vocapia Research, a provider of speech-to-text soft-
ware, and Probayes, specialized in R&D and custom AI engineering. These defense
and non-defense SMEs are integrated into the French DTIB ecosystem, either as
partners of French prime contractors or as direct suppliers to the French MoD.
Figure 2: French Defense AI Innovation ecosystem Start-ups and ICT SME:
a few examples
Major defenseplayers Digital service companies
Major defense players
Major defenseplayers Digital service companies
Major defenseplayers Maj D o M i r g d i a t e j a M o f l e r Ma s n e d jos r a e v erj f i o e d c p e n rel a s f c de e y o ine m g p sr l i s p e a t a a y p n e ll i a r e s y s ers Digit D al i g sDe it r a ivg l i ic s t e ea r lc v so i e c mr e vp i c ca o en m ice p os a m n p ie a s nies
service companies
partner-
ships
partner-
ships
Major defenseplayers Digital service compCaonnietrsacts& spin-offs
activities
development
into
startups
French MoD
French MoD
R&D
partner- 1
Non Sensitive ships

Non Sensitive
French MoD French MoD
French MForeDnch MoD
French MoD

Non Sensitive Non Sensitive 1 1
French MoD Non SensitiNvoen Sensitive
Research labs
Source:Authors

Non Sensitive
18 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

3.4 Adaptation of France’s Traditional Defense Players
The reconfiguration of the IT value chain resulting from digital technological devel-
opments is leading digital players (majors, software publishers, digital services
companies) to capture an increasing share of the added value generated by com-
panies operating in so-called “traditional” business sectors. Defense is no excep-
tion as several civilian and specialized digital players are determined to penetrate
the defense market (Table 1). Atos and Sopra-Steria, for example, are involved to
varying degrees in the French Ministry of Defense’s ARTEMIS.IA program. In 2022,
Preligens, created in 2016, had been awarded a 7-year (premium) framework con-
tract by the DGA worth €240M for data processing solutions tailored to defense
requirements.23
In response, traditional defense prime contractors24 have adapted their strategies
to consider the changes brought on by digital technologies (cyber, cloud comput-
ing, AI, etc.). Indeed, the weapon programs for which they are prime contractors
are increasingly integrating digital capabilities. Most of these companies’ digital
transformation plans, which date back to the mid-2010s, include action plans or
roadmaps for AI and data governance. However, these specific actions appear to
be more recent and coincide with national strategies.
While the strategy of external growth seems to have been favored by defense
actors with the first wave of digital technologies related to cybersecurity, current
approaches emphasize partnerships and initiatives related to open innovation.25
To implement a partnership policy, almost all prime contractors have developed
corporate venture-type structures or increased their presence within specialized
incubators and accelerators. However, there are subtle differences between the
different strategies applied by incumbent defense companies:
Thales is developing its partnership approach with specialized private sector
players (start-ups and young SMEs) to ensure long-term collaboration (i.e.,
move from a prime contractor-subcontractor relationship to a partner relation-
ship). The group has a presence in France at Station F (Cyber) and in Montreal
through the Centech incubator (AI). Thales seems to make less use of its
corporate venture arm, which is mainly used for strategic actions.
Airbus Defense & Space has also adopted this approach and has diversified
its support mechanisms for its partners, focusing on acquisitions (simplified
procedures for subcontractors such as start-ups and SMEs), open innovation
23 “DGAordersdataprocessingsolutionstailoredtodefenseneedsfromPreligens.”
24 Thales,Airbus,DassaultAviation,NavalGroup,NexteraKNDSCompany,MBDA,SafranGroup.
25 Martin,“Defensegroupsanddigitaltechnologies,”p.19.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 19

(more challenges) and its Airbus Group Development structure (support for
actors around the Group’s various industrial sites).
Safran Group also launched its corporate venture capital fund in 2015, which
has not only allowed it to invest in numerous start-ups in the sector (Outsight,
Kalray, for example), but has also structured itself internally to manage and
develop its big data activities (creation of Safran Analytics). In ,
Safran Group created a new department in charge of driving the Group’s
digital transformation.
The situation is different for Dassault Aviation. The company benefits from the
positioning of Dassault Systèmes (same shareholder, GIMD), France’s leading
software publisher (2022 revenue €5.67bn), whose offering is based on the 3D
experience platform (modeling-simulation) and, more recently, on the devel-
opment of a trusted cloud offering (Outscale).
Finally, France’s “pure defense players” MBDA, Nexter (KNDS Company) and
Naval Group lack synergies stemming from comparable civilian activities. They
also seem to suffer from different issues related to data management – such as
data access or data storage –, which could be detrimental to their defense AI am-
bitions. As a result, they might interpret defense AI as a niche task only. However,
different specialization strategies are taking place:
In 2017, for example, the European missile maker MBDA adapted its inno-
vation structure by setting up a “Tech Watch” service to provide technology
monitoring. What’s more, in 2019, MBDA was selected as a sponsor (along
with Thales) in the AI challenge of the Future Investment Program (PIA). In
terms of AI, the Group seems to be focusing its approach on topics related
to target tracking and identification, especially after its strategic partnership
and its acquisition of Kalray. Decision support also seems to be another niche
in which MBDA is investing. In , the Group acquired a stake in
Numalis, a start-up specializing in the formal validation of AI-based applica-
tions. The Group has also collaborated with Probayes on the HUMAT research
program.26
Like other pure defense players, Naval Group opened its innovation structure
and system in 2015 with the creation of its disruptive innovation accelerator,
the Naval Group Innovation Booster. Like MBDA or Nexter (KNDS Company),
Naval Group seems to be positioning itself around very specific AI technolo-
gies. Indeed, the group’s priorities in the digital field are to strengthen tech-
nologies related to digital twins. Other research topics (whether related to the
digital twin or not) seem to be predictive maintenance, cybersecurity, and the
strengthening of on-board systems (AUV, USV, etc.).
26 Scott,“HUMATstudylookstoimprovehuman/machineinterface.”
20 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

Finally, Nexter (KNDS company) has also reviewed its digital transformation
strategy with the creation of a digital innovation and transformation depart-
ment in .27 Within this framework, predictive maintenance, local
and global navigation without GPS, and decision support seem to be priority
development areas for the group. Issues related to empowerment seem to
be a priority for the Nexter Group. As Bruno Ricaud (appointed AI roadmap
leader in ) and Cécile Jourdas (Nexter Group artificial intelligence
engineer) remind, “in the land military field, autonomous mobility does not yet
use artificial intelligence, but traditional robotics methods.”28 In the field of AI,
Nexter’s teams are mainly working on topics related to human-machine collab-
oration, the validation and certification of neural network algorithms, and the
embedding of computing capabilities.29
In addition to adapting their innovation structures, defense groups can also jointly
develop an offer that incorporates AI or big data capabilities. This partnership,
which is part of a defined industrial and commercial project, can be carried out
with major digital players, contributing to the digital transformation of the group
and its businesses, or with innovative and specialized players (large groups, mid-
caps companies, SME and start-ups), mainly in application segments. Focusing on
partnerships with major digital players, for example, the Airbus Group has em-
barked on a data collection project that will enable it to add new services related
to fleet management and predictive maintenance. The result is the new “Skywise”
(for civil aircraft platforms) and “Smartforce”30 (for military aircraft platforms) of-
ferings, both developed in partnership with specialist players such as Palantir and
Alten.
In addition, as part of the development of a secure cloud offering for Armed
Forces and public institutions, European defense contractors have partnered with
key players in the field. Thales, for example, has partnered with Google Cloud
to position itself in its national public cloud market.31 Thales and Microsoft are
also partners in the development of a defense cloud solution, “Nexium Defense
Cloud.”32
27 Gain,“CommentNexterconjugueinnovationettransformationdigitaledepuisunan.”
28 Ricaud/Jourdas,“Nexter:AI&RoboticSystems,”p.28.
29 Ibid.
30 “AirbuslaunchesSmartForce–servicesbringingthepowerofdatatomilitaryoperations.”
31 “ThalesandGoogleCloudannounceastrategicpartnershiptojointlydevelopa‘TrustedCloud’inFrance.”
32 “ThalesandMicrosoftpartnertodevelopauniqueDefenseCloudsolution.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 21

Table 1: Key Actors of the French Defense Industrial Ecosystem Relevant for Defense AI
French MoD R&D entities Defense industrial base
Armed Forces AI coordinators, National Research Agendy Traditional defense prime
directorates and services (ANR) con-tractors
• 4chairsfundedbythe • Thales
Digital Directorate (DGNUM) FrenchMOD • Airbus
• NavalGroup
General Directorate for Arma- • DassaultAviation
ment (DGA) Atomic energy commission • MBDA
• OperationsDirectorateand (CEA) • Safran
itsmanagementunits • Generalpartnership • Nexter
• TechnicalDirectorateand agreement(jointaction
Specialized industries
itscentersofexpertise undertheEDF)
(defense or non-defense
• Defensesystem
oriented)
architecturedepartment
• Athea(Thales-AtosJV)
• IndustrialAffairsand National scientific
• Preligens
EconomicIntelligence research center (CNRS)
• Chapsvision
Department • Frameworkagreement
• Bloom
• DefenseInnovationAgency signedinSept2020-AI
• Dataiku
• DefenseArtificialIntelli- studyagreementinthe
• VocapiaResearch
genceCoordinationUnit processofbeingsigned
• Deepomatic
• Kalray
Staff from the Armed Forces
• NanoXplore
• ArmedForcesDigital French National Institute
• BertinTechnologies
StrategyDivision for Research in Digital
• SharkRobotics
• ArmedForcesCapacity Science and Technology
• Outsight
CoherenceDivision (INRIA):
• Alteia
• AIagreementsignedin
• XXII
French Navy, Army, Air Force December2019
• Probayes
• ProgramplanningDivisions,
• Delfox
• Digitalandinnovationentities
• Numalis
• Operationalunitsand
• Synapse-defense
Sourcceen:tAerusthoofresx’pceormtipseilaftoiornth.e
benefitofMSx
Digital services companies
Joint Directorate of Infra-
• Atos
structure Networks and Infor-
• Capgemini
mation Systems (DIRISI)
• Sopra-Steria
Source:Authors
22 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

3.5 Defense AI R&D Strategy
In general, the French MoD focuses on AI-related R&D activities that are under-
funded by the civilian sector or require a defense-specific approach. Consequently,
R&D activities on AI focus on
Handling data produced and collected by specific sensors of the Armed
Forces such as infrared imaging, Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) imaging,
sonar, or hyperspectral sensing
Using AI for very specific military missions such as intelligence collection/gath-
ering or collaborative combat applications
Developing algorithms for specific tasks such as data and information fusion,
heterogenous and multi-source data processing, or weak signal detection
Ensuring embedded or operational safety challenges stemming, for example,
from operating in unknown, unrolled or even hostile environment
The development of defense AI also aims to ensure trustworthiness. This requires
the formalization of a dedicated methodological framework and a technological
base that allows collection, storage, processing, and exploitation of the necessary
data. On the technical side, the Defense Artificial Intelligence Coordination Unit
(CCIAD) has published a guide for the integration of AI in operational defense
systems. This provides methodological elements for implementation, specification,
and qualification.33 In addition, an initial technology base has been built up around
three main projects:34 ARTEMS.IA, POCEAD35 and DATA360/ECE.36 However,
the architecture to store, collect, process, and operate solutions remains to be
defined. Pending the next defense cloud program, ARTEMIS.IA remains the most
structured program in this field (see also chapter 3.5).
3.6 Priority Application Areas
The development of AI in French defense systems is aimed at solving technical de-
fense challenges (specific sensors, embeddability, frugal learning, explainability) to
ensure operational superiority. As with any emerging technology, it brings higher
levels of performance to operational systems based on maturity. For example, it is
now possible to provide feedback from operational deployments for intelligence
33 GuideforintegrationofAIintoprograms,2021.
34 WecanalsoaddDatamarOPSaspartoftheNavy’sdataservicecenter(whichnowholds1petaofstorageforitsdata),
35 Platformforopeningup,centralizing,exposingandanalyzingdata.DevelopedwithCapgemini,inassociationwithSaagieand
OpenDataSoft.
36 Experimentationplatform.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 23

applications, while developments in autonomous robotics still require further
development.
The French MoD, through its roadmap, has identified seven main use cases for AI
in operations:37
Decision and planning support
Collaborative combat
Cybersecurity applications and digital influence
Logistics and operational readiness,
Intelligence
Robotics and autonomy
AI in support services (administration/health).
In view of developing future AI-enabled defense capabilities, the French MoD also
emphasizes the need to cooperate with partners. In this regard France acts upon
the belief that AI is a technology field ideally suited for multinational cooperation
because of its dual use nature. However, French authorities also perceive defense
AI as a critical technology.38 As a consequence, the French Defense Innovation
Agency mainly focuses on collaboration within the European context with partners
who have complementary capabilities. This is done in part to compensate for
French AI-related shortfalls, or to build critical mass. In this context, Germany and
the UK have been identified as suitable partners.39 Outside of Europe, France is
building on its long-standing innovation cooperation with Singapore40 to extend it
to AI work. This was demonstrated by the announcement of a technical
agreement to create a joint R&D laboratory for AI.41
37 AIinSupportofDefense,pp.14-20.
38 Revuestratégiquededéfenseetdesécuriténationale,2017.
39 Ibid.,p.24
40 TheSAFARI(SingaporeandFranceAdvancedResearchInitiative)agreementprovidestheframeworkforcooperationbetween
FranceandSingaporeinthefieldsofresearch,scienceandtechnology.Createdin1997,overtheyearsithashelpedtobuild
asolid,trust-basedbilateralrelationshipbetweenstateandindustrialpartnersfrombothcountriesinvolvedincooperative
ventures.Todate,ithascarriedoutover70jointprojects,notablyinthenaval,robotics,biologicalandchemicalfields.
41 “FranceandSingaporecreateajointR&Dlaboratoryinthefieldofartificialintelligencefordefense.”
24 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

3.7 ARTEMIS.IA: Ambition and Reality of Building
a Defense AI Ecosystem
To address the massive increase in data, the French MOD decided to structure its
efforts around a digital foundation in 2017, designed to harness the potential of
massive data processing technologies through AI modules. The decision to launch
a project, which then became a major procurement program in 2019, was in line
with the French MoD’s AI strategy goal to harmonize understanding of the issues
at stake.
In 2017, the applications developed by the most innovative AI players in the civil-
ian world were developed on outsourced hosting capacities, which enabled them
to benefit from standardized interfaces at competitive costs. However, depend-
ence on a private cloud was not an option for activities involving national security.
ARTEMIS.IA therefore emerged in a context where there was a strategic need to
build a sovereign solution to exploit the mass of operational data from various
sensors while facilitating closer ties with the civilian digital ecosystem.
The original ambition of ARTEMIS.IA was to provide shared services for the French
MOD’s massive data processing applications. This was based on the observation
that a single industrial player is unable to meet all user requirements in every
context. The technical foundation on which the French MOD’s data is hosted has
specific features not found in the civilian sector. This includes the need to manage
data with different levels of classification. This leads to specific restrictions and
multiple security constraints as well as the need to distribute data via networks of
varying types, sometimes on embedded platforms.
Alongside this technical ambition, the need to build an ecosystem of applications
capable of massive processing around a digital base has raised the need to adjust
procurement mechanisms. The innovation partnership, a new feature of the French
Public Procurement Code, has made it possible since 2016 to resolve several
issues, such as ensuring competitive bidding by contracting the same service to
two different manufacturers. It also enables transferring intellectual property from
a feasibility contract to a preliminary design and definition contract.42 This part-
nership makes it possible to introduce progressive competitive bidding from the
exploration phase through to production, culminating in the construction of a mar-
ket-standard platform. This platform is open to a plurality of business application
suppliers and contains a separation of responsibilities: State operator; industrial
42 ArticleR2172-20oninnovationpartnerships–PublicProcurementCode.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 25

players developing software bricks; users exploiting them. Through this project,
the French MOD explores new ways to engage with startups.
ARTEMIS.IA is divided in three program phases:
Phase 1, launched in 2017: Three players competing in parallel, under the
aegis of an innovative partnership framework agreement, to define the foun-
dations of the system and carry out the first proofs of concept.
Phase 2, launched in 2019: ARTEMIS.IA became a program of record. The
government selected the ATHEA solution (joint venture between Thales and
Atos), a synthesis of the solutions proposed by Thales and Atos in terms of
data management, ontology processing and human-machine interface for visu-
alizing the results of data fusion.
Phase 3, launched in 2022: Opening to a diversity of suppliers, including the
ecosystem of French AI startups. This has revealed new challenges of integrat-
ing innovations of startups into ARTEMIS.IA.
The original design of the program was intended to identify the best proposal
among the competitors. However, this objective was not accomplished, as com-
petitors who were unable to win successive phases were eventually able to reposi-
tion themselves as subcontractors (despite a ban on co-contracting, and a ban on
keeping more than one player after phase 2, circumvented by the creation of the
Athea joint venture). Given the criticism of the program, both in terms of ARTE-
MIS.IA’s operational contribution and the relevance of the technical proposal put
forward by Atos and Thales, the integration of AI into weapons programs may be
subjected to particular attention. This could include more political pressure to be
stricter about the competitive nature of such tenders.
As the role of data supervisor is assigned to the DGNUM and not to ARTEMIS.
IA, the connections to sensor data (e.g., CSO satellites), the platform for sharing
operational data, and the dedicated instances for algorithm training and agile
experimentation have not yet been established. This decoupling means that the
program has yet to mature. As a result, it does not yet offer a state-of-the-art
software platform with genuine integration of innovative building blocks from the
civilian ecosystem.
The integration of startups into the ARTEMIS.IA program therefore remains
complex: although these startups were invited to take part in phase 1, none of
them had the capabilities or the capacity to provide an answer to whole challenge.
However, each did have technology that could address parts of the problem.
Contacted again four years later, these startups highlighted the difficulty in align-
ing timeframes between defense programs, the decision-making cycles of major
26 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

industry players, the life cycles of start-ups and the ability of the administration to
keep up.
It takes a long time for buyers to build up their AI skills, and this has revealed
differing levels of maturity among the target users of the first use cases. These are
not always aligned with the technological priorities initially defined. For example,
French military intelligence services are keen to integrate AI, notably because it
can deliver concrete operational gains through technologies that are combat-prov-
en. By contrast, other AI developments – such as detection, reconnaissance, and
identification of armored vehicles – have not yet reached full maturity and involve
ethical aspects that remain to be solved.
Although it was mainly treated as a technical issue, ARTEMIS.IA also revealed
broader organizational challenges. One big issue encompassed the need by the
defense procurement agency to reach out to players in all AI-related programs,
from the Armed Forces, directorates, and services to industry, and to agree on
a roadmap. As a result, ARTEMIS.IA was transformed into a “platform” project,
even though it was originally intended as a “profound transformation in the use of
data” project, risking selling technology without reflecting on its uses.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 27

4 Organizing
Defense AI
28 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

4.1 Defense AI Governance
In 2019, the French MoD created the Defense Artificial Intelligence Coordination
Unit (CCIAD) to facilitate the implementation of AI and coordinate the actions of
the French MoD. At the time of its creation, the goal was to recruit 200 AI experts
and specialists by 2023.43 Housed within the Defense Innovation Agency (AID),
CCIAD’s mission is to coordinate the defense AI community, raise awareness of the
operational value of AI, and bring together the various stakeholders to commu-
nicate on relevant initiatives that can lead to the integration of AI into programs.
CCIAD created an ecosystem around two functions:
AI coordinators in the Armed Forces, directorates, and services, are in charge
of cross-functional actions that may affect AI (e.g., those in charge of actions
related to ethics or the legal framework), and those in charge of thematic
groups related to AI (C4ISR, air, sea, support/health, etc.).
Project and action managers integrating an AI solution. On the DGA side, this
involves AI function architects, AI experts for an armament operation with an
AI module or for any upstream study related to AI; on the Armed Forces side,
this involves, directorates, services, officers in charge of AI experiments.
However, these coordination functions do not include “data” governance, which
is still handled by the MoD’s Digital Directorate (DGNUM) as ministerial data
administrator.
4.2 Data Governance and Data Sharing: A Policy
Yet to be Confirmed
Since the launch of its digital transformation process in ,44 the
French MoD’s digital governance organization has evolved significantly. Thus,
DGNUM was created to carry out this transformation. It is responsible for imple-
menting the Ministry’s digital policies (and making proposals for their develop-
ment). Its director is also the minister’s data manager. In this way, DGNUM ensures
the implementation of the Ministry’s data governance, and its policy is then
translated into roadmaps and action plans by the Ministry’s various bodies.
43 AccordingtotheformercoordinatorofthenationalAIstrategy,RenaudVedel,theywere120to130.Douillet,«IA:‘Ilfauten
urgenceàlaFranceuneforcedetravailpourpréparer,comprendrelesdonnéesetprévenirleslimitesdesmachines.»
44 LatransformationnumériquedesArmées.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 29

According to the French MoD’s 2021/2023 data roadmap,45 one of the main areas
of focus is data exploitation. With a greater variety of data than the civilian sector
(e.g., sonar, radar, IR, electronic warfare, etc.), the defense sector is characterized
by its specific constraints (embedded systems, limited networks, non-cooperative
environment, very often unstructured data). As the main AI solutions on the market
focus on deep learning technologies (in particular, machine learning), the develop-
ment of AI systems relies on the ability to use adapted training and test data. This
requires, among other things, massive data annotation. To manage and increase
the value of the data, the French MoD has decided to act on three levels: strategic
to provide a coherent vision of the data; operational to define sharing rules and
exchange procedures; and organizational to promote AI culture.
DGNUM is responsible for implementing a data policy that will enable the iden-
tification of existing data, its tagging, and the definition of exploitation models.
However, this process of data collection produced in the context of French military
operations – data that should then be annotated and contextualized to make it
available for defense AI developments – still needs to be structured. It raises many
questions: who owns the data, how to store it, how to share it?
In the absence of a general data policy that has been modernized, formalized at
a strategic level and shared – an action that is nevertheless called for in the latest
French MoD Data Roadmap 2021/2023 – various French MoD entities, have set up
discussion frameworks to address the issues inherent in data sharing (e.g., access
to data recorded on embedded systems, the consequences of which go beyond
the operation of these systems and raise maintenance issues, as platforms now
depend on “verticalized maintenance contracts”). This was driven primarily by the
operational needs of experimentation with industry support.
Moreover, the French MoD’s vision of data sharing seems rather restrictive. The
Ministry does not want to share the environmental data sets collected by the
system because they are considered confidential and can provide information
on the use and performance of defense equipment by Armed Forces and, more
generally, on activities carried out in theaters of operations. However, the question
of the “value” of the data may be overlooked. It seems that the annotation of
the data by an expert in the field is of greater value for the use of AI algorithms
than raw data. There are still ways to overcome the sensitivity of operational data,
such as anonymizing data by design or creating synthetic data from a data model.
Experiments are underway, but the approach is still case-by-case.
45 “Feuillederoutedeladonnée2021/2023.“
30 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

In addition, different means of accessing data have not yet been clearly debated.
This is a problem as different perspectives may collide:
On the one hand, there is the zero-trust vision developed in the United States
by the Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer (CDAO).46 This concept
assumes that data can only be accessed on the basis of minimal privileges
(individual access, need-to-know, etc.) and is therefore based on a restrictive
approach (significant compartmentalization of data sources and databases,
following a defense-in-depth model as promoted by National Agency for
Information Systems Security (ANSSI) in France). In the defense context, with
a relationship that is mainly multi-stakeholder (prime contractor, customer(s),
subcontractor(s), etc.), this model, based on strict rights management, seems
to be the most compatible with confidentiality and data protection require-
ments. Nonetheless it may have some drawbacks such as the difficulty in
configuring multiple logical barriers or over-reliance on this type of solution in
the case of an all-in-one model.
On the other hand, data sharing in an open or semi-open architecture, would
be intended to facilitate the use of customer data to improve performance.
However, it must be based on the establishment of a trusted industry player,
who implements the sharing system according to defined legal and data
protection requirements. Additionally, this trusted industry player would need
to remain (semi-) open to other solutions, to prevent the risk of vendor lock-in.
46 Kahn,RiskyIncrementalism.DefenseAIintheUnitedStates,p.25.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 31

5 Funding
Defense AI
32 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

By 2022, the budget for defense innovation increased by around 20% to €1bn. In
2023, this will rise to €1.2bn, intended to enable the Armed Forces to adequately
address new fields of conflict (space, seabed, information, cyber) by 2030.
With a target of €100M spent per year on defense AI, upstream studies currently
account for almost 30%, the ARTEMIS.IA program for 30% (with a gradual rise to
€30M per year), other programs for around 30% (SCAF, Rafale). The remaining
10% are devoted to capturing innovation from the civilian sector via the RAPID47
grants and the innovation acceleration projects of the Defense Innovation Agency.
Investments are mainly focused on use cases considered currently more mature,
such as detection, recognition, and identification. AI brings significant added
value here, overcoming challenges in terms of the frugality of AI models and state-
of-the-art computing.
Spending on artificial intelligence is therefore mainly associated with program-
matic roadmaps, decided over a long period of time, leaving very little room for
capturing open innovation. The low level of investment to attract military appli-
cations of civilian AI innovations therefore complicates the integration of these
technologies for the Armed Forces.
Table 2: Non-Exchaustive List of Major Impact Programs Incorporating AI
Joint Land Marine Air and Space
• SIGINT • SCORPION • SLAMF(DRI) • FCAS
(DRI:Detection, (collaborative • SHOF (cooperation
Recognition, combat,DRI) (cooperative remotecarriers)
Identification) • EventuallyMGCS navalwatch) • RAFALE(predic-
• Cyber (autonomous • FDI(DRI) tivemaintenance)
(anomalydetection, robotics) • IRIS(DRI)
deepfakes) • CELESTE(DRI)
• SIA • SCCOA(abnor-
(decisionsupport, maltrajectory
planning) detection)
• ARTEMIS.IA • ARES(analysis
(maintenance,intel- ofspatialobject
ligence,healthcare) trajectories)
Source:Authors
47 RAPID :dualinnovationsupportscheme.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 33

As most programs (Table 2 ) are primarily oriented towards hardware development
(as opposed to software), there are several challenges to integrate AI:
The programs leave little room for increments once they have been launched.
Exceptions occur primarily when the industrial company which serves as
program and system owner, is ready to commit to performance levels (e.g.,
purchase orders through MALICIA contracts).48
Most of the funding is earmarked for R&D and the corresponding production
at the end of these contracts. Potential scale-up is rarely envisioned. The
Comité de gouvernance du passage à l’échelle (or Scale-Up Governance
Committee) set up by the Defense Innovation Agency is intended to address
this issue for all emerging technologies, but with a still limited budget and a
restricted number of projects.49
ARTEMIS.IA, the only program to have opened its design phase to an ecosys-
tem of innovative AI players from the civilian sector. It has a budget of €13M
to finance the integration of state-of-the-art AI bricks, i.e., barely 13% of the
annual defense AI spending.
48 AgilesoftwarematurationfortheintegrationofArtificialIntelligenceComponents.
49 Briant,“OpenInnovationinDefense:PassingFadorNewPhilosophy?,”p.11.
34 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

6 Fielding and
Operating
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 35

6.1 A Wide Range of Initiatives
The aim of preparing the Armed Forces for the AI revolution is to help them make
the appropriate organizational changes to achieve superior operational efficiency.
Initiatives aimed at bringing defense AI to the battlefield take various forms:
Operational Data Management
In 2020, the French Navy set up a Marine Data Service Center within the Naval
Programs Expertise Center (CEPN) ,50 with the aim of building up databases
annotated and contextualized by sailors. The idea was to make them availa-
ble to entities inside or outside the French MoD and explore the use of AI to
provide decision support tools and use cases exploiting massive data (e.g.,
electronic warfare, tactical situation replays and sharing, operational readiness,
etc.).
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO)
In the French Air Force, the Directorate of Aeornautical Maintenance (DMAé) is
leading the strategy to verticalize maintenance contracts. A prime example is
the RAVEL program, which groups most of the support activities for the Rafale
airframe and associated equipment (excluding the engine). To this end, Das-
sault Aviation draws on its experience in the civilian sector and uses the same
digital tools to carry out all its “support big data” activities.51 As part of its
military support activities, the French aerospace group benefits from sovereign
solutions developed by Dassault Systèmes around the civilian 3D Experience
platform,52 an evolution of Catia CAD (having benefited from the acquisition of
new technological capabilities, particularly in data mining53 and cloud infra-
structures).54 With the help of these technical tools and a new form of contract,
the RAVEL contract has enabled the Armed Forces’ data to be more visible
and therefore taken into account.55
Maintenance contracts are also designed to address the problem of heteroge-
neous information systems and the difficulty of communicating between them.
50 TheCEPN,theNavy’sreferencefortechnical-operationalexpertise,hasbeenassigneddigitalservicemissionsbythelatest
instructiondated1August2022.TheNavalDataServiceCenter(CSD-M)isintegratedintotheCEPNwithvariousmissions:
Retrieve,store,processandrestoreNavyoperationaldataforentitiesinsideandoutsidetheMinistryoftheArmedForces;
produceroofsofconceptinthefieldofartificialintelligence,decisionsupporttoolsusingsimulationandoperationalresearch
techniques,andusecasesexploitingmassivedata;actastheNavy’sdatareferencefortechnicalarchitectures,artificial
intelligencetechniques,dataprocessinganddataproducts;providetechnicalandmethodologicaloversightinthefieldofdata
enhancement,inordertofederateworkondataenhancementandrationalizetheNavy’sefforts.Formore,see:“InstructionN°
1070/ARM/EMM/MGM.”
51 DassaultAviation,Annual Report,p.42.
52 3DExperienceisaBigDataplatformbasedonDassaultSystèmes’3DExperiencesoftware,withcloudconnectionbetweenthe
ArmedForcesandDassault,withoutusinganyAmericansoftware.
53 June2010acquisitionofFrenchcompanyExaleadfor€135M.
54 SupportforthecreationofOutscalein2010beforeitstakeoverin2017.
55 Industrialmaintenance.
36 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

In , for example, Sopra-Steria was selected as part of the Brasidas
program, which aims to set up a new information system for aeronautical
operational maintenance. Software development is based on a proven civil
aeronautical maintenance software package.56 Thales, the prime contractor for
the SCCOA program, is developing the VASSCO information and operational
management system, which “ensures the integrity and rapid sharing of infor-
mation between all players involved in systems support.”57
Co-Innovation Projects with Industry
As discussed below, the Military Intelligence Directorate is using short-loop
experimentation to develop the TAIIA solution (Image Processing and Analysis
by Artificial Intelligence) with Preligens.
Feedback Loops for Concept Development
Feedback from field experience for the development of doctrine, such as the
degree of autonomy of equipment, particularly in the context of denial of
action in electromagnetic space supports concept development.
Training for Specialists and Experts
The French Army is currently considering the creation of a program for senior
officers specializing in AI, big data, and robotics to create a senior manage-
ment corps.
By operationalizing defense AI along these lines of efforts, the Armed Forces also
learn and understand what works or not. On the positive side, the experiments have
shown that it is possible to achieve “common requirements” that can be shared
across domains/environments despite existing constraints. In addition, experiments
also help establish user groups that are essential to collect feedback from operators
that helps shape common roadmaps. On the critical side, connectivity – in addition
to the decompartmentalization of data, storage, and computing capacities – is
brittle. Therefore, Armed Forces need to think about “data frugality” and reconsid-
er whether to put algorithms on the edge or on common backbones. In addition,
sometimes operational contexts limit the amount of available data. In this case syn-
thetic data can help to train algorithms. This prompts the need to rethink weapon
system contracts and data access, so that algorithms can be constantly evolved and
re-trained based on all available data. Recent examples of software factories in the
French Armed Forces and the Software Acquisition Pathway in the United States
show how hardware/software development cycles can be truly decoupled, with very
short software development loops between manufacturers and Armed Forces (a few
weeks, or even a few days, instead of several years).
56 “Lesarméesachètentunsystèmed’informationpouraccroîtreladisponibilitédeleuravion.»
57 “ThaleswinsVASSCOcontracttosupportairsurveillancesystems.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 37

6.2 Development through Experimentation: A New
Approach to Deploy AI Solutions
Developing AI solutions for the Armed Forces involves a great deal of experi-
mentation. Because of the need to access data, the agile development approach
required for this technology, and since the level of technological maturity still
varies from one application to another, use cases need to be explored with the
respective users. In what follows, we look at challenges and the TAIIA case to
illustrate the approaches of the French Armed Forces.
Challenges by the Armed Forces’ Experimental Labs
Alongside the DGA’s technical innovation clusters and the Armed Forces’ exper-
imentation centers, the Armed Forces experimental labs play an essential role in
accelerating innovation. Despite their differences in terms of size and resources
(whether physical or intangible testing grounds, physical or digital modeling ca-
pabilities, with or without a specific location), the Ministry’s laboratories share the
objective of responding to innovation challenges by working on specific projects
or problems.
In 2022, to provide the French MoD with the necessary tools for innovation,
the DGA set up the Innovation Défense Lab. This lab provides centralized and
dedicated support to the Ministry’s laboratories, facilitating hackathons, training
courses and design thinking sessions. The Agency has also taken steps to federate
the “Defense Makers Community.” In collaboration with the DGA expertise center
on aeronautical techniques (DGA TA), the Agency presented its ambitions in , followed by a mapping of the French Armed Forces labs. In this context, nu-
merous exchanges have taken place with entities such as FUSCOLAB,58 Battle Lab
Terre,59 and CEAM60 confirming the interest of operational staffs and enabling the
French MoD to pursue its efforts to structure this community. The current objective
is to create a platform for exchanging and sharing best practices in modeling and
rapid prototyping. Ideally, this will accelerate innovation within the French MoD.
One of the latest challenges to consider the integration of AI on the battlefield
is the CoHoMa challenge. Aimed at innovation related to decision-making, this
challenge focused on displacement (e.g., forest, urban area, open country) and
concealment as well as connectivity. Launched in 2021 (and renewed in 2023) by
58 FUSCOLAB:InnovationLaboratoryoftheMarineFusiliersandMarineCommandosForce.
59 BattleLabTerre:experimentationlabofLandForces.
60 CEAM:AirForceExpertiseCenter.
38 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

the Battle Lab Terre, the challenge of cooperation between man and machine aims
to unite players in robotics through mixed teams from industry, startups, research
labs, and engineering schools around a collaborative challenge. Each challenge
envisages a tactical scenario for 2040. Three aspects are of particular relevance:
maneuvering and articulating land and air satellites from a master vehicle; crossing
terrain compartments and progressing to the final zone; detecting, identifying and
deactivating traps to be able to advance while informing the command post.
Experiments Conducted by Operational Units: The TAIIA Case
The TAIIA project (“Traitement et Analyse d’Images par Intelligence Artificielle” or
Image Processing and Analysis by Artificial Intelligence) was an experiment hosted
by the Directorate of Military Intelligence (DRM) in 2020.61 It aimed at building a
customized tool for the automatic detection of activities on sites of strategic inter-
est (Figure 3). Based on an experimental platform fed by operational images from
the new CSO observation satellite constellation, the project was one of the first
experiments to industrialize AI in classified environments. These classified environ-
ments imply particular constraints for product development such as on-premises
deployment within protected military sites, classified test data, restricted user
access, and other aspects. To nevertheless deliver high-performance algorithms,
Preligens’ models have been trained on commercial data. Preligens has invested
heavily in building an “AI Factory” which accelerates moving from development to
production. This has the potential to drastically reduce the time it takes to pro-
duce algorithms.
Over and above the challenge of making AI operational for intelligence pur-
poses, the specificity of the project lies in the co-construction of the product.
The technology not only helps the experts in their search for information and
clues in the images, but also enables them to improve their analysis of activity at
pre-selected geographical sites. This project has had far-reaching organizational
consequences:62
It has profoundly transformed the activities of photo interpreters and intelli-
gence analysts, freeing them from a particularly tedious task (counting objects)
to concentrate on higher value tasks, such as detecting unknown activity on
sites of interest (e.g., the presence of drones on a platform where they had
never been observed) and thus producing usable intelligence.
This co-construction approach, which responds to a strong operational chal-
lenge but entails major organizational changes, mirrors the defense sector’s
unique restraints. The software had to work, heavily restricted, within the
61 “ProjectTAIIA.”
62 Ceillier,“Unestart-upciviledansladéfense,lesraisonsd’unsuccès.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 39

Directorate of Military Intelligence infrastructure and premises, with no Internet
connection and no remote intervention in the event of a problem. Preligens
transformed its solution in iterations, bringing it into line with the necessary
software and operational requirements. Moreover, the end-users, intelligence
analysts, remain discrete and bound by oath to secrecy, despite the prod-
uct’s co-construction approach. Many subjects cannot be discussed, and the
knowledge passed on is often taken out of context or diluted, preventing
direct access to sensitive information. Other adaptations to the agile software
development method are necessary due to the constraints of confidentiality
such as delivery rhythm (every eight weeks for example, rather than in a matter
of minutes or hours in the commercial sector) and user involvement (frequent
interaction with users – every day at the beginning of the project and later on
a weekly basis via user group workshops – is still unusual in this environment).
Finally, despite the operational interest and relevance of the co-innovation
approach with AI, this project had to overcome the difficulties associated with
scaling up from an R&D budget to industrialization, imposing highly complex
contract negotiation phases and specific contractual engineering.
Initial results have prompted the French Armed Forces to pursue experimen-
tation, with the aim of offering this technological capability to all players in the
field of imagery-based intelligence and analysis. After many months of nego-
tiations, the French MoD decided to pursue the TAIIA project, scaling up the
solution for operational deployment within the Joint Intelligence Function.63
Furthermore, this project also revealed that the historical separation between R&D
budgets (P144) and equipment budgets (P146), inherited from the “waterfall”
model used for the design and acquire complex hardware systems, was ill-suited
for software development in “DevOps”, which requires very short loops between
design, development, testing and deployment. The Defense Innovation Agency,
via the Scale-Up Governance Committee is addressing this issue to provide
budgetary support and leeway for innovation projects that have demonstrated the
power to enhance the operational superiority of the French Armed Forces.
63 “France’sGeneralDirectorateofArmaments(DGA)contractswithPreligensfordataprocessingsolutionstomeetitsdefense
needs.”
40 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

Figure 3: The Preligens Case: The Scale-Up from the TAIIA Experiment64
Vehicule StartofTAIIA Scalingupwith
Challengeat experimentation over30solutions
Directorate deployed
ofMilitary
Intelligence InstallationofTAIIina
classifiedenvironment
attheDirectorateof
MilitaryIntelligence
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
RAPID* 1 RAPID* 2 Major contract to
provide the AI solutions
to all Armed Forces
1stproofof Development Industriali-
concept ofanAI-based zationofAI
ofAI solutionfor algorithm
algorithms monitoring production Catalogof10military
strategicsites objectdetectorson
satelliteimagery
Funds
raised €200k €20M
Employees /
Revenue 15/N.A. 80/€5M 220/€25M
Difficulties of access to Solved by
Sensitivedata Useofcommercialproxies
End-user Experiments
Militaryinfrastructures Agileadaptations
*RAPID:R&Dprojectondual-usetechnologiesfundedbytheFrenchMOD
Source:Authors
64 In2022,Preligenssigneda7-yearcontractworthuptoUS$240MwithFrenchDefenseMinistry.Thecontractcovers
theacquisitionofsoftwarelicensesforAI/MLsolutionstoprocessandexploitbigdata.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 41

7 Training for
Defense AI
42 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

One of the last, but nevertheless important barriers to operationalize AI in the
Armed Forces remains the human resources challenge. Beyond the subject of AI,
the issue of skills in the digital field is crucial. It is essential to have operational
staff with a high level of digital expertise This is currently under considerable
pressure due to high demand and limited supply. This situation is reflected in the
exponential growth in salaries in the private sector compared to the public sector.
Several initiatives have been put in place to meet this challenge:
The French Interministerial Digital Department (DINUM) has introduced a new
approach for the management of its contract staff, based on a “quasi-corps”
system. This approach offers several advantages, such as shorter recruitment
times, better remuneration for the 56 professions concerned, and a more
structured career path. For example, measures are taken to anticipate train-
eeship and apprenticeship exits to offer positions to qualified candidates.
Inspired by the model of the National Agency for Information Systems Security
(ANSSI), which employs 80% contract staff, the French Ministry of Defense
sees this model as a means of rapid staff renewal, where contract staff come
to gain rewarding experience before pursuing their careers elsewhere. This
approach fosters diversity of career paths and the enrichment of skills within
the administration.
The use of Digital Service Companies is also widespread, and the French MoD
is working to industrialize this collaboration with the private sector. Hybrid
service centers have been set up, notably at the Joint Directorate of Infrastruc-
ture Networks and Information Systems (DIRISI), to bring together public and
private skills to develop satellite links, for example.
Recruiting specialized AI experts is also a challenge for the defense industry. To
meet this challenge, major defense companies have created in-house training
programs ranging from awareness-raising and dissemination of an AI culture to ad-
vanced technical certifications. The co-construction of training programs with en-
gineering schools is also a priority. Projects are launched on interactive simulation
using AI, among others at the Air Force Experimentation Center. Finally, we should
also mention a partnership initiative between manufacturers (multi-sector),65 the
AI Manifesto. As part of this initiative, which aims to establish a coordinated
action plan for the French AI ecosystem, a thematic group (GT) has been set up
specifically to address the issues of training and the attractiveness of specialized
human resources. The aim is to combine forces, notably by creating a common job
repository for the signatory groups of the manifesto and offer synergy in the career
paths of young engineers between the different groups (facilitating career mobility
between these signatory companies).
65 Thales,DassaultAviation,Safran,NavalGroup.OthersignatoriesincludeEDF,Total,Valeo,AirLiquide,Renault,Schlumberger,
ST,Orange,Michelin,andSaintGobain.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 43

8 Conclusion
44 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

Defense AI now seems to be firmly rooted in the French Armed Forces. There is a
plethora of initiatives launched in the context of major programs (FCAS, for exam-
ple), thematic challenges (robotics with COHOMA), or experiments in operational
units (TAIIA).
AI governance has also taken shape around the CCIAD at the Defense Innovation
Agency. However, considering the requirements of different military services, the
Procurement Agency (DGA) and the new entities created as part of the Armed
Forces digital transformation (Defense Innovation Agency – AID, the Digital
Directorate – DGNUM, Defense Digital Agency – AND), the French MoD’s action
can appear very fragmented for the defense ecosystem. This is all the truer given
that localized, high-impact initiatives have emerged within each military branch
at multiple levels, as discussed, for example, with the creation of the Naval Data
Service Center (CSD-M).
This profusion of initiatives at various levels and taken by different military branch
may illustrate the lack of a centralized data-sharing policy, favoring ad hoc devel-
opment frameworks. For the time being, the French MoD’s approach to data shar-
ing is restrictive. The latest Defense Innovation Agency activity report suggests
that this situation is subject to minor changes, with the declared aim of ensure
adequate data supply:
Data at the heart of AI-based processing is all the more valuable for its oper-
ational nature. The provision of such data must be compensated fairly by the
Ministry, such as through the supply of annotated data or the possibility of
testing solutions developed by external players.66
This type of negotiation generally concerns the sharing of intellectual property
related to algorithms developed on the data made available by the MoD. For the
time being, however, the respective compensation seems to be negotiated on a
case-by-case basis.
In addition, the French MoD’s objective is to promote AI in all programs wher-
ever possible and desirable. Indeed, while the first phase consisted of setting a
course and providing resources, the French MoD seems to have adopted a new
approach, with the widespread dissemination of AI. According to Mickaël Kra-
jecki, head of AI projects at the Defense Artificial Intelligence Coordination Unit
(CCIAD), AI is no longer “identified as a particular object.”67 This underlines the
French MoD’s commitment to a new approach that could be interpreted as a sign
of maturity. But it seems that the Ministry’s policy remains to be confirmed if it is
66 DefenseInnovationAgencyActivityreport2022,p.20.
67 Vincent/Bezeat,«Défense:lesstart-upsdel’intelligenceartificielletententd’investirlechampdebataille.»
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 45

to fully disseminate trusted AI solutions. Indeed, if the ministerial policy of data
sharing remains restrictive, then this will force the MoD to continue to rely on
the recruitment of scarce skilled labor. Moreover, experiments conducted so far
have identified major roadblocks such as the need to develop adequate digital
infrastructure including clouds, access to users, and adjusting budgetary and
contractual mechanisms to the reality of agile software development. The updated
defense AI strategy, which could be published by the end of 2023 or early 2024,
will need to take these elements into account to meet the challenges of develop-
ing trusted AI techniques and solutions.
The strategy update will also need to reflect upon the fact that – despite the will
to integrate defense AI into military operations – large-scale implementation has
yet to take place. To achieve this, AI governance needs to be strengthened and
strategic investments made to develop programs that can catalyze many success-
ful initiatives in different areas of AI. There are still several open items that can
help scale AI development, such as:
Supporting the work of raising awareness of investments in AI within armament
programs.
Increasing financing capacities to scale up AI developments available to major
armament programs.
Increasing the R&T budget of the Defense Innovation Agency’s to finance de-
fense applications of emerging civilian technologies, identified and captured
in an open innovation process.
Formalizing a strategic data-sharing policy for the entire French MoD and
defining rules of ownership and use to facilitate access for experimentation
purposes.
Decoupling software and hardware development cycles within weapons
programs.
Facilitating agile co-development between the military and manufacturers to
move forward on the rapid construction of solutions in response to use cases
(possibly drawing inspiration from US Armed Forces’ software factories).68
68 Barrett,“SoftwareFactoriesfortheMilitaryScaleDevSecOps.”
46 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

Literature
“AirbuslaunchesSmartForce-servicesbringingthe “Lesarméesachètentunsystèmed'information
powerofdatatomilitaryoperations”,AirbusDSPress pouraccroîtreladisponibilitédeleuravion”,Larevue
release,16July2018, dudigital,25March2021,
newsroom/press-releases/2018-07-airbus-launches- com/les-armees-commandent-un-systeme-dinforma-
smartforce-services-bringing-the-power-of-data-to(last tion-pour-accroitre-la-disponibilite-de-leurs-avions/(last
accessed30August2023). accesseddate30August2023).
“DGAordersdataprocessingsolutionstailoredto “ProjectTAIIA”,Video,FrenchMinistryofDefense,
defenseneedsfromPreligens”,DGA,12October2022, 2020,
 (lastaccesseddate30August2023)
mande-a-societe-preligens-solutions-traitement-don-
nees-adaptees-aux-besoins-defense-0(lastaccessed30 “ThalesandGoogleCloudannounceastrategicpart-
August2023). nershiptojointlydevelopa'TrustedCloud'inFrance,”
ThalesGrouppressrelease,6October2021,https://
“Feuillederoutedeladonnée2021/2023,”French 
MinistryofDefense,September2021, lease/thales-and-google-cloud-announce-strategic-part-
gouv.fr/fr/datasets/feuilles-de-route-ministerielles-sur- nership-jointly(lastaccessed30August2023).
la-politique-de-la-donnee-des-algorithmes-et-des-codes-
sources/ (lastaccessed30August2023). “ThalesandMicrosoftpartnertodevelopaunique
DefenseCloudsolution”,ThalesGrouppressrelease,
“FranceandSingaporecreateajointR&Dlaboratory 12June2018,
inthefieldofartificialintelligencefordefense”,French worldwide/defence/press-release/thales-and-microsoft-
MoDPressrelease,18April2023, partner-develop-unique-defence-cloud-solution(last
gouv.fr/aid/actualites/france-singapour-creent-labora- accessed30August2023).
toire-conjoint-rd-domaine-lintelligence-artificielle-de-
fense(lastaccessed30August2023). “ThaleswinsVASSCOcontracttosupportairsurveil-
lancesystems”,Thales,ThalesGrouppressrelease,6
“France’sGeneralDirectorateofArmaments(DGA) January2022,
contractswithPreligensfordataprocessingsolutions wide/defence/press_release/thales-wins-vassco-con-
tomeetitsdefenseneeds”,Preligenspressrelease,12 tract-support-air-surveillance-systems(lastaccessed
October2022, date30August2023)
files/2022-10/Press_Release_Preligens_DGA.pdf(last
accessed30August2023). “Webconferenceonfundingandstartupdevel-
opmentindefensesector,”FoundationforStrategic
“InstructionNo1070/ARM/EMM/MGMrelativeàl'or- Research,9July2020
ganisationetaufonctionnementducentred'expertise watch?v=ZKNSIAz2ZYM(lastaccessed30August
desprogrammesnavals,”BulletinOfficieldesArmées, 2023).
no60,12August2022,
sites/default/files/sga/Texte%201%20instruction%20 AIinSupportofDefense.ReportoftheAITaskForce
du%201%20aout%202022.pdf(lastaccessed30August (Paris:FrenchMinistryofDefense,2019),
2023). decideo.fr/attachment/1702015/(lastaccesseddate30
August2023).
“L’intelligenceartificielleetlemondedeladéfense,”
DirectionGénéraledesentreprises,undated,https:// AINationalstrategy:2ndphase(Paris:Officeofthe
 PrimeMinister,2021),
gence-artificielle-et-monde-de-la-defense (lastaccessed com/Augure_Minefi/r/ContenuEnLigne/Download?i
30August2023). d=334FD34F-7844-497E-9551-79EDFF3B2EEF&file-
name=1645%20-%20DP%20-%20Strat%C3%A9gie%20Na-
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 47

tionale%20pour%20l%27IA%202%C3%A8me%20phase. Gain,Nathan,“CommentNexterconjugueinnovation
pdf(lastaccesseddate30August2023). ettransformationdigitaledepuisunan,”FOB,6July
2020,
ArticleR2172-20oninnovationpartnerships–Public ter-conjugue-innovation-et-transformation-digitale-depu-
ProcurementCode is-un-an/(lastaccessed30August2023).
codes/section_lc/LEGITEXT000037701019/LEGISC-
TA000037724640/2021-08-26(lastaccessed30August GuideforintegrationofAIintoprograms–Refer-
2023). ence:DR-GuideS-CATn°220000.Revisedin2021,

Barrett,Randy,“SoftwareFactoriesfortheMilitary tegration-lintelligence-artificielle-ia-programmes-evolue
ScaleDevSecOps,”FedTech,9May2022,https:// (lastaccesseddate30August2023).
fedtechmagazine.com/article/2022/05/software-facto-
ries-military-scale-devsecops-perfcon(lastaccessed30 Instructionn°1618/ARM/CABonarmamentopera-
August2023). tions,
(lastaccesseddate30August2023)
Bômont,Clotilde,“Leclouddéfense:défiopération-
nel,impératifstratégiqueetenjeudesouveraineté,”Fo- Kahn,LaurenA.,RiskyIncrementalism.DefenseAIin
cusstratégique,n°107(Paris:Ifri,2021), theUnitedStates.DAIOStudy23/07(Hamburg:Defense
ifri.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/bomont_cloud_ AIObservatory,2023),
defense_2021.pdf(lastaccessed30August2023). uploads/2023/01/DAIO_Study2307.pdf(lastaccessed
30August2023).
Briant,Raphaël,“OpenInnovationinDefense:Pass-
ingFadorNewPhilosophy?,”Briefingdel’IFRI(Paris:Ifri, LatransformationnumériquedesArmées,Concepts
2022), clés(Paris:FrenchMinistryofDefense,2020),https://
files/briant_open_innovation_defense_2022.pdf(last 
accesseddate30August2023). La%20Transformation%20num%C3%A9rique%20du%20
minist%C3%A8re%20des%20Arm%C3%A9es_concepts_
Ceillier,Tugdual,“Unestart-upciviledansladéfense, cl%C3%A9s.pdf(lastaccessed30August2023).
lesraisonsd’unsuccès,”LaJauneetlaRouge,Novem-
ber2021,no769,pp.38-41, Martin,Kévin,Defensegroupsanddigitaltechnol-
larouge.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/Pages-de- ogies(Paris:FondationpourlaRechercheStratégique,
JR_769-4.pdf(lastaccessed30August2023). 2022),
recherches-et-documents/groupes-defense-technolo-
DassaultAviation,AnnualReport2022(Paris: gies-numerique-2022 (lastaccessed30August2023).
DassaultAviation,2022),
com/wp-content/blogs.dir/2/files/2023/06/RA_2022_ Montaufray-Bureau,Elisabeth,“LeMinistèredes
VA_BD.pdf(lastaccessed30August2023). Armées,viaBpifrance,investitdanslePMEstratégiques
àl'Ouest,”OuestFrance,28April2023,
DefenseInnovationAgency,ActivityReport2022 ouest-france.fr/economie/entreprises/entretien-le-
(Paris:DefenseInnovationAgency,2023),https:// ministere-des-armees-via-bpifrance-investit-dans-les-
 pme-strategiques-a-louest-6177d838-e4fb-11ed-9757-
d%27activite%CC%81s%202022.pdf(lastaccessed30 e35473d4e313(lastaccessed30August2023).
August2023).
Nationalartificialintelligenceresearchstrategy:
Duillet,Louise,“IA:'IlfautenurgenceàlaFranceune astrategytobestructuredandsustained(Paris:
forcedetravailpourpréparer,comprencrelesdonnées CourdesComptes,2023),
etprévenirleslimitesdesmachines',”Usbek&Rica,4 system/files/2023-04/20230403-strategie-nationale-re-
November2021, cherche--intelligence-artificielle.pdf(lastaccessed30
il-faut-en-urgence-a-la-france-une-force-de-travail-pour- August2023).
preparer-comprendre-les-donnees-et-prevenir-les-limites-
des-machines(lastaccessed30August2023). ParlyFlorence,“StatementbytheMinisterofthe
ArmedForcesonDefenseAIinSaclay,”5April2019,
EzrattyOlivier,TheUsesofArtificialIntelligence 
(Paris:Self-Published,2021), ence-parly-5042019-intelligence-artificielle-et-defense
wordpress/2021/usages-intelligence-artificielle-2021/ (lastaccessed30August2023).
(lastaccessed30August2023)
48 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

Parly,Florence.,“StatementbytheMinisterofthe
ArmedForcesondefenseAIinCreil,”10May2021,

ence-parly-10052021-intelligence-artificielle(last
accessed30August2023).
Philippe,Edouard,“Missionletterfromthe
FrenchPrimeMinistertoCédricVillani,”n°1756/17/
SG,8September2017,
default/0001/01/81e6a65e224b3de490ecfbd-
00b6e40c79bcb3a43.pdf(lastaccessed30August
2023).
Revuestratégiquededéfenseetdesécuriténation-
ale(Paris:FrenchMinistryofDefense,2017),https://

gique_dsn_cle4b3beb.pdf(lastaccessed30August
2023).
RicaudBrunoandCécileJourdas,“Nexter:AI&
RoboticSystems”,AFIA,bulletinn°104,April2019,p.28,

PFIA2021.pdf(lastaccessed30August2023).
Scott,Richard,“HUMATstudylookstoimprove
human/machineinterface”,Janes,22November2019,

humat-study-looks-to-improve-humanmachine-interface
(lastaccessed30August2023).
SpeechbyFrenchPresidentEmmanuelMacron
#Aiforhumanity,29March2018,
fr/emmanuel-macron/2018/03/29/discours-du-presi-
dent-de-la-republique-sur-lintelligence-artificielle(last
accessed30August2023).
Villani,Cédric,Forameaningfulartificialintel-
ligence:towardsaFrenchandEuropeanstrategy.
RapportdelamissionconfiéeparlePremierMinistre,
March2018,
pdf/2018/2018-03-28_Rapport-Villani.pdf(lastaccessed
30August2023).
Vincent,Elise,andJeanMichelBezat,“Défense:les
start-upsdel'intelligenceartificielletententd'investir
lechampdebataille,”LeMonde,27June2023,https://

fense-les-start-up-de-l-intelligence-artificielle-tentent-d-
investir-le-champ-de-bataille_6179459_3234.html(last
accessed30August2023)
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 49

50 A WINDING ROAD BEFORE SCALING-UP?

Defense AI Observatory Studies
23|17 Kévin Martin and Lucie Liversain, A Winding Road Before Scaling-Up? Defense AI in
France
23|16 Sami O. Järvinen, Cautious Data-Driven Evolution. Defence AI in Finland
23|15 Inbar Dolinko and Liran Antebi, Embracing the Organized Mess. Defense AI in Israel
23|14 Alastair Finlan, A Fertile Soil for AI? Defense AI in Sweden
23|13 John Lee, “Overtaking on the Curve?” Defense AI in China
23|12 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, and Joseph Verbovszky, Master and Servant. Defense
AI in Germany
23|11 Katarzyna Zysk, High Hopes Amid Hard Realities. Defense AI in Russia
23|10 Yvonne Hofstetter and Joseph Verbovzsky, How AI Learns the Bundeswehr’s
“Innere Führung.” Value-Based Engineering with IEEE7000™-2021
23|09 Robert C Engen, When the Teeth Eat the Tail: A Review of Canada’s Defence Artificial
Intelligence
23|08 Çağlar Kurç, Enabling Technology of Future Warfare. Defense AI in Turkey
23|07 Lauren A. Kahn, Risky Incrementalism. Defense AI in the United States
22|06 Yvonne Hofstetter, Wie KI Innere Führung lernt. Wertbasierte Technik mit
IEEE7000™-2021
22|05 Andrea Gilli, Mauro Gilli, and Ivan Zaccagnini, Exploring the Benefits of a New Force
Enabler: Defense AI in Italy
22|04 Kenneth Payne, Bright Prospects – Big Challenges. Defense AI in the United
Kingdom
22|03 Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber, Armin Brandstetter, and Gary S. Schaal, Free
Jazz on the Battlefield. How GhostPlay’s AI Approach Enhances Air Defense
22|02 Peter Layton, Evolution not Revolution. Australia’s Defence AI Pathway
21|01 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, Joseph Verbovszky, Beware the Hype. What Military
Conflicts in Ukraine, Syria, Libya, and Nagorno-Karabakh (Don’t) Tell Us About the
Future of War