Survival of the
Smartest?
Defense AI in Ukraine
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Vitaliy Goncharuk
DAIO Study 24|22

About the Defense AI Observatory
The Defense AI Observatory (DAIO) at the Helmut Schmidt University in Hamburg
monitors and analyzes the use of artificial intelligence by armed forces. DAIO comprises
three interrelated work streams:
Culture, concept development, and organizational transformation in the context of
military innovation
Current and future conflict pictures, conflict dynamics, and operational experience,
especially related to the use of emerging technologies
Defense industrial dynamics with a particular focus on the impact of emerging
technologies on the nature and character of techno-industrial ecosystems
DAIO is an integral element of GhostPlay, a capability and technology development
project for concept-driven and AI-enhanced defense decision-making in support of fast-
paced defense operations. GhostPlay is funded by the Center for Digital and Technology
Research of the German Bundeswehr (dtec.bw). dtec.bw is funded by the European Union
– NextGenerationEU.
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von

Survival of the
Smartest?
Defense AI in Ukraine
Ein Projekt im Rahmen von
Vitaliy Goncharuk
DAIO Study 24|22

About the Author
Vitaliy Goncharuk is an entrepreneur. He hold his first company, Augmented Pixels, a
company focusing on AI-based autonomous navigation and 3D mapping, to Qualcomm
in 2022. Currently he runs two new startups dealing with AI. In addition, he was a member
of the external innovation advisory board of Ukroboronprom and the first chairman of
Ukraine’s AI Committee from 2020-2022. Right now, he is head of the “AI for Defense”
working group a Ukraine’s AI Advisory Committee and founder of WiseRegulation.org, a
think and do tank focusing on AI regulation. His X/Twitter account is @vactivity.
Design
Almasy Information Design Thinking
Imprint
Vitaliy Goncharuk, Survival of the Smartest? Defense AI in Ukraine. DAIO Study 24/22
(Hamburg: Defense AI Observatory, 2024).
An adapted version of this paper will appear in: Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, and Joseph
Verbovszky (eds.) The Very Long Game. 25 Case Studies on the Global State of Defense AI
(Cham: Springer, forthcoming).
Defense AI Observatory | Chair of Political Theory | Helmut Schmidt University
Holstenhofweg 85 | 22043 Hamburg | T +49 40 6541 2776
 | contact@defenseai.eu | @Defense_AIO
ISSN (online): 2749-5337
ISSN (print): 2749-5345
4 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

Content
1 Summary ..................................................................................................................... 6
2 Thinking About Defense AI ....................................................................................... 8
2.1 Regulating Defense AI .................................................................................................9
2.2 Re-Evaluating “Human in the Loop” in Modern Warfare ............................................11
3 Developing Defense AI. ........................................................................................... 13
3.1 AI’s War Stimulus .......................................................................................................14
3.2 Ukraine’s New Defense AI Priorities ...........................................................................15
3.3 Ukraine’s New Defense AI Ecosystem ........................................................................17
4 Organizing Defense AI ............................................................................................. 23
5 Funding Defense AI ................................................................................................. 26
6 Fielding and Operating Defense AI ............................................................................................................. 29
7 Training for Defense AI ............................................................................................ 32
8 Conclusion. ................................................................................................................ 35
Literature ...................................................................................................................... 38
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 5

1 Summary
Before Russia’s full-scale invasion in , Ukraine had an
advanced ecosystem to produce artificial intelligence (AI) solutions
for commercial use. The country also ranked first in the number of
AI companies in Eastern Europe1 with more than 7,000 AI engineers
and hosting research and development (R&D) offices of multinational
companies like Amazon, Lyft, Google, Samsung, Grammarly and
many others. In addition, the country approved its first national AI
strategy2 in 2020, which, among other priorities, also identified the
importance of implementing AI in the field of security and defense.
However, Ukraine’s defense sector only used AI sporadically, as the
defense industry was primarily state-owned, focused on traditional
hardware, and was not known as a “hotbed” for innovative, especial-
ly software-driven solutions.
The current war between Russia and Ukraine has changed almost
all these parameters. Unlike other conflicts over the last 30 years,
this is a war among technologically advanced countries. Therefore,
both sides began developing and fielding AI solutions for tasks like
geospatial intelligence, operations with unmanned systems, mili-
tary training, and cyber warfare. Consequently, the war in Ukraine
became the first conflict where both parties compete in and with AI,
which has become a critical component of success.
In 2022, Ukraine’s resilience originated from a more active use of
awareness systems, volunteer and private AI initiatives as well as
the crowdsourcing of data, the use of open-source platforms, and
advances in the decentralized use of the respective assets. As of
2023, the Cabinet of Ministers began to launch policy initiatives to
more systematically o advance defense AI and the respective indig-
enous industrial base by creating a new ecosystem and advancing
public and private funding solutions. The ecosystem of information
1 TheGovernmentAIReadinessIndex2020.
2 CabinetofMinisters,“OntheapprovaloftheConceptforthedevelopmentofartificialintelligenceinUkraine.”
6 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

technology (IT) companies also began to shift its focus from devel-
oping civil products to dual-use products and actively recruit the
best talents in the AI field. Foreign AI solution developers are using
the war as a testbed to evaluate the performance of their solutions
on the battlefield. Some defense observers even contend that AI
solutions that have not been tested for use in Ukraine’s combat envi-
ronment won’t be fit for purpose.
This war poses challenges not only to AI solutions providers but
also to AI regulation as battlefield experience prompts the need to
reconsider the appropriateness of the “human in the loop” princi-
ples and other core assumptions. It seems that many of the existing
regulatory principles will be hard to sustain as they have not been
designed for war and thus hamper countries in their need to defend
against aggressors. Consequently, Ukraine is turning into a most
valuable test case for the development and regulation of war-proof
defense AI solutions.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 7

2 Thinking
About
Defense AI
8 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

At the time of writing this study, Ukraine is at war. Almost all investments, intellec-
tual and material resources are directed toward survival and enhancing defense
capabilities to ensure success on today’s battlefield, not in two or three years.
This focus also drives defense AI in Ukraine. According to the national AI strategy,
AI is understood as
an organized set of information technologies, with the use of which it is possi-
ble to perform difficult complex tasks by using a system of scientific research
methods and algorithms for processing information obtained or independently
created during work, as well as to create and use own knowledge bases, de-
cision-making models, algorithms for working with information and determine
ways to achieve the tasks.3
Ukraine’s current efforts are geared towards using AI to establish a competitive
edge vis-à-vis Russia and build an ecosystem that will sustain this technological ad-
vantage to withstand aggression and rapidly develop much-required defense solu-
tions. While both sides benefit from using defense AI to advance the processing
of information, support decision-making, and enhancing existing equipment with
defense AI, the question is how to get the upper hand in this technology-driven
“tit for tat” game. In this regard, the accumulation of knowledge and experience
could become a future strategic currency for Ukraine to advance national force
development and share insights with allies and partners. The battle use of defense
AI also yields valuable lessons for the future regulation of defense AI. Considering
the situation, Ukraine has started to explore how warfighting insights on defense
AI could be transitioned from the current state of war into a future state of peace
as it is particularly important that data, which has been collected during wartime,
would henceforth not be used in ways detrimental to human rights and democrat-
ic values.
2.1 Regulating Defense AI
The Ministry of Digital Transformation of Ukraine4 is the main body responsible
for policies in the field of AI and robotics development. Within the Ministry, a
separate department has been established, and since 2020, there is an operating
expert committee on developing and deploying AI.
3 CabinetofMinisters,“OntheapprovaloftheConceptforthedevelopmentofartificialintelligenceinUkraine.”
4 CabinetofMinisters,“OnmakingamendmentstotheRegulationontheMinistryofDigitalTransformationofUkraine.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 9

So far, the national AI strategy5 is the country’s capstone document, which also
foresaw the use of AI for national security and defense as a key area of application.
According to the strategy, AI solutions must ensure the protection of human rights
and adhere to ethical standards. To this purpose, the strategy also includes devel-
oping an ethical code on AI but work in this direction has not yet started.
National security and defense are key use cases for AI in Ukraine. According to the
strategy,6 the government wants to develop solutions for the use of AI for
Command and control (C2);
Weapons and military equipment including unmanned systems and unmanned
demining solutions;
Collection and analysis of information during combat operations;
Analysis in support of intelligence activities including the processing of car-
tographic information;
Defense against cyber threats including applications that allow for the quick
detection of cyberattacks, preliminary scanning, and subsequent avoidance of
malicious codes;
Simulation and cognitive modeling of the combat situation.
These use cases suggest that Ukraine sees AI as integral to its attempt to develop
unmanned systems and advance cyber defense solutions as envisioned by the
country’s 2021 Military Security Strategy.7 To this end, the Cabinet of Ministers has
also adopted an implementation plan.8 The plan outlines a series of initiatives such
as adopting legal regulation on issues of forming state policy in the field of AI,
providing state support to use AI in priority sectors of the economy; implement-
ing AI to enhance national cybersecurity systems, and defining priority tasks and
directions for the current and future use of AI for defense.
In addition, Ukraine participates in international initiatives to regulate the develop-
ment and use of AI. In particular, the Ukrainian Parliament ratified the agreement
with the European Union (EU) on joining the “Digital Europe” program in February
20239 and signed the Bletchley Declaration on AI Security at the
AI Safety Summit.10 As an official candidate for EU membership, Ukraine clearly
signals its will to synchronize legislative efforts to advance digitalization with the
EU’s policy initiatives. But while the Ministry of Digital Transformation has outlined
5 CabinetofMinisters,“OntheapprovaloftheConceptforthedevelopmentofartificialintelligenceinUkraine.”
6 CabinetofMinisters,“OntheapprovaloftheConceptforthedevelopmentofartificialintelligenceinUkraine.”
7 PresidentofUkraine,“OntheStrategyofMilitarySecurityofUkraine.”
8 CabinetofMinisters,“Ontheapprovaloftheactionplanfortheimplementationoftheconceptforthedevelopmentofartificial
intelligence.”
9 “AgreementbetweenUkraineandtheEuropeanUniononUkraine’sparticipationintheEuropeanUnionprogram‘DigitalEurope.’
10 MinistryofDigitalTransformation,“UkrainesignedaninternationaldeclarationdedicatedtothesafetyofusingAI.”
10 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

a roadmap for regulating the civilian and commercial use of AI in Ukraine,11 the
respective capstone document for the use of AI in support of national security and
defense is missing.
2.2 Re-Evaluating “Human in the Loop” in
Modern Warfare
In recent years, civil society organizations and AI experts have become increas-
ingly concerned about the emergence of lethal autonomous weapons systems
(LAWS), which may use AI to identify targets and thus could harm individuals if
used without direct human control.12 Consequently, there has been a collective
initiative at the United Nations to prohibit or impose limitations on using these
systems. So far, however, these discussions have not yielded significant results.
Proponents of the “human in the loop” principle, which advocates the ultimate
role of humans as decision-makers, have noble intentions. But technical solutions
envisaged to ensure ultimate human control are challenging to implement in war
without overly limiting a defender’s space for action. First, on the battlefield, the
distinction between solutions to find, fix, track, and engage targets with a “human
in the loop” or in fully autonomous mode is almost impossible to make as the
same technology operates in different modes. In practice, there are only two
to five seconds between target identification and engagement, which is hardly
enough for a human operator to make a balanced decision. This bears the risk
that involving a “human in the loop” becomes a “formality,” that might render the
target-engagement cycle more difficult. Second, implementing a “human in the
loop” via mechanisms that ensure remote control of assets not only increases the
costs of the respective devices. Russia’s frequent use of electronic warfare (EW)
also makes connectivity with the platform and the payload unfeasible. Third, there
are no effective international mechanisms to verify or ensure that both sides refrain
from using weapons without a “human in the loop,” as it is challenging – if not
impossible – to assume after a mission has been executed, whether an unmanned
asset has been piloted or flown autonomously. Under these conditions, fully
autonomous AI solutions would provide the defender with significant advantages
in executing its tasks more effectively and more precisely than, for example, with
traditional artillery or conventional weapons.13
11 MinistryofDigitalTransformation,“RoadmapfortheregulationofartificialintelligenceinUkraine.”
12 Kahn,“AIisonthefrontlinesofthewarinUkraine.”
13 Goncharuk,“WarinUkraine.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 11

In sum, the use of AI in the current war is very likely to shape the future regulatory
debate in two different ways. First, war experience will test the binding power of
norms and rules when aggressors feel unrestricted by the normative principles that
guide a defender’s actions. In addition, this will also prompt the need to rethink
how the human in the loop logic – which depends on connectivity between oper-
ators and unmanned assets – would be ensured under adversarial electromagnetic
spectrum dominance.
12 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

3 Developing
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 13

Before the full-scale invasion in 2022, Ukraine’s defense sector was considered
non-prestigious and corrupt.14 The defense-industrial complex of Ukraine con-
sisted mainly of state-owned enterprises with only a handful of private defense
manufacturers getting state defense orders.15 The main AI development centers
were concentrated in a few state institutes that historically worked with the main
customer UkrOboronProm and dozens of private companies.
In 2022, most AI initiatives, including data collection and processing, neural
network training for weapon detection, and social media analysis to fight disin-
formation campaigns, were spearheaded by private companies and volunteers.
These private and volunteer-led efforts incorporated advanced technologies such
as AI-enhanced detectors and trackers in drones and robots for localization, adapt-
ing rapidly to the evolving demands of the conflict, whereas the state continued
to focus on conventional weapons production. However, as will be discussed
below, systemic changes at the state level, including the development of funding
programs and the creation of new structural units with a focus on AI development,
began in 2023.
3.1 AI’s War Stimulus
Russia pays significant attention to the development of AI technologies in de-
fense. The arsenal of the Russian armed forces already includes a wide range of
weapons using AI technologies (CNA 2022). As Katarzyna Zysk16 shows, Russia’s
political and military decision-makers understand the importance of AI and are
therefore actively investing in its military application, involving state and private
development centers.
Given that Russia is ramping up its industrial production of drones and robotic
systems, autonomous robots with AI may begin to be used massively from 2025-
2026, which could provide a significant advantage on the battlefield. These
systems may be EW-proof due to AI’s capability to autonomously process and
react to electronic threats, dynamically adapt to changing electronic environments,
and operate independently without the need for remote signals, which are often
targets of electronic jamming. Consequently, Ukraine is forced to compete and
develop AI solutions that provide adequate responses to Russia’s challenges.
14 Bondar,“ArsenalofDemocracy.”
15 Kolomychenko,“’ArmyofDrones’.”
16 Zysk,HighHopesAmidHardRealities.
14 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

From 2023, the Government of Ukraine began actively stimulating the develop-
ment of innovative defense solutions. The Ministry of Strategic Industries and the
Ministry of Digital Transformation are at the forefront of these efforts. Technolog-
ical defense developments in the field of AI receive organizational and financial
support through specialized platforms and projects. In addition, volunteers – who
joined to help the Ukrainian armed forces by raising funds for the purchase of
weapons, special equipment, transport, communication means, and training – are
of pivotal importance in strengthening the country’s defense.
This combination also helps explain Ukraine’s success in implementing AI on the
battlefield, which is driven by the motivation of Ukrainian troops, a high level of
technical training of military specialists (who are recruited from the private sector),
and the involvement of private companies in spearheading novel defense solu-
tions. Crowdsourcing, involving ordinary citizens collecting important information
about military operations shared with Ukrainian authorities, also plays an important
role. Together, these aspects highlight the broader trend of democratizing military
power, which goes far beyond the current war.17
Moreover, the unprecedented speed of implementing AI technologies into military
systems and their use on the battlefield became possible thanks to the simplifi-
cation of bureaucratic mechanisms to approve new technologies for use in the
defense sector. So far, however, neither Russia nor Ukraine has officially acknowl-
edged deploying fully autonomous weapon systems using AI. This also highlights,
that it is “impossible to know, based on open-source materials, whether and what
type of AI and autonomous technologies are being used in classified tasks and
missions, and to what effect.”18
3.2 Ukraine’s New Defense AI Priorities
In , the Expert Advisory Committee on AI Development at the
Ministry of Digital Transformation (Expert Committee Undated) provided recom-
mendations for directing state and private investments to accelerate the develop-
ment of defense AI solutions between 2023 and 2026. Among other things, the
committee identified the following defense AI priorities:
AI for Domestic Unmanned Systems (e.g., Drones and Robots)
The use of AI is meant to support navigation systems (without Global Position-
ing System, GPS), coordinated task execution management systems, auton-
17 Kahn,“HowUkraineIsRemakingWar.”
18 Konaev,Tomorrow’sTechnologyinToday’sWar,p.1.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 15

omous task performance systems, enemy weapon and equipment detection
(identification) systems, and data collection and storage systems for unmanned
systems. These AI applications will be important to augment the “Army of
Drones,” that the General Staff of the Armed Forces and the Ministry of Digital
Transformation intend to establish to leverage Ukraine’s experience in using
unmanned systems to repel Russia’s aggression.19
AI to Combat Disinformation
AI shall be used for interactive solutions based on generative AI, deep voice
and deepfake technologies for special law enforcement agencies, automatic
detection systems for sources of disinformation and bots involved in foreign
influence operations (FIMI), automation/standardization of information threat
description and data exchange, labeling and detecting enemy generative AI
to prevent the spread of disinformation, and creating datasets and data collec-
tion for generative AI development.
AI for Defense and Security-Relevant Logistics Systems
AI is used to support predictive maintenance of equipment based on operat-
ing conditions, simulation analysis of supply logistics operations, systems for
predicting supply and logistics needs and risks, management and automation
systems for military warehouses, autonomous robots for military cargo delivery
and personnel evacuation during active military operations.
AI for Mine and Ammunition Detection and Neutralization
AI should support data collection and accumulation systems from satellites,
drones, robots, and other sources (e.g., thermal sensors) for minefield detection,
identification of combat sites for demining planning, robotic management systems
for demining (urban, field, underwater), and quality control of demining systems.
AI for Cybersecurity and Information and Communications Technology (ICT)
Protection in the Defense Sector
AI should support systems for radio reconnaissance and advanced EW,
modern data encryption and exchange systems, generative AI (voice) for
pentesting (e.g., to verify military authorization procedures), countering sophis-
ticated social engineering using generative AI (e.g., voice, 3D video), research
focused on developing necessary innovative cybersecurity systems to protect
critical digital infrastructures using advanced AI technologies for automatic
threat analysis and classification.
19 Saballa,“Ukraine’s‘ArmyofDrones”Destroys200RussianTargetsinOneWeek:Minister.”
16 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

General Conditions for Rapid Development of AI Solutions for Security and Defense
Accelerating the use of AI for national security and defense foresees simplify-
ing import and licensing procedures for components needed for AI solution
training and development, deregulating and simplifying data acquisition pro-
cedures from the battlefield for drone, robot, and other AI system developers,
simplifying testing processes for innovative products “on the battlefield” by
domestic and foreign companies, advancing transparency and accessibility of
information for defense tech participants, implementing universally accepted
data exchange and storage standards, providing legal-regulatory provision for
data exchange between different market participants and state bodies.
General Infrastructure and Solutions
Moreover, Ukraine also wants to push for automated combat management sys-
tems (automated and AI assistance), simulation modeling solutions for military
operations (wargames and military operations research), data analysis and clas-
sification systems from surveillance cameras, data collection and accumulation
systems from media resources (as part of intelligence data), facial recognition
and identification systems, AI-based damage assessment systems with various
data types, advanced physical data transmission systems (for drones, robots,
between different agents), datasets accessible to market participants for AI
training and data collection systems, testing ranges for domestic and foreign
developers, data exchange systems between different departments, integra-
tion with government business intelligence production of indigenous sensors
such as stereo cameras, thermal cameras and others.
3.3 Ukraine’s New Defense AI Ecosystem
Many state agencies, private companies, and volunteer initiatives are involved in
developing defense AI. As Ukraine’s defense ecosystem grows it also becomes
more complex thus prompting the need for coordination and synchronization.
This is an aspect that will need to be strengthened in the future to make sure that
ongoing development efforts meet current – and future – warfighting needs.
In addition to the leading Ukrainian ministries, which will be discussed in the next
chapter, several para-governmental agencies, a growing number of indigenous
defense startups as well as international AI companies flocking to Ukraine con-
stitute the country’s defense AI ecosystem. Adjacent to the public sector is the
state-influenced defense industrial complex that harbors many of the traditional
defense companies. The following entities are of particular relevance:
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 17

JSC Ukroboronprom
JSC Ukroboronprom is a strategic manufacturer of weapons and military
equipment in Ukraine, uniting enterprises in the strategic sectors of the state’s
defense industry.20 Ukroboronprom includes the state enterprise Antonov,
which developed more than one hundred types of passenger, transport,
and special aircraft, like the Ruslan and Mriya platforms.21 Ukroboronprom
also includes the enterprise State Kyiv Design Bureau Luch, which is one of
Ukraine’s leading developers of components for aviation and anti-tank weapon
systems.22
Brave1 Platform
The Brave1 Platform, established by the Ministry of Digital Transformation,
acts as an accelerator and an incubator. The main goal of the platform is to
assess and promote technological products that can be integrated into various
state sectors. In addition, Brave1 offers grants to accelerate the development
of technologies considered critically important for Ukraine.23 Brave1 supports
research projects in the field of AI in priority areas like systems and weapons,
protection and security, support and logistics, unmanned systems, cyberse-
curity, intelligence, and navigation. Based on the military cluster of Brave1,
the Griselda system was developed using AI to collect intelligence data. This
technology is already in use with other systems like Delta (situational aware-
ness), Bronya (artillery fire support), Kropyva (planning support), and GISArta
(C2 for artillery fire).24
Innovation Development Accelerator.
Under the auspices of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine, the Innovation De-
velopment Accelerator was created to combine and develop the capabilities
of different units inside the Ministry of Defense. This program is designed as a
channel for rapid deployment of innovations in the military sphere.25
Ukrainian Startup Fund
The Ukrainian Startup Fund (Ukrainian Startup Fund Undated) was established
to promote the development of early-stage technological startups in Ukraine.26
Since the beginning of the full-scale invasion, the fund has focused on sup-
porting defense tech and deep tech projects. The fund allocated USD8.2M
in grants, funding 352 startup teams, and conducted over 330 events like
20 Formoreinformation,see:
21 Skorobogatova/Kalko,“DevelpmentofastrategyforformingtheexportpotentialofUkrainianaviationenterprisesontheexam-
pleofthestateenterprise‘Antonov’.”
22 Formoreinformation,see:
23 Pylypiv,“Dronesatseaandonland,artificialintelligence,andtheJavelinsimulator.”
24 Denisova,“Griselda.”
25 Formoreinformation,see:
26 Formoreinformation,see:
18 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

hackathons, boot camps, educational lectures, or mentoring sessions with 119
startups. The fund has also provided support to attend some of the world’s
largest technology events and enabled close to 200 pro bono experts to join
the fund’s work.27
Private funds and non-profit organizations complement the government’s efforts to
advance Ukraine’s defense industrial base. The following organizations play a key
role:
D3 Military Tech Accelerator
The D3 military tech accelerator provides investments in early-stage startups
and mentorship.28
Flyer One Ventures
Flyer One Ventures, with a presence in Ukraine, invests in Ukrainian startups
from Europe and North America.29
Aerorozvidka
Aerorozvidka is a non-profit organization that promotes the creation and
implementation of networked and robotic military capabilities for the Ukrainian
security and defense forces.30
“Come Back Alive” Army Assistance Fund
The “Come Back Alive” Fund, established in 2014, has already raised over
UAH5.2bn (USD138M) for the needs of the Defense Forces of Ukraine. This
fund specializes in the procurement of technical means and was the first in
Ukraine to obtain permission to import dual-use goods from abroad.31
Prytula Foundation
Serhiy Prytula’s charity fund provides aid to the Armed Forces of Ukraine and
humanitarian aid to civilians since .32
Ukraine Defense Fund
The Ukraine Defense Fund provides supplies and supports people fighting on
the front lines of Ukraine.33
27 Tarasovsky,“Grantsworthmillionsofdollars,hundredsofevents,andprojects.”
28 Boshnykov,“D3militarytechacceleratoristolaunchinUkraine.”
29 Formoreinformation,see:
30 Formoreinformation,see:
31 Melezik,“Ukrainianvolunteersandfundsthathelpthecountrythemostduringthewar.”
32 Formoreinformation,see:
33 Formoreinformation,see:
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 19

Ukrainian ministries and national programs are meant to strengthen Ukraine’s de-
fense industrial base. Consequently, the number of Ukrainian startups that provide
solutions for defense and national emergency management is growing rapidly.
Some of these companies also work on defense AI as the following examples
illustrate:
Artellence, an IT company, has developed neural networks for text analysis,
face profile search, and algorithms for cleaning and structuring large data.34
Athlon Avia, a Ukrainian research and production company, develops un-
manned aerial systems for tactical military missions such as intelligence,
surveillance, target acquisition, and artillery fire adjustment (A1-CM “Furia”).35
Keep Robotics develops multi-purpose unmanned electric cargo vehicle like
Mule for logistics tasks.36
Kvertus develops and manufactures EW and reconnaissance systems, among
other missions, also for counter UAS operations.37
Logics7 creates the UNITS universal training system for military fire training in
Ukraine.38
MPS Development creates technologies for UAS such as simulators, ground
control stations, C2 centers and drone traffic management solutions.39
Piranha Tech develops and produces EW tools such as radio jammers coun-
ter-UAS missions.40
Roboneers develops UGV for surveillance, fire support, logistics, and evacua-
tions tasks, remote-weapon stations for its UGVs as well as a C2 software for
tactical-level combat coordination.41
Saker develops affordable AI for small businesses, including drone-based
vision systems for plant protection. The SAKER SCOUT drone, equipped with
AI, is used in Ukraine for autonomous target detection and engagement.42
Skiftech builds laser-equipped tactical engagement simulators for Ukraine’s
armed forces.43
SkyLab manufactures jamming and spoofing resisted UAS like the Shoolika
MK-6 strike quadcopter or the Sirko-S1 UGV.44
34 Formoreinformation,see:
35 Formoreinformation,see:
36 Hrudka,“FiveUkrainianwarstartupstakingonRussia’sbruteforce.”
37 Formoreinformation,see:
38 Formoreinformation,see:
39 Formoreinformation,see: and 
January2024).
40 Formoreinformation,see:
41 Formoreinformation,see:
42 Formoreinformation,see:
43 Formoreinformation,see:
44 Formoreinformation,see:
20 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

Temerland creates UGV like Gnome, which can carry rocket propelled gre-
nades, as well as Scorpio 2 and LASKA 2.0, multifunctional UGVs for fire
support and reconnaissance tasks.45
UA Damage developed a platform for analyzing damage and pyrotechnic con-
tamination using AI, satellites, and drones. Its comprehensive analysis allows
visual inspection of unexploded rockets and mines, detecting them in grass
and underground, and even localizing explosive objects and marking them on
maps.46
Ukrspecsystems produces SHARK unmanned aerial systems that can be used
for ISR and stand-off target identification.47
Zvook company creates neural networks of acoustic sensors for detecting
aerial objects. The network helps conventional air defense systems detect and
destroy enemy cruise missiles and drone attacks and provides alerts to civil-
ians. Zvook technology is trained on a unique dataset of acoustic imprints for
most modern Russian weaponry.48
Finally, a unique aspect of military operations in Ukraine lies in the unprecedented
support offered by foreign companies. In general, collaboration with the United
States has been essential for Ukraine. For example, Ukraine has benefited from
SpaceX providing access to real-time data transmission in areas where IT infra-
structure had been damaged.49 General Atomics and AeroVironment contributed
to advancing surveillance, reconnaissance, and precision strikes. CrowdStrike and
FireEye helped advance Ukraine’s digital defense in cyberspace.50 In addition
to financial and material support, collaboration is meant to advance Ukraine’s
indigenous defense industrial base and includes agreements on data-sharing and
co-production of defense solutions. In addition, Ukraine and the United Kingdom
have signed a far-reaching security agreement in to cooperate in
defense and military issues, defense industrial affairs, maritime security, and infor-
mation security.51 At the time of writing this study in , a new French
support package was reportedly also under preparation.52
45 Formoreinformation,see:
46 Formoreinformation,see:
47 Formoreinformation,see:
48 MinistryofDigitalTransformationofUkraine.IncredibleTech,p.43.
49 Thisservices,however,hasalsobeencontroversialgiventheambivalentroleofElonMusk,SpaceX’sfounder,intakingdown
satelliteconnectionandpreventingSpaceXfrombeingusedforoffensivemilitaryoperations.Formore,see:Jayanti,“Starlink
andtheRussia-UkraineWar.”
50 Thomas/Arsene/Hendi,“CrowdStrikeFalconprotectsfromnewWipermalwareusedinUkrainecyberattacks;”Hultquistetal.,
“SpearphishingcampaigntargetsUkrainiangovernmentandmilitary;”“AerovironmentstandswiththepeopleofUkraineand
allofNATO;”“StatementfromGA-ASICEOLindenBlueonUkraineconflict.”
51 “AgreementonsecuritycooperationbetweentheUnitedKingdomofGreatBritainandNorthernIrelandandUkraine.”
52 Caulcutt,“Macronto‘finalizesecuritydeal’duringUkrainevisit.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 21

Moreover, foreign AI solutions support and enhance Ukraine’s situational aware-
ness and situational understanding regarding Russian threats.53 One notable
contributor is Palantir, which played a pivotal role during the conflict by providing
extensive data sharing capabilities to the military leadership. Through its Meta-
Constellation too, Palantir facilitated large-scale data integration, encompassing
sources ranging from commercial satellites to classified information from foreign
intelligence services. This empowered Ukraine and its allies to utilize commercial
data pertaining to specific battlegrounds, enabling the analysis of combat opera-
tions and the strategic planning of military endeavors. Notably, during the libera-
tion of Kherson, the Ukrainian military benefited from accurate intelligence on the
movements of Russian forces, allowing precise long-range strikes. The informa-
tion, processed by NATO outside Ukraine, was then transmitted to the Ukrainian
command.54
American companies such as Planet Labs, BlackSky Technology and Maxar Tech-
nologies also contribute significantly by generating satellite imagery of ongoing
combat operations and sharing the data with the government and Armed Forces.
Furthermore, Primer, an IT company, adapted its voice-to-text program to effi-
ciently process intercepted messages from the Russian military. This innovative
approach spares the Ukrainian military from spending extensive hours manually
deciphering intercepted conversations. The Primer Command technology facil-
itates the creation of AI models that swiftly process substantial volumes of data
derived from enemy radio communications.55
53 Fontes/Kamminga,“UkraineALivingLabforAIWarfare.”
54 Ignatius,“HowthealgorithmtippedthebalanceinUkraine.”
55 Fontes/Kamminga,“UkraineALivingLabforAIWarfare.”
22 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

4 Organizing
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 23

Ukraine’s war effort leverages decentralized organizational structures and volun-
teer initiatives to create a vibrant ecosystem of actors that jointly work on complex
systems. This approach also nurtures competition for the best ideas and products
between different actors. Although beneficial in principle, decentralized efforts
create additional layers of complexity related to coordination and synchronization
of activities. In this context, several ministries are involved in setting the course for
long-term force planning, operational planning to conduct the war, and strength-
ening the local defense industrial base. Among the public stakeholders, the
following are of particular relevance:
Ministry of Defense of Ukraine
In 2021, a Joint Directive of the Minister of Defense of Ukraine and the Com-
mander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine led to the creation of the
Center for Innovation and Defense Technologies.56 Among other things, the
Center has been tasked to develop, test, and provide support for new soft-
ware that meets the needs of the Armed Forces of Ukraine.57
The General Staff of the Ministry of Defense is responsible for military man-
agement and develops the country’s defense plans. The General Staff is also
in charge of strategic planning of the use of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and
certain elements and resources of other parts of the Armed Forces. In addi-
tion, the Office for the Development of Automation has been set up within the
General Staff. This office has been tasked to organize, coordinate, and execute
efforts to advance automated defense solutions, create a unified automated
control system, and advance the digitalization of Ukraine’s Armed Forces.58
The Main Intelligence Directorate complements these activities with a focus
on conducting intelligence operations relevant for capability development,
military construction as well as cybersecurity and military-technical security.59
Ministry of Digital Transformation
The Ministry of Digital Transformation implements the state’s digitalization
policy and is responsible for policies in robotics and AI. In 2020, the Ministry
had established an Expert Advisory Committee on AI Development, whose
goal is to enhance Ukraine’s AI competitiveness. This committee, initially the
only governmental body with AI expertise, played a significant role before the
war. It focused on educational activities, organizing conferences and training
sessions to educate military personnel and other agencies about AI applica-
tions relevant to their tasks. With the onset of the war, the Expert Advisory
Committee shifted its focus to providing consulting support for various tasks.
56 Formoreinformation,see:
html(lastaccessed30January2024).
57 DefenseExpress,“TheMinistryofDefensewillcreateanInnovationCenter,itsown‘lightanalog’oftheAmericanDARPA.”
58 MinistryofDefense,“TheMinistryofDefensehasestablishedtheCenterforInnovationandDefenseTechnologies.”
59 VerkovnaRadaofUkraine,“OnIntelligence.”
24 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

Additionally, some committee members joined the frontline, contributing
directly to the defense efforts.
Ministry of Strategic Industries
The Ministry of Strategic Industries is intended to manage the military-in-
dustrial complex with a focus on producing drones and robots and boosting
Ukraine’s indigenous missile program.60
Ukraine’s organizational set up to advance defense AI evolves commensurate
with the threat landscape that shapes and refines the country’s defense AI under-
standing. As argued above, Ukraine’s defense AI focus has become more focused
reflecting a maturing understanding of the benefits of AI on the battlefield. None-
theless, as the war goes on, more emphasis will need to be put on how to syn-
chronize the short cycles of battlefield adaptation, that quickly turn instant lessons
identified into product upgrades, with the more medium and long-term cycles
that look at the necessary changes of concept and capability development that
are indispensable to sustain warfighting. This will also have an impact on defense
AI governance and the role of coordinating entities that bring the decentralized
group of stakeholders together to make sure that everybody understands, sup-
ports, and further develops the long-term defense AI priorities discussed above.
60 “Minstrategpromwasconceivedasapowerfulcenterforcoordinatingindustrialpolicyandmilitary-industrialcomplex:Dmytro
Kysilevsky.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 25

5 Funding
Defense AI
26 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), Ukraine
significantly increased its military spending in 2022 by 640% to USD44bn.61 For
comparison, Russian military spending grew by 9.2% to USD86.4bn, which is 4.1%
of its GDP.62 Especially as of 2023, Ukraine accelerated funding for AI develop-
ment. However, due to the war, some program details cannot be disclosed:
On 19 , Ukraine’s Parliament approved the first reading of the
2024 state budget, allocating nearly UAH56bn (USD1.5bn) for the Ministry of
Strategic Industries (Minstrategprom 2023). The 2024 budget also provides
UAH2.55bn (USD60M) for the Ministry of Digital Transformation’s digitaliza-
tion, six times more than in 2023. The approved budget for 2024 includes an
increase in funding for defense industry development, specifically for weapon
production worth UAH51bn (USD1.3bn) as well as unmanned aerial, surface,
and underwater systems worth UAH43.3bn (USD1.1bn).63
BRAVE1 launched an AI startup funding program in 2023, awarding 84 defense
tech grants worth USD1.53M for AI and other technologies. The platform aims
to fund Ukrainian startups with over USD2M by the end of 2023. The 2024
budget foresees a significant increase of the budget to more than USD39M.
As of late 2023, an average grant is about USD5,000-25,000, and in 2024,
grants will reach amounts of USD50,000, USD100,000, and USD250,000.64
The State Innovative Financial Credit Institution systematically invests in inno-
vative developments through competitions among universities, institutes, and
other state structures. As of 2022, it started including AI projects in dual-use
sectors, but specific data is not available.65
International VC Funds66 are actively monitoring the Ukrainian market, as it
serves as a testing ground for creating and testing new weapons, with the goal
of investing or engaging on mergers and acquisitions (M&A). Among others,
Ukrainian AI startup Swarmer secured funding from D3 Accelerator, a fund
co-managed by Eric Schmidt. Swarmer’s flagship product AI Copilot enables a
single operator to fly a swarm of drones thus boosting battlefield capacities.67
In addition, international companies open local branches in Ukraine to speed
up technology development initiatives. German drone manufacturer Quan-
tum Systems, for example, attracted substantial funds with its recent Series B
funding round and has decided to join the special economic zone in Diia City
to shift parts of its production to Ukraine.68
61 SIPRI,“WorldmilitaryexpenditurereachesnewrecordhighasEuropeanspendingsurges.”
62 RadioSvoboda,“SIPRI:Ukraine’smilitaryspendingin2022increasedby640%ofGDPcomparedto2021.”
63 MinistryofFinance,“VerkhovnaRadaofUkraineadoptedthestatebudgetfor2024.”
64 TechUkraine,“Ukraine’sDefenseTechClusterBRAVE1PlanstoInvest$39MinStartupsin2024.”
65 Formoreinformation,see:
66 Stojkovski,“CanUkraineBecometheSiliconValleyofDefenseTech?”
67 Yarova,“UkrainianAIstartupSwarmersecuresfundingfromD3Accelerator.”
68 Crumley,“QuantumSystems’Ukrainedrone,enterprisetechattracts$63MinSeriesBfunding.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 27

Overall, the funding infrastructure for defense innovations focused on AI in
Ukraine is in its early stages, actively engaging in processes to establish inter-
national cooperation. Considering the high value of local players’ experience, a
wave of small and medium-sized M&A of Ukrainian developers by global defense
market players is likely to occur within the next years.
28 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

6 Fielding and
Operating
Defense AI
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 29

Ukraine’s defense AI ecosystem operates within a rapid development-to-deploy-
ment cycle, characterized by the integration of government and military efforts
to recruit top engineering talent. This strategy offers engineers an alternative
to frontline service, allowing them to contribute to defense projects in secure
settings. The approach indicates a strategic use of civilian expertise in military
applications, balancing defense development needs with the protection of skilled
personnel.
There’s a notable cultural and operational shift as engineers and managers from
the civilian IT sector adapt to the traditional military culture. This transition is sig-
nificant, blending civilian technological expertise with military operational practic-
es, which is essential for developing relevant and practical AI solutions.
A key feature of the ecosystem is the real-time combat testing of AI technologies.
Unlike controlled environments, this rigorous testing allows for immediate feed-
back and rapid iteration, crucial for practical application and improvement of AI in
military contexts. It underscores a focus on developing solutions that can with-
stand the dynamic and unpredictable nature of modern warfare.
However, the ecosystem faces challenges in system integration due to the diver-
sity of systems and standards, affecting the speed and efficacy of AI implementa-
tion. This complexity points to a need for standardized protocols and integration
strategies to streamline the process.
Many AI solutions, while showing promise, are still in their early developmental
stages. This immaturity can lead to increased long-term operational costs, em-
phasizing the ongoing development, refinement, and investment required to fully
realize the potential of these technologies. The ecosystem’s characteristics reflect
a strategic blend of civilian and military expertise, rapid adaptation in real-world
scenarios, and the ongoing challenge of integrating diverse technologies into a
cohesive defense strategy.
Key projects and initiatives include:
Situational Awareness Solutions
The Delta platform is a situational awareness and battlefield management
system.69 It consolidates information from various sources, including person-
nel, officials, sensors, and drones. This system is crucial for planning military
operations, coordinating unit movements, and securely exchanging enemy
location data. Delta was created at the Center for Innovation and Develop-
ment of Defense Technologies of the Ministry of Defense. The platform is used
69 Rosengren,“Network-CentricWarfareinUkraine:TheDeltaSystem.”
30 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

by intelligence to recognize and identify objects such as enemy soldiers or
military equipment. Delta played a pivotal role in destroying the Russian Cruis-
er “Moskva” in ,70 as the system enabled the military command to
assess the situation in a short period of time and decide to destroy the military
target. The Delta system was created according to NATO standards and is
compatible with similar situational awareness systems of NATO members.71
Kropyva is another situational awareness system developed by the volunteers
of “Army SOS.” Based on target localization by drones, Kropyva provides fire
supports to gunners by computing ballistic calculations. The system receives
daily updates on frontline developments. The Ukrainian Army uses Kropyva in
combination with other systems like GISArta and more.72
Data Set Collection Projects
Students at the Ukrainian Catholic University’s Faculty of Applied Sciences
(APPS UCU) prepared a specific dataset for object recognition. Data is collect-
ed from open sources and can be used by experts to prototype and validate
hypothesis.73 Kaggle, another database of more than 50,000 public datasets
such as equipment losses, for example, can be used for AI training.74
Disinformation and Bots
With the help of AI, the Mantis analytics platform monitors and analyzes the
information space to detect disinformation.75
In sum, Ukraine’s defense AI sector is rapidly evolving, marked by a shift towards
accelerated development cycles and a focus on integrating advanced AI technolo-
gies into defense strategies. Defense AI and other novel defense solutions benefit
in particular from
easier access to combat data, which manufacturers need to negotiate with the
government, to continually refine their products and train AI more effectively.
the efforts of the Ministry of Defense to support a community-driven response
to streamline certification processes that significantly reduce the time from an
average year to just one to two months for drone certification.
international companies that establish service and development centers in
Ukraine, enabling quick resolution of issues and reduced maintenance time.
the fact that key end-users are creating general requirements for defense solu-
tions, providing clear long-term development objectives, and reducing market
uncertainty.
70 Krasnomovets,“’Neptune’struck‘Moskva’.”
71 Dobrovolsky,“UkraineshowedNATOauniquebattlemanagementandenemysurveillancesystem.”
72 Melnyk,“Singing‘Nettle.’HowUkrainiansoftwareforartilleryaffectsthecourseofthewar.”
73 AppliedSciencesFacultyofUCU,“Buildingadatasetforprototypingideasforobjectdetection.”
74 Formoreinformation,see:
2024.
75 Sobachynskyi,“Ukrainian-madeAIplatformMantisAnalyticsdetectsRussianfakesinthenews.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 31

7 Training for
Defense AI
32 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

Amid the ongoing conflict with Russia, Ukraine’s educational landscape has been
significantly disrupted. The constant destruction of educational institutions and
private residences, coupled with frequent power outages and the tragic loss of
family members, have profoundly impacted the quality and accessibility of edu-
cation. As of , Russian bombardments have damaged 3,290 Ukrainian
educational institutions, destroying 262 of them.76 This destruction accounts for
about 10% of the country’s educational infrastructure.77
Despite these challenges, Ukraine trained over 7,000 experienced AI developers
as of 2022, with its education system producing about 27,000 science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) graduates each year. Before the full-scale
invasion in 2022, AI education in Ukraine typically distinguished between civilian
and defense applications. However, the onset of the war prompted a significant
shift, with almost all academic programs incorporating military-related compo-
nents. This shift led to close collaborations between universities and the military
sector on various projects.
A noteworthy aspect of Ukraine’s educational response to the war has been the
grassroots development of numerous training programs and courses, such as
drone operations. These initiatives were often driven by charitable foundations
and volunteers, rather than state funding. This approach reflects a unique, commu-
nity-driven response to the urgent need for specialized training in a war time.
Ukraine’s higher education institutions, including the Ukrainian Catholic University,
Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, National Technical University of
Ukraine “Igor Sikorsky Kyiv Polytechnic Institute,” Kyiv School of Economics, and
American University Kyiv, have adapted their programs to meet these new chal-
lenges. These adaptations include offering courses and degrees in Data Science,
machine learning, and AI that are increasingly tailored to address defense needs.
Given the destruction of the civilian education infrastructure, the military train-
ing ecosystem for drone pilots and users of systems like Delta and Kropyva has
become even more important. The rapid development of these programs, primar-
ily facilitated by volunteers, underscores the agility of Ukraine’s response to the
evolving demands of the war. Military units of the Air Defense Forces, for example,
use a Virtual Reality (VR) simulator for military training. This synthetic training
environment ensures a more effective preparation of pilots to shoot down enemy
cruise missiles, drones, and aircraft.78
76 Formoreinformation,see:
77 CenterforEconomicStrategy,“10%ofUkraine’seducationalinfrastructurewasdamagedbyRussianshelling.”
78 PressServiceODA,“AirDefenseForces‘West’receivedaVRsimulatorforpracticingtheskillsofdestroyingenemyaerial
targets.”
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 33

Based on current war experiences, Strata-22 has developed immersive multimedia
platforms to train infantrymen, gunners, and tankers. Military operators learn how
to handle weapons with the help of largescale models using VR glasses. This sim-
ulation environment is built according to NATO standards.79 In addition, Ukrainian
IT company Logics7 has created a universal training system for the fire training of
Ukrainian military units. Right now, the system provides digital replicas of different
weapon systems like the Next Generation Light Anti-Tank Weapon (NLAW), Javlin
anti-tank systems, as well as Stinger and Ingla anti-aircraft systems.80 Finally, the
war has also highlighted the effectiveness of AI laboratories established at univer-
sities, under the aegis of the Ministry of Digital Transformation and the AI Expert
Committee. These labs have become instrumental in developing AI tools for
wartime use.
In summary, the war has catalyzed a significant transformation in Ukraine’s edu-
cational system. Traditional university programs have swiftly pivoted to focus on
AI applications in military contexts. Meanwhile, the private sector and non-profit
initiatives have stepped in to fill the immediate needs for specialized training and
program development, demonstrating remarkable adaptability and resilience in
the face of war.
79 Ossipova,“Wereducedthecostoftrainingasoliderbyatleast30times.”
80 Pylypiv,“Dronesatseaandonland,artificialintelligence,andtheJavelinsimulator.”
34 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

8 Conclusion
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 35

War needs require Ukraine to focus on what works best on the bat-
tlefield while considering future warfighting requirements as well.
This has prompted a clear focus on delivering the best solutions to
the frontline and making sure to nurture the talent pipeline for tech-
nology development. By contrast, ineffective concepts and burden-
some procedures and regulation are pushed aside.
After two years of intensive war fighting, it becomes more and more
obvious that Ukraine and Russia actively compete in enhancing
existing defense solutions with AI and providing new AI-enhanced
systems. Against this background, Ukraine is increasingly focusing
on:81
investing in AI to enhance the autonomy and effectiveness of
drones and robotic systems, in particular by enabling these
systems to operate without GPS and engage adversarial drone
systems;
expanding the use of sophisticated sensors, including thermal
and real-time satellite video feeds, thereby using for data analysis
and data fusion to support decision-making for complex combat
operations;
developing fully autonomous systems to engage autonomous
adversarial systems, thereby using AI to enhance autonomy;
establishing new research and development centers to underline
the government’s commitment to advancing AI and other de-
fense technologies;
integrating AI into all levels of military operations, and
making AI solutions more affordable to accelerate a broader and
quicker adoption of defense AI by the country’s Armed Forces.
It is important to note that in the ongoing war, Ukraine’s defense
AI solutions will be significantly improved thanks to continuous
training based on battlefield experience and data. The Ukrainian
AI ecosystem has evolved rapidly due to the war, transitioning from
81 ExpertCommitteeonAIofUkraine,“Regardingcriticaldevelopmentprioritiesofartificialintelligencetechnologiesinthefield
ofsecurityanddefenseofUkraine.
36 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

grassroots volunteer and commercial efforts to more organized
government-backed initiatives and funding. This shift reflects the
government’s strategic commitment to leveraging AI for defense.
The ecosystem now robustly incorporates R&D, academia, private
sector collaboration, and significant government investment, focus-
ing on dual-use technologies for military and civilian benefits. This
approach underlines a comprehensive, multi-faceted advancement
in AI capabilities driven by the urgency of war.
These advancements are also very likely to shape the future inter-
national discussion on the use of defense AI on the battlefield. In
this regard, NATO countries should first monitor AI developments in
Ukraine and Russia during the war and reflect upon the likely con-
sequences for their own capability planning as well as R&D prior-
ities. Second, it can be assumed that violent non-state actors will
also closely follow this war and consider how to best benefit from
defense AI. This prompts the need to reconsider how to prevent
and limit the proliferation of AI-relevant technologies to non-state
actors, which broadens the regulatory debate. Third, countries will
also need to be aware that many of the existing data and privacy
protection ideas are unfit for warfighting when the comprehensive
collection, assessment, fusion, and sharing of public and private
data might produce distinct advantages in fighting an adversary.
Fourth, this should also lead to a more realistic understanding and
reconceptualization of the “human in the loop” principle that will be
essential for future certification standards as well defense AI compli-
ance and verification regimes.
Finally, even advanced countries should not underestimate the bene-
fits of crowdsourcing, open-source technology, decentralization, and
volunteer efforts that tend to be overlooked in a more mature insti-
tutional environment. As these efforts have been crucial in Ukraine’s
early and ongoing defense efforts it would be worth analyzing how
these efforts can infuse defense innovation elsewhere.
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 37

Literature
“AerovironmentstandswiththepeopleofUkraine ru-danyh-dlya-prototypuvannya-idey-shhodo-vyyavlenn-
andallofNATO,”Aerovironment,undated, ya-ob-yektiv/(lastaccessed30January2024).
avinc.com/lms/ukraine(lastaccessed30January
2024). ArtificialintelligenceandautonomyinRussia.
SpecialIssue(Arlington:CNA,2022),
“Agreementonsecuritycooperationbetweenthe org/Newsletters/Ai%20and%20Autonomy%20in%20Rus-
UnitedKingdomofGreatBritainandNorthernIreland sia/AI-and-Autonomy-in-Russia-Special-Issue-Septem-
andUkraine,”PrimeMinister’sOffice,12January ber-2022.pdf(lastaccessed30January2024).
2024,
dia/65a14a6ae96df50014f845d2/UK-Ukraine_Agree- Bondar,Kateryna.“ArsenalofDemocracy:Inte-
ment_on_Security_Co-operation.pdf(lastaccessed30 gratingUkraineIntotheWest’sDefenseIndustrial,”
January2024). Carnegie,4December2023,
dowment.org/2023/12/04/arsenal-of-democra-
“Minstrategpromwasconceivedasapowerfulcenter cy-integrating-ukraine-into-west-s-defense-industri-
forcoordinatingindustrialpolicyandthemilitary-indus- al-base-pub-91150(lastaccessed30January2024).
trialcomplex–DmytroKysilevsky,”PressServiceofthe
OfficeoftheVerkhovnaRadaofUkraine,23March2023, Boshnyakov,Ilya,“D3militarytechaccelerator
 istolaunchinUkraine.Ex-GoogleCEOEricSchmidt
(lastaccessed30January2024). isamongtheLPs,”AIN,11May2023,
capital/2023/05/11/d3-military-tech-accelerator-is-to-
“SIPRI:Ukraine’smilitaryspendingin2022increased launch-in-ukraine-ex-google-ceo-eric-schmidt-is-among-
by640%ofGDPcomparedto2021,”RadioSvoboda,24 the-lps/(lastaccessed30January2024).
April2023,
ovi-vydatky-ukraina-sipri/32376625.html(lastaccessed Brave1.Undated.
30January2024). cessed30January2024).
“StatementfromGA-ASICEoLindenBlueonUkraine CabinetofMinistersofUkraine,“Onmaking
conflict,”GeneralAtomicsAeronautical,1February2023, amendmentstotheRegulationontheMinistryofDigital
 TransformationofUkraine,”OrderoftheCabinetof
den-blue-on-ukraine-conflict(lastaccessed30January MinistersofUkraineNo.916,25August2023,https://
2024). ips.ligazakon.net/document/MN027216?hide=true(last
accessed30January2024).
“TheMinistryofDefensewillcreateanInnovation
Center,itsown‘lightanalog’oftheAmericanDARPA,” CabinetofMinistersofUkraine,“Ontheapprovalof
DefenseExpress,8October2021, theactionplanfortheimplementationoftheConcept
com/news/minoboroni_stvorit_tsentr_innovatsij_svij_ forthedevelopmentofartificialintelligenceinUkraine
vlasnij_lajt_analog_amerikanskoji_darpa-4975.html(last for2021-2024,”OrderoftheCabinetofMinistersof
accessed30January2024). UkraineNo.438-p,12Mai2021,
ua/laws/show/438-2021-%D1%80#Text(lastaccessed
“Ukraine’sDefenseTechClusterBRAVE1Plansto 30January2024).
Invest$39MinStartupsin2024,”TechUkraine,undated,
 CabinetofMinistersofUkraine,“Ontheapprovalof
tech-cluster-brave1-plans-to-invest-39m-in-startups- theConceptforthedevelopmentofartificialintelligence
in-2024/(lastaccessed30January2024). inUkraine.OrderoftheCabinetofMinistersofUkraine
No.1556-p,”2December2020,
AppliedSciencesFacultyofUCU,“Buildingadataset ua/laws/show/1556-2020-р#Text(lastaccessed30
forprototypingideasforobjectdetection,”undated, January2024).

38 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

Caulcutt,Clea,“Macronto‘finalizesecuritydeal’ 2023,
duringUkrainevisit,”Politico,17January2024,https:// ukrainian-war-startups-taking-on-russias-brute-force/
 (lastaccessed30January2024).
ty-deal-ukraine-volodymyr-zelenskyy/(lastaccessed30
January2024 Hultquist,Johnetal.,“Spearphishingcampaign
targetsUkrainiangovernmentandmilitary,”Mandiant,
Crumley,Bruce,“Quantum-Systems’Ukraine 16April2019,
drone,enterprisetechattracts$63MinSeriesB blog/spear-phishing-campaign-targets-ukraine-gov-
funding,”DroneDJ,25October2023, ernment-and-military-infrastructure-reveals-poten-
com/2023/10/25/quantum-systems-ukraine-drone- tial-link-so-called-luhansk-peoples-republic(last
enterprise-tech-attracts-63m-in-series-b-funding/(last accessed30January2024).
accessed30January2024).
Ignatius,David,“Howthealgorithmtippedthe
Denisova,Kateryna,“Griselda.Asystemofintelli- balanceinUkraine,”TheWashingtonPost,20Decem-
gencebasedonartificialintelligencehasbeendevel- ber2022,
opedinUkraine,”NewVoice,20December2023,https:// ions/2022/12/19/palantir-algorithm-data-ukraine-war/
nv.ua/ukr/ukraine/events/v-ukrajini-na-bazi-shtuchno- (lastaccessed30January2024).
go-intelektu-rozrobili-sistemu-rozvidki-50362114.html
(lastaccessed30January2024). Jayanti,Amritha,“StarlinkandtheRussia-Ukraine
War:ACaseofCommercialTechnologyandPublic
Dobrovolsky,Vadim,“UkraineshowedNATOaunique Purpose?”BelferCenterforScienceandInternational
battlemanagementandenemysurveillancesystem,” Affairs,9March2023,
Speka,27October2022 publication/starlink-and-russia-ukraine-war-case-com-
na-pokazala-nato-unikalnu-sistemu-stezennya-za-pro- mercial-technology-and-public-purpose.
tivnikov-9g1zd9(lastaccessed30January2024).
Kahn,Jeremy,“A.I.isonthefrontlinesofthewar
ExpertCommitteeonAIofUkraine,“Regarding inUkraine,”Fortune,1March2022,
criticaldevelopmentprioritiesofartificialintelligence com/2022/03/01/russia-ukraine-invasion-war-a-i-artifi-
technologiesinthefieldofsecurityanddefenseof cial-intelligence/(lastaccessed30January2024).
Ukraine,”August2023.
uploads/2024/01/criticaldevelopment-prioritiesinAI-1. Kahn,Lauren,“HowUkraineIsRemakingWar
pdf(lastaccessed30January2024). TechnologicalAdvancementsAreHelpingKyivSucceed,”
ForeignAffairs,29August2022,
Fontes,Robin,andJorritKamminga,“UkraineA naffairs.com/ukraine/how-ukraine-remaking-war(last
LivingLabforAIWarfare,”NationalDefence,24March accessed30January2024).
2024,
cles/2023/3/24/ukraine-a-living-lab-for-ai-warfare(last Kolomychenko,Tetiana,“Armyofdrones:”Howpri-
accessed30January2024). vatedronemanufacturers“master”thedefensebudget,”
BiznesTsenzor,11November2023,
Gaidai,Yurii,“10%ofUkraine’seducationalinfra- net/r3448681(lastaccessed30January2024).
structurewasdamagedbyRussianshelling.Howmuch
damagehasRussiacausedtoUkrainianeducation?” Konaev,Margarita,Tomorrow’sTechnologyin
CentreforEconomicStrategy,20April2023,https:// Today’sWar:TheUseofAIandAutonomousTechnolo-
ces.org.ua/en/10-of-ukraines-educational-infrastruc- giesintheWarinUkraineandImplicationsforStrategic
ture-was-damaged-by-russian-shelling-how-much-dam- Stability(Arlington,CNA:2023),
age-has-russia-caused-to-ukrainian-education/(last reports/2023/10/Use-of-AI-and-Autonomous-Technolo-
accessed30January2024). gies-in-the-War-in-Ukraine.pdf(lastaccessed30January
2024).
Goncharuk,Vitaliy,“WarinUkraine:AIWeapons
andtheDebateOver‘HumanintheLoop’,”Medium,20 Krasnomovets,Pavlo,“’Neptune’struck‘Moskva.’
September2023, HowtheUkrainianmissilesystempaiditselfofftenfold,”
ukraine-ai-weapons-and-the-debate-over-human-in-the- ForbesUkraine,14April2022,
loop-ba2e48a97390(lastaccessed30January2024). neptun-uraziv-moskvu-yak-ukrainskiy-raketniy-kompl-
eks-okupiv-sebe-desyatikratno-14042022-5449(last
Hrudka,Orysia,“FiveUkrainianwarstartupstaking accessed30January2024).
onRussia’sbruteforce,”EuromaidanPress,19October
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 39

Melezhik,Tetiana,“Ukrainianvolunteersand ukraini-proektom-biudzhetu-2024-peredbacheno-maizhe-
fundsthathelpthecountrythemostduringthe 56-mlrd-hrn(lastaccessed30January2024).
war,”TSN,25October2022,
top-volonteriv-ta-fondiv-yaki-zaluchili-naybilshe-gro- Ossipova,Viktoriia,“Wereducedthecostoftraining
shey-dlya-shvidshoyi-peremogi-ukrayini-2181787.html asoldierbyatleast30times’.ThedeveloperofStrata
(lastaccessed30January2024). 22onhowtheArmedForcesofUkraineareacquiring
combatskillsinARandVR,”DOU,24October2022,
Melnyk,Taisa,“Stinging‘Nettle.’HowUkrainian 
softwareforartilleryaffectsthecourseofthewar,” tems-for-military-training/(lastaccessed30January
ForbesUkraine,24July2024, 2024).
tions/zhalyucha-kropiva-yak-ukrainske-programne-za-
bezpechennya-dlya-artileristiv-vplivae-na-khid-vi- PresidentofUkraine,“OntheStrategyofmilitary
yni-22072022-7054(lastaccessed30January2024). securityofUkraine.”DecreeofthePresidentofUkraine
No.121/2021,25March2021,
MinistryofDefense,“TheMinistryofDefensehas gov.ua/documents/1212021-37661(lastaccessed30
establishedtheCenterforInnovationandDefense January2024).
Technologies:therelevantjointDirectivewassignedby
theMinisterofDefenseofUkraineandtheCommand- PressServiceODA,“AirDefenseForces‘West’
er-in-ChiefoftheArmedForcesofUkraine,”undated, receivedaVRsimulatorforpracticingtheskillsof
 destroyingenemyaerialtargets,”LOVA,8March2023,
cle=64623(lastaccessed30January2024). 
GUCkLAB1fsR22kFQcs1SvrJPQTAHGWTwX55jMrr6kP-
MinistryofDigitalTransformation,“Ukrainesigned JBrMoew(lastaccessed30January2024).
aninternationaldeclarationdedicatedtothesafetyof
usingAI,”2November2023, Pylypiv,Ihor,“Dronesatseaandonland,artificial
news/ukraina-pidpysala-mizhnarodnu-deklaratsiiu-prys- intelligenceandtheJavelinsimulator:howmilitary-tech
viachenu-bezpetsi-vykorystannia-shi(lastaccessed30 developmentsbringUkraineclosertovictory.TheEP
January2024). talksaboutprojectsthathelptheDefenseForcesbeat
theenemy.Whichofthemarealreadyworkingtowin?”
MinistryofDigitalTransformation,IncredibleTech: Epravda,5July2023,
InvestorsguidetoUkrainianIT(Kyiv:MinistryofDigital publications/2023/07/5/701912/(lastaccessed30
Transformation,2023), January2024).
ITIGUIT.pdf(lastaccessed30January2024).
Rosengren,Oscar,“Network-CentricWarfarein
MinistryofDigitalTransformation,Roadmapfor Ukraine:TheDeltaSystem.GreyDynamics,”3February
theregulationofartificialintelligenceinUkraine(Kyiv: 2023,
MinistryofDigitalTransformation,2023). fare-in-ukraine-the-delta-system/(lastaccessed30
thedigital.gov.ua/storage/uploads/files/page/commu- January2024).
nity/docs/%D0%94%D0%BE%D1%80%D0%BE%D0%B6
%D0%BD%D1%8F_%D0%BA%D0%B0%D1%80%D1%82%D Saballa,Joe,“Ukraine’s‘ArmyofDrones’Destroys
0%B0_%D0%B7_%D1%80%D0%B5%D0%B3%D1%83%D0% 200RussianTargetsinOneWeek:Minister,”TheDefense
BB%D1%8E%D0%B2%D0%B0%D0%BD%D0%BD%D1%8F_ Post,14September2023,
%D0%A8%D0%86_%D0%B2_%D0%A3%D0%BA%D1%80% com/2023/09/14/ukraine-drones-russian-targets/(last
D0%B0%D1%97%D0%BD%D1%96_compressed.pdf(last accessed30January2024).
accessed30January2024).
SIPRI,“Worldmilitaryexpenditurereachesnewre-
MinistryofFinance,“VerkhovnaRadaofUkraine cordhighasEuropeanspendingsurges,”SIPRI,24April
adoptedthestatebudgetfor2024,”9November 2023,
2023, world-military-expenditure-reaches-new-record-high-eu-
da-ukrainy-pryiniala-derzhbiudzhet-na-2024-rik(last ropean-spending-surges(lastaccessed30January
accessed30January2024). 2024).
Minstrategprom,“Thedraftbudget-2024provides Skorobogatova,N.Ye.,andYu.V.Kalko,“Development
foralmost56billionUAHforthedevelopmentofthe ofastrategyforformingtheexportpotentialofUkrain-
defenseindustrialcomplexinUkraine,”16September ianaviationenterprisesontheexampleofthestate
2023, enterprise‘Antonov’,”EffectiveEconomy,no11,2016,
40 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

 Zysk,Katarzyna,HighHopesAmidHardRealities.
accessed30January2024). DefenseAIinRussia.DAIOStudy23/11(Hamburg:
DefenseAIObservatory,2023),
Sobachynskyi,Rostyslav,“Ukrainian-madeAI daio_study2311(lastaccessed30January2024).
platformMantisAnalyticsdetectsRussianfakesinthe
news,”AIN,15September2023,
tal/2023/09/15/ukrainian-mantis-analytics-detects-rus-
sian-fakes/(lastaccessed30January2024).
Stojkovski,Bojan,“CanUkraineBecometheSilicon
ValleyofDefenseTech?,”TheRecursive,5October2023,

con-valley-of-defense-tech/(lastaccessed30January
2024).
Tarasovsky,Yuriy,“Grantsworthmillionsofdollars,
hundredsofevents,andprojects.TheMinistryofDigital
Transformationshowedtheresultsoftheworkofthe
startupfund,”ForbesUkraine,11July2023,https://
forbes.ua/news/granti-na-milyoni-dolariv-sotni-iven-
tiv-ta-proektiv-mintsifri-pokazalo-rezultati-roboti-fon-
du-startapiv-11072023-14732(lastaccessed30January
2024).
TheGovernmentAIReadinessIndex2020(Malvern:
OxfordInsights2020),
wp-content/uploads/2023/11/AIReadinessReport.pdf
(lastaccessed30January2024).
Thomas,William,AdrainLiviuArsene,andFarid
Hendi,“CrowdStrikeFalconprotectsfromnewwiper
malwareusedinUkrainecyberattacks,”Crowdstrike,
25February2022,
how-crowdstrike-falcon-protects-against-wiper-malware-
used-in-ukraine-attacks/(lastaccessed30January
2024).
VerkhovnaRadaofUkraine,“Agreementbetween
UkraineandtheEuropeanUniononUkraine’spartici-
pationintheEuropeanUnionprogram‘DigitalEurope’
(2021–2027),”LawofUkraineNo.2926-IX,23February
2023,
22#Text(lastaccessed30January2024).
VerkhovnaRadaofUkraine,“OnIntelligence,”Law
ofUkraine,12December2022,
ua/laws/show/912-20#n73(lastaccessed30January
2024).
Yarova,Maia,“UkrainianAIstartupSwarmersecures
fundingfromD3Accelerator,”AIN,16November2023,

cures-funding-from-d3/(lastaccessed30January
2024).
WWW.DEFENSEAI.EU 41

42 SURVIVAL OF THE SMARTEST?

Defense AI Observatory Studies
24|22 Vitaliy Goncharuk, Survival of the Smartest? Defense AI in Ukraine
24|21 Youngwook Park, Will the One Ring Hold? Defense AI in South Korea
23|20 Tomas Jermalivičius, Caught Between Today and Tomorrow. Defence AI in Estonia
23|19 Nikolaos Karampekios, Konstantinos Sakalis, and Iraklis Oikonomou, Harnessing the
Potential. Defense AI in Greece
23|18 Andreas Graae, Servers Before Tanks? Defence AI in Denmark
23|17 Kévin Martin and Lucie Liversain, A Winding Road Before Scaling-Up? Defense AI in
France
23|16 Sami O. Järvinen, Cautious Data-Driven Evolution. Defence AI in Finland
23|15 Inbar Dolinko and Liran Antebi, Embracing the Organized Mess. Defense AI in Israel
23|14 Alastair Finlan, A Fertile Soil for AI? Defense AI in Sweden
23|13 John Lee, “Overtaking on the Curve?” Defense AI in China
23|12 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, and Joseph Verbovszky, Master and Servant. Defense
AI in Germany
23|11 Katarzyna Zysk, High Hopes Amid Hard Realities. Defense AI in Russia
23|10 Yvonne Hofstetter and Joseph Verbovzsky, How AI Learns the Bundeswehr’s
“Innere Führung.” Value-Based Engineering with IEEE7000™-2021
23|09 Robert C Engen, When the Teeth Eat the Tail: A Review of Canada’s Defence Artificial
Intelligence
23|08 Çağlar Kurç, Enabling Technology of Future Warfare. Defense AI in Turkey
23|07 Lauren A. Kahn, Risky Incrementalism. Defense AI in the United States
22|06 Yvonne Hofstetter, Wie KI Innere Führung lernt. Wertbasierte Technik mit
IEEE7000™-2021
22|05 Andrea Gilli, Mauro Gilli, and Ivan Zaccagnini, Exploring the Benefits of a New Force
Enabler: Defense AI in Italy
22|04 Kenneth Payne, Bright Prospects – Big Challenges. Defense AI in the United
Kingdom
22|03 Heiko Borchert, Christian Brandlhuber, Armin Brandstetter, and Gary S. Schaal, Free
Jazz on the Battlefield. How GhostPlay’s AI Approach Enhances Air Defense
22|02 Peter Layton, Evolution not Revolution. Australia’s Defence AI Pathway
21|01 Heiko Borchert, Torben Schütz, Joseph Verbovszky, Beware the Hype. What Military
Conflicts in Ukraine, Syria, Libya, and Nagorno-Karabakh (Don’t) Tell Us About the
Future of War