CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 1
CSIS
BRIEFS
Battle Networks and the
Future Force
Part 1: A Framework for Debate
By Todd Harrison
THE ISSUE
As the first in a two-part series that explores the future of battle networks in the U.S. military—what has become known as
Joint All-Domain Command and Control (JADC2)—this paper examines the importance of battle networks to modern military
operations and presents a framework of five functional elements that make up a battle network. This framework provides
a common basis for conceptualizing and comparing existing systems and proposed new capabilities in terms of how they
contribute to JADC2. The second brief in the series explores factors the Department of Defense (DoD) must contemplate in
designing battle networks for the future force, including operational constraints, strategy and policy issues, and alternative
acquisition approaches.
DEFINING THE CHALLENGE battle networks became faster, longer range, and more
Militaries use battle networks to detect what is happening advantageous to militaries, the networks themselves
on the battlefield, process that data into actionable also became an attractive target. As John Stillion and
information, decide on a course of action, communicate Bryan Clark have noted, the competition between battle
networks was a key element of World War II, particularly
decisions among forces, act on those decisions, and assess
in submarine and anti-submarine warfare.
the effectiveness of the actions taken. Battle networks
are sometimes referred to as the “sensor-to-shooter kill What has changed in recent decades is the amount of
chain” (or just the “kill chain”), and they are widely information produced by sensors, the speed and ubiquity of
acknowledged as an increasingly important element of communications, and the magnitude of tactical advantage
modern warfare. possible from processing that information and making
decisions faster than one’s adversary—what some have
While the importance of battle networks has garnered
called “informationized” warfare. In this “new way of
more attention in recent years, battle networks
war,” advantage accrues to those that can see farther and
themselves are not new. Early battle networks used
clearer and act faster and at greater range—and deny the
scouts, couriers, flags, telegraphs, and wired field
other side the ability to do the same.
telephones to transmit information and decisions
among forces on the battlefield. More advanced battle The technological advances that have enabled this
networks began to emerge in World War II with the new way of operating are driven in part by commercial
widespread adoption of technologies such as radar, sonar, developments: lighter, cheaper, and higher fidelity
radio communications, and aerial reconnaissance. As sensors; increases in data throughput capacity

and coverage from cellular, fiber, and satellite CURRENT EFFORTS
communications networks; massive cloud computing The military is now at a critical point in architecting
and data storage centers; and big data analytics, machine the battle networks of the future. DoD’s overarching
learning (ML), and artificial intelligence (AI) systems. The concept for this is known as Joint All Domain Command
application of these commercial technologies to military and Control (JADC2), and on May 13, 2021, Defense
battle networks has been widely acknowledged for more Secretary Lloyd Austin officially signed the military’s
than three decades and has manifested itself in whole or JADC2 implementation strategy. Within the JADC2
in part in many different concepts, initiatives, strategies, concept, however, are multiple overlapping and
and buzzwords over the years. This long line of thinking sometimes contradictory efforts. The Air Force is
includes the Revolution in Military Affairs and what the pursuing the Advanced Battle Management System
Soviet’s termed the Long-Range Reconnaissance-Strike (ABMS), which started out as a replacement for the
Complex in the 1980s and 1990s; the Transformation aging fleet of E-8C Joint Surveillance Target Attack
Initiative, Network-Centric Warfare, and the Global Radar System (JSTARS) aircraft and morphed into a
Information Grid of the 1990s and 2000s; and the Third program to develop a “secure, military digital network
Offset Strategy of the 2010s (to name a few examples). environment,” but the program remains ill-defined
in terms of which elements of the battle network
Despite the abundance of thinking and strategizing about
it is building. For several years, the U.S. Navy has
the need to modernize the U.S. military’s battle networks
been developing and expanding its Naval Integrated
to increase speed, resilience, and interoperability,
Fire Control-Counter Air (NIFC-CA) architecture
progress has been slow. As Chris Brose notes in his book
to integrate more platforms, sensors, and weapons,
Kill Chain, “Rather than thinking in terms of buying new
including the F-35, Aegis ships, and SM-6 anti-aircraft
battle networks that could close the kill chain faster than
missiles. The Navy is also exploring its own future
ever, they [the U.S. military] thought in terms of buying
network architecture through Project Overmatch, which
incrementally better versions of the same platforms they
is intended “to enable a Navy that swarms the sea,
had relied upon for decades—tanks, manned short-range
delivering synchronized lethal and nonlethal effects
aircraft, big satellites, and bigger ships.” As Brose goes on
from near-and-far, every axis, and every domain.”
to discuss, the focus on buying next-generation platforms
The U.S. Army is taking a more incremental approach
rather than the sensors, payloads, and communications
through its Project Convergence, which it bills as a
systems needed to make both existing and next-
“campaign of learning organized around a continuous,
generation platforms work together more effectively is
structured series of demonstrations and experiments.”
a deep cultural limitation of the military. It is the root
The Army is also experimenting with the Terrestrial
cause of many interoperability limitations present in the
Layer System, which is intended to network a range
force today, such as the inability of the U.S. Air Force’s
of sensors—including intelligence agency sensors—to
two fifth-generation fighters (the F-22 and F-35) to
enable precision kinetic, electronic, and cyberattacks,
communicate directly with one another.
and the service has begun initial production of its
To address some interoperability issues, DoD is Integrated Battle Command System (IBCS).
using workarounds, such as U-2s equipped with a
Beyond the military departments, the Joint Staff, the
communications payload that connects F-22s and F-35s
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research
with each other and with units on the ground. Similarly,
and Engineering (OSD/R&E), Special Operations
the Battlefield Airborne Communication Node (BACN)
Command (SOCOM), and the Defense Advanced
can be flown on platforms such as the RQ-4 and E-11
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) each have ongoing
to act as a communications gateway to connect aircraft
initiatives related to JADC2. The Joint Staff is tasked
and users on the ground using various tactical data links,
with developing an overall strategy for JADC2 and
such as Link 16 and the Situational Awareness Data
leading a joint cross-functional team on the subject.
Link (SADL). Workarounds such as these are a necessary
OSD/R&E has a research effort known as Fully
first step, but they fall short of achieving the full vision
Networked Command, Control, and Communications
of a mesh network that allows dynamic and resilient
(FNC3) that is initially focused on developing resilient
interoperability across military services, domains, and and diversified communication paths for future battle
allied and partner forces.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 2

networks. SOCOM is working on multiple initiatives to lexicon for comparing and evaluating different concepts
increase interoperability among forces, such as a data and programs, and it provides an overview of the various
fabric and data management environment for special options available in each functional element. It does
operations forces. DARPA has developed a concept not provide specific recommendations on which options
known as Mosaic Warfare that aims “to turn complexity should be pursued. Many competing ideas already exist
into a powerful new asymmetric weapon via rapidly for how to build the battle networks of the future and
composable networks of low-cost sensors, multi-domain what technologies should or should not be incorporated.
command and control nodes, and cooperative manned This paper aims to raise the level of debate by offering a
and unmanned systems.” As part of this effort, DARPA framework by which competing ideas can be compared,
has sponsored a series of projects that use AI to turn and roles and missions can be more precisely and
raw sensor data into actionable information, to connect deliberately articulated. The second paper in this series
radios that otherwise are not compatible, and to perform explores the operational, strategy and policy, and
airspace deconfliction. acquisition approaches senior leaders should consider
when designing and building battle networks for the
COMPLICATING FACTORS future force.
While many programs and activities are simultaneously
underway across DoD, a major impediment to making DEFINING A BATTLE NETWORK: FIVE
meaningful progress is that no one “owns” the overall FUNCTIONAL ELEMENTS
JADC2 mission area. Each of the military services The framework proposed in this paper divides the
owns their respective programs, platforms, and battle component parts of a battle network into five functional
networks (and the budgets that fund them), but elements, shown in Figure 1. Within each functional
there is no effective forcing function that ensures the element, a combination of people, processes, and tools
services’ systems will be able to work together. For (i.e., technology) govern how the element works and the
example, in ABMS, the Air Force is developing a system capabilities it can provide in the overall battle network.
that may work well for connecting a few thousand Each element of the network can include multiple types
aircraft, but the same system may not work well for of platforms and payloads, and some of these platforms
connecting hundreds of thousands of soldiers (and and payloads can be part of multiple functional elements
their equipment) on the ground. And if the Army and simultaneously. For example, an E-3 AWACS aircraft can
Navy develop their own independent battle networks, be part of the sensor and processing functional elements
connecting them to ABMS may end up being an in a battle network because it houses a powerful radar
afterthought or, worse, an unfunded requirement.
used to detect and track aircraft and the computer
The risk in the current approach is that each service,
systems and personnel needed to process and analyze
COCOM, or agency goes in its own direction and
that data in real time.
develops multiple stove-piped networks that do not
allow the kind of interoperability and resilience that SENSOR ELEMENT
would be possible with a more coordinated approach.
The functional purpose of the sensor element is to collect
Further complicating matters, the debate over JADC2 data on what is happening in the battlespace. This data
is obscured in the generic language used to describe can be used to detect and geolocate forces, identify who
the vision, the technologies being developed, and the or what is involved, characterize the activities or types of
programs executing the services’ plans. While the need forces being used, and track forces as they move around
for JADC2 is well established and articulated, in many the battlespace. The sensor element can also be used to
cases, the military services and Congress appear to assess the effectiveness of actions taken—what is commonly
be talking past each other when it comes to specific known as battle damage assessment. The targets for data
programs and activities. collection can include adversary forces, friendly forces, and
non-combatants, and one of the most important roles of the
The following sections provide a framework for
sensor element is to distinguish among these.
discussing battle networks and the various payloads,
platforms, and other components that comprise them. Operators can use a variety of sensor technologies to
This framework is intended to provide a common acquire the desired data. Active sensors, such as active
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 3

Figure 1: Example Diagram of the Five Functional Elements of a Battle Network
Source: Based on author’s own creation.
scanning radar and sonar, emit a source of energy and aperture radar (SAR) satellites can also detect and track
measure the reflected returns of that energy from an moving targets on the ground without the same range,
object to determine its location, size, relative motion, weather, overflight, or flight duration limitations as
or other characteristics. Passive sensors, such as optical aircraft, but continuous coverage of an area from space
and infrared cameras or passive radar and sonar, rely on requires a large constellation of satellites in low Earth
the collection of energy emitted by an object or reflected orbit (LEO) because satellites in LEO are in constant
from natural sources. Active sensors can potentially be motion relative to the surface of the Earth.
detected by an adversary and give away the location of
the sensor and how it is being used, whereas passive COMMUNICATIONS ELEMENT
sensors can operate with a lower probability of detection. The communications element of battle networks often
receives the most attention because it provides the data
Sensors can be used in-domain or cross-domain
links that pass information among systems and operators.
depending on their capabilities and the needs of the
The information transmitted can include voice, video,
user. Table 1 provides a crosswalk with some examples
one-way data broadcasts, or two-way data links. Raw data
of specific sensor platforms, including both military
from high-fidelity sensors often requires high data rate
and commercial systems. For example, tracking moving
communication links, whereas compressed data, processed
targets on the ground can be accomplished by many
data, or telemetry can use significantly lower data rates.
different types of sensors. Ground-based sensors can
detect some movements, but they are limited in range to The physical means of communication can be through
a relatively small area around the sensor itself. Airborne wired (copper or fiber), radio frequency (RF), or free-
sensors can monitor a much broader area and provide space laser communication (i.e., lasercom). Wired links
persistent tracking of ground targets, but their use can can only connect fixed sites within the ground domain,
be limited by weather conditions, aircraft flight duration, whereas mobile and cross-domain data links require RF
adversary air defenses, and the maximum effective range or lasercom. Communication systems use a wide range
of the sensors, which scales with altitude. Synthetic of encryption and waveforms, which can be unique to a
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 4

Table 1: Examples of In-Domain and Cross-Domain Sensor Applications
SENSING FROM:
particular mission area or system. Previous efforts, such near the speed of light, transit times can start to add
as the Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS) and the related up over long distances. The transit time to a satellite in
Software Communications Architecture (SCA), attempted geostationary orbit (GEO) and back to Earth, for example,
to mandate compatibility across communications systems is roughly 0.25 seconds. If multiple hops between satellites
with limited success. Gateways (or teleports) can be in GEO are needed to close a link, the total round trip
used to connect systems across a variety of protocols latency can rise above 0.5 seconds—a noticeable delay for
and standards and act as translators between otherwise applications such as voice or video communications. The
incompatible radios. For example, the Air Force envisions roundtrip time to satellites in LEO, however, is on the
aerial refueling aircraft such as the KC-46 serving as order of 0.01 seconds, depending on the altitude of the
flying gateways that connect aircraft inside adversary air satellite and the look angle of the user.
defenses with other parts of the battle network.
RF communication links, whether direct between users
The military must weigh several factors when selecting the or relayed through airborne or satellite communications
best types of communication links to use for a particular systems, are vulnerable to detection, interception, and
mission, including: latency; probability of detection interference. Various methods are available to make
and intercept; and resilience to jamming, spoofing, and RF signals more protected from these threats, such as
weather disruptions. Latency is the roundtrip time it using frequency-hopping spread spectrum waveforms,
takes for data to travel between systems, and this can be antenna nulling, adaptive filtering, and high-gain/narrow
a factor for missions where real-time data is critical, such beamwidth antennas. RF signals are also bandwidth
as passing tracking and targeting data for air and missile limited by the range of frequencies allocated for their
defense. While RF, fiber, and lasercom links operate at use to help avoid interference with other military and
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 5
:OT
GNISNES
MARITIME MARITIME
GROUND AIRBORNE SPACE
(SUBSURFACE) (SURFACE)
Maritime Patrol Aircraft
MARITIME Towed Array Sonar Hull-Mounted Sonar
with Sonobuoys
(SUBSURFACE) (TB-29X) (AN/SQS-53C)
(P-3, P-8)
Synthetic Aperture Radar
Over-the-Horizon Radar
MARITIME Towed Array Sonar Hull-Mounted Sonar Maritime Patrol Aircraft (SAR) Satellites
(Jindalee Radar
(SURFACE) (TB-29X) (AN/SQS-53C) (P-3, P-8) (Umbra, Orbital Effects,
Network)
Capella)
Acoustic, Seismic, Optical, Infrared, and SAR, Electro Optical, and
Optical, and Infrared Radar ISR Aircraft RF Monitoring Satellites
GROUND
(Unattended Ground (E-8C, MQ-9, U-2, (Digital Globe, Planet,
Sensor) RQ-4) Hawkeye360)
Surface-to-Air radar
Airborne Warning and
Ship-Mounted Radar systems Missile Warning Satellites
AIRBORNE Control Aircraft
(AN/SPY-1) (AN/MPQ-65 passive (SBIRS)
(E-2D, E-3)
radar, AN/TPY-2)
Radar and Optical
Telescopes for Space Space Domain Awareness
Ship-Mounted Radar
SPACE Domain Awareness Satellites
(AN/SPY-1)
(Space Fence, (GSSAP, SBSS)
LeoLabs)
Source: Author’s own research and analysis.

civilian signals. Depending on the frequency band being lasercom crosslinks for passing data directly between
used, atmospheric attenuation, weather conditions, satellites. The Space Development Agency (SDA) initiated
solar flares, or other natural forms of interference development of a constellation of satellites in LEO that
can degrade communications. Wired communications plan to use lasercom for high data rate links, and it funded
systems, including fiberoptic cables, do not have the a pair of satellites with infrared and lasercom payloads
same bandwidth limitations as RF signals because more to demonstrate the technology, shown in Figure 2.
lines can often be run along the same path as needed, but DARPA’s Blackjack program separately funded a lasercom
wired communications remain vulnerable to detection, demonstration on its Mandrake 2 mission. Both sets
interception, and interference through physical tampering of satellites launched together as part of a ridesharing
along cable routes or cyberattacks that target routers or mission on June 30, 2021 and, as of this writing, are
terminals in the network. undergoing initial testing and assessment.
Lasercom systems can overcome many of the limitations
PROCESSING ELEMENT
of RF and wired communications. Lasercom links are
Perhaps one of the most overlooked but critically
inherently protected from detection, interception, and
important functional elements of a battle network is the
interference because of the extremely narrow beamwidth
processing element. The processing element is used to
of the laser and the narrow field of view of the receiver.
analyze, aggregate, and synthesize data from a variety
This limits an adversary from being able to detect,
of sensor sources to inform decisions. For example, raw
intercept, jam, or otherwise interfere with a transmission
data from SAR systems must be processed to produce
unless it is physically located within the beam.
radar images and to identify objects or movements of
However, the extremely narrow beamwidth of lasercom
interest in the battlespace. Processing can also be used to
links also means that they are not ideal for broadcast
compress data before transmission, to filter or flag data
communications. Whereas an RF link can be transmitted
of potential interest to decisionmakers, and to produce
across a broad area for many users simultaneously,
specific intelligence products. Commercial companies, for
lasercom links are best suited for point-to-point
example, have developed algorithms that analyze satellite
communications that require dedicated high data rate
imagery to count the number of cars in a parking lot or
links. Lasercom links that transit through the atmosphere
the number of ships in an area. Importantly, the output of
(as opposed to space-to-space lasercom
links) are subject to atmosphere distortion
Figure 2: Rendering of the General Atomics and Space
and weather disruptions, but lasercom links
Development Agency Lasercom Demonstration Mission
between space and airborne platforms can
avoid much of the atmosphere, depending on
the altitude of the aircraft involved.
Space-based lasercom was a key component
of the Air Force’s Transformational Satellite
Communications (TSAT) program that began
in 2003, but that program was canceled
in 2009 without fielding any satellites.
Despite this setback, progress on space-
based lasercom continued in the decade
that followed both within and outside of
government programs, such as the 2020
demonstration by General Atomics and
Tesat-Spacecom of an airborne lasercom
communications system. This demonstration
connected an MQ-9 Reaper with a satellite
in geostationary orbit using a lasercom link.
The latest generation of SpaceX’s Starlink
communications satellites is equipped with Source: General Atomics Electromagnetic Systems.
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 6

the processing element can sometimes be a set of numbers without relying on other data links. Stealthy aircraft in
(with statistical confidence parameters) rather than an contested airspace can relay their sensor data to non-
image or qualitative assessment. stealthy aircraft operating just outside the threat area for
processing and dissemination, leveraging systems such as
A key discriminator in the processing element is where the
the Open Mission Systems computer on the U-2 or the
processing occurs: on-board the sensor, in the cloud, or at
Advanced Display Core Processor (ADCP) II being fielded
the tactical edge. The platforms that carry some sensors
in the new F-15EX. And aerial refueling aircraft can double
may also have sufficient size, weight, and power (SWAP)
as communication gateways and data processing and
to carry the computational components needed to process
distribution centers at the tactical edge, given their size
the data they produce before transmitting it. For example,
and power generation capacity.
imagers may have the processing capacity to compress data
(and greatly reduce communications requirements), and
DECISION ELEMENT
radars may have on-board processors to filter and compute
The decision element is perhaps the most important part
initial products from the raw data they produce. On-board
of the battle network because it is where information is
processing has many advantages in terms of increasing
the speed of analysis, automating some sensor cueing translated into action. Where the decision occurs, how it
and tracking functions, and reducing communications is made, and who is involved depends on what types of
requirements. But for some platforms, particularly smaller actions are being considered. For the foreseeable future,
aircraft and satellites, SWAP is highly limited, and it may major decisions, such as the use of lethal force, will likely
make more operational and economic sense to perform the involve a human-in-the-loop at some level, and historically
processing separate from the sensing platform. this has been the default for most decisions in battle
networks. Human-in-the-loop decisionmaking can still
Cloud-based processing offers the advantage of essentially
involve many forms of computer-assisted or artificial
unlimited processing and data storage capacity without
intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) augmented
the SWAP limitations of many platforms. Sensors can
processes to better inform decisions and accelerate the
transmit raw or partially processed information to data
process.
centers on the ground for final processing and analysis. In
the past two decades, commercial firms have built massive Virtually all engagements beyond visual range already
data centers around the globe with processing, storage use computer-assisted decisionmaking. The human eye
capacity, and (in some cases) reliability far beyond the can only detect objects at roughly two miles or less in
scope of the data centers owned and operated by the U.S. distance, and beyond this range, operators must rely on
military and intelligence agencies. DoD’s Cloud Strategy, electronic sensors of some form. For example, a fighter
released in , notes the importance of cloud jet in contested airspace will seek to engage adversary
computing as a key differentiator of mission success. aircraft at the maximum range possible—well beyond two
However, the main contract to build a common cloud miles. The aircraft’s radar will detect other aircraft in the
computing environment for DoD, known as the Joint area and compare their signatures to others in its database
Enterprise Defense Infrastructure (JEDI), was mired in to determine the types of aircraft involved and whether
legal disputes for years and ultimately canceled. they are friend, foe, or non-combatant. This information
is displayed on the fighter jet’s cockpit display, and it can
Some military missions require high-frequency or low-
be corroborated with data from other sensors to increase
latency processed data that the communication links
the confidence of the operator in the result. But ultimately,
to and from cloud computing centers may not be able
the pilot can decide to fire weapons based solely on the
to support. Moreover, in a contested communications
recommendations provided by its computer systems
environment, these long-haul data links may be degraded
without direct confirmation.
or disrupted, especially for forces operating at the edge or
within the contested battlespace. These forces may need AI/ML systems go a step further to assist decisionmaking
sensors that link directly to other platforms in-theater and automate some decisions that do not necessarily
with sufficient processing capacity to close the sensor- require a human-in-the-loop. AI/ML systems can be
to-shooter kill chain quickly and reliably. Airborne or used in the decision element to rapidly analyze data to
satellite sensors can downlink their data directly to user find information or patterns of interest—and they can
terminals on the ground that process the data onsite dynamically evolve the way they analyze and interpret
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 7

data as more information is gathered. In the fighter jet The quality and confidence of decisions made by AI/
example above, an AI/ML algorithm running on the radar ML systems—and humans as well—can be improved by
data could detect new signatures or patterns in the data increasing connectivity to additional sensors and data
not already cataloged in its databases, such as aircraft using processing capacity. This higher level of connectivity may
electronic countermeasures not seen before, and update shift the balance in favor of automating more decisions
its algorithms during flight based on this new information. and higher-level decisions in future battle networks. The
The advantage of AI/ML systems is the ability to form strategic and policy implications of using AI/ML systems in
connections in data that humans may miss and to analyze decisionmaking are discussed in more detail in the second
large volumes of data in a fraction of the time it would take paper of this series.
humans to accomplish the same task. For relatively benign
decisions, such as redirecting sensors to look for something EFFECTS ELEMENT
or reallocating bandwidth in a jamming environment, AI/ The fifth and final element of a battle network is where
ML systems can be used to make decisions without human information is turned into effects in the battlespace.
input. This helps off-load work from human operators so These effects include both kinetic fires, which physically
that they can focus their mental energies on the processes damage or destroy adversary forces, and non-kinetic fires,
and decisions where humans are most needed. such as electronic warfare, directed energy weapons,
For many types of military missions, the slowest part of or cyberattacks. A key part of joint operations is the
the battle network can be the decision element, and for ability to coordinate these effects across domains in time
some applications it may not be feasible to have a human- and location to generate the desired effects against an
in-the-loop because of the rapid response time required adversary at minimal risk to friendly forces and non-
to be effective. This is already the case with many close-in combatants. Battle networks are how this coordination
air and missile defenses, such as the Close-In Weapons occurs. Cross-domain effects—where forces in one domain
System (CWIS) shown in Figure 3. This raises several launch attacks against forces in another domain—are
important policy issues about the role of AI/ML systems in a particularly effective way to leverage asymmetric
future battle networks and the levels of automation that advantages and keep an adversary off balance. The air
policymakers are comfortable with in different situations. campaign in the opening days of the First Gulf War in
1991 is a classic example where
Figure 3: USS Vella Gulf (CG 72) Fires Its Close-In Weapons System the U.S. military leveraged its
(CWIS), July 10, 2019 advantages in air and space to
achieve greater effects on the ground
than ground forces alone.
When selecting the best method to
generate effects in an engagement,
several factors must be considered,
including: the range and number
of targets, the threat environment,
the potential for collateral
damage, the need for post-attack
damage assessment, and whether
public visibility, reversibility, and
attribution are a concern. Short-
range kinetic weapons, such as
the Joint Direct Attack Munition
(JDAM), are ideal when a large
volume of low-cost fires is needed
and targets may be highly mobile.
Long-range and stand-off kinetic
Source: U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist/Petty Officer 3rd Class Gian Prabhudas via Defense
Visual Information Distribution Service. weapons, such as the Long Range
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 8

Anti-Surface Cruise Missile (LRASM) and the Joint Air- some situations, although this remains a point of debate.
to-Surface Standoff Missile (JASSM), are better suited for It can be difficult to determine if some non-kinetic forms
small numbers of high-value targets and more contested of attack are effective, particularly if the effects are not
environments where not all delivery platforms may be publicly visible. And some methods of attack—such as
able to penetrate adversary defenses. Precision-guided exploiting zero-day vulnerabilities in a cyberattack—may
weapons are used to reduce the number of weapons and have a limited period of effectiveness before an adversary
delivery platforms required and the risks of collateral develops defenses against them. For these reasons,
damage, especially for targets in dense urban areas. Kinetic operators may be reluctant to rely on non-kinetic effects
weapons generally produce visible and permanent effects that cannot be verified when kinetic effects can achieve
that allow for battle damage assessment using the sensor the same results.
element of a battle network.
An important consideration when building and integrating
Non-kinetic methods of attack, such as cyberattacks, the effects element of a battle network is the dynamic
directed energy weapons, and electronic warfare, can process of matching weapons to targets in an evolving
achieve some of the same effects as kinetic weapons battlespace. This requires close integration among the
through different means. For example, instead of attacking sensor, decision, and effects elements to optimize how
a threatening drone or small ship with guns or missiles, targets are selected and prioritized based on the types
operators could target it with a high-powered laser, of effects desired and the delivery methods available.
such as the system shown in Figure 4. For some non- In the battle networks of the future, this process could
kinetic forms of attack, such as jamming, the effects can be much faster and more dynamic than it is today, with
be reversible, creating temporary effects at the time and targets being identified and prosecuted on a rolling basis
place they are needed. For some types of non-kinetic by swarms of crewed and remotely crewed systems across
attack, third parties may not be able to see that an attack all domains. As some have postulated, it could be more
has occurred, or the party being attacked may not know like a commercial ride-sharing service (e.g., Uber or Lyft)
right away who is attacking. For these reasons, non- that continually matches riders with drivers based on their
kinetic attacks may be perceived as less escalatory in relative locations, projected paths, and number of people
and seats available. But this vision
Figure 4: Laser Weapon System (LaWS) Undergoing Testing on the of a highly optimized and rapidly
USS Ponce, November 17, 2014 adapting effects element cannot
be achieved without resilient and
interoperable battle networks.
FINAL THOUGHTS
The above sections provide a
framework for defining the five
functional elements that make up
a battle network and the various
payloads, platforms, and other
components that comprise them. The
sensor element collects data on what
is happening in the battlespace and
passes it to the processing element,
where it analyzes, aggregates, and
synthesizes data from a variety
of sources. The decision element
then uses data products to inform
decisions and translate information
into action in the effects element
Source: U.S. Navy photo by John F. Williams via Defense Visual Information Distribution Service. of the battle network. And the
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 9

communications element allows all the other elements to comprise future battle networks are already in service—and
pass data and decisions freely across the battlespace. these existing systems will continue to be a significant part
of the force for decades to come. Existing systems must
Perhaps the most important insight this framework
be integrated into the same networks as future systems to
yields is that the battle network of the future is not one
achieve the full potential of Joint All-Domain Operations.
network—it is a network of networks. Rather than using
Moreover, DoD already owns or has access to a variety of
a traditional hub-and-spoke network architecture, the
U.S. government, commercial, allied, and partner systems
battle networks of the future should be dynamically
across each of the functional elements. Building the
reconfigurable mesh networks that are better capable of
battle networks of the future is as much about integrating
adapting to threats and disruptions. These networks can
existing systems to connect with one another to perform
split into tactical sub-networks as necessary, reroute data
new missions in new ways as it is about fielding entirely
through different systems and alternative pathways in
new systems and capabilities. As the military pursues the
unpredictable ways, and reconnect into larger networks
vision set forth in its Joint Warfighting Concept, it raises
as opportunities emerge. The communications element
several operational, strategic, and acquisition issues for
is the essential component that makes this higher level
policymakers. The second paper in this series addresses
of interoperability and resilience possible, but the other
these issues and the key factors policymakers should
elements of the battle network must also be adapted to
consider when charting a way forward.
pass data seamlessly across multiple levels of security
using compatible data standards and protocols.
Todd Harrison is the director of Defense Budget Analysis and
The battle networks of the future are also not composed
director of the Aerospace Security Project at the Center for
exclusively of new systems built to a new set of standards.
Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C.
While new systems and new standards are an important
part of enabling new capabilities, the vast majority of the This brief is made possible by support from General Atomics
platforms, sensors, radios, and other payloads that will and general support to CSIS.
CSIS BRIEFS are produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a private, tax-exempt institution
focusing on international public policy issues. Its research is nonpartisan and nonproprietary. CSIS does not take specific
policy positions. Accordingly, all views, positions, and conclusions expressed in this publication should be understood to
be solely those of the author(s). © 2021 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
Cover Photo: U.S. Air Force photo by Senior Airman Daniel Hernandez
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 10