CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 1
CSIS
BRIEFS
Commercial Space Remote Sensing
and Its Role in National Security
By Todd Harrison and Matthew Strohmeyer
THE ISSUE
Over the past two decades, the pace of innovation in the commercial space remote sensing industry has accelerated. The
capabilities provided by commercial firms can be used to complement government space systems across a wide range of national
security missions and fill in gaps in capabilities where the U.S. government has lagged. The challenge for the military and
intelligence community is understanding how to leverage commercial capabilities for military advantage while protecting national
security and maintaining the health and competitiveness of U.S. companies in the global remote sensing market. This CSIS brief
examines how the paradigm for space remote sensing has changed within the U.S. government, the ways commercial systems can
support this new paradigm for national security missions, and the roles commercial systems can play in strategic competition. The
brief concludes by looking at alternative acquisition approaches and key policy issues that should be addressed to fully leverage
the innovation, capabilities, and additional capacity offered by commercial space remote sensing companies.
The first hint of a challenge to these three paradigms
INTRODUCTION
emerged in the early 2000s with the expansion of
As early as the launch-and-catch CORONA satellite
commercial remote sensing. The commercial market for
program of the late 1950s, the United States’ strategy
satellite imagery dates to the passage of the Land Remote
to gain insights from space remote sensing has hinged
Sensing Policy Act of 1992. This law replaced the Land
on three paradigms: government-developed satellites,
Remote-Sensing Commercialization Act of 1984 and
human-based processing, and agency data ownership.
created the regulatory framework through which U.S.
These approaches served the United States well during
commercial companies could launch, operate, and sell
the cat-and-mouse years of space sensing competition
space-based remote sensing data. However, the market
with the Soviet Union when exquisite satellite sensors
remained relatively small until the early 2000s when
and space launch capabilities were the exclusive purview
of the government. Similarly, the need to process modest privately owned U.S. companies began selling high-
amounts of analog and digital satellite images fit well with resolution satellite images to the government. Major
highly experienced human analysts whose contextual government investment in commercial remote sensing,
knowledge of normal activity at Russian airfields, training as seen in the 2010 EnhancedView contract, enabled
ranges, and submarine pens could quickly spot anomalies. commercial capabilities to augment government-owned
These analysts, who closely guarded their information, sensing. Unclassified imagery from commercial satellites
created much-needed concentrations of highly competent was quickly vacuumed into the Intelligence Community’s
intelligence experts. (IC) classification vortex of human processing. This

system held images and analysis in IC
abeyance until operators made requests to
access snapshots of data.
Meanwhile, the growing complexity of
the unipolar post-Cold War world led to
an increasing need for remote sensing
that targeted rogue states such as Iran and
North Korea as well as an emerging China
and revanchist Russia. The limited capacity
of exquisite government remote sensing
often failed to keep pace with emergent
Combatant Command needs for intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR).
The interagency image request process—
while effective for methodical Cold War
competition—consistently frustrated
operational users and foretold the need for
a new approach. Throughout the 2010s,
the capability and capacity of commercial
sensing continued to increase and rival that
of the U.S. government. Concurrently, several
government efforts to harness the power
of machines for remote sensing detection
and processing combined with a concept
of unlocking previously enclaved data.
Programs such as Project Maven, under the
Top: Now declassified image of the Pentagon from a Corona spy satellite from 1967.
undersecretary of defense for intelligence and
Bottom: Image of the Pentagon from the GeoEye-1 commercial satellite in 2011.
security, sought to rethink the three remote
Source: National Reconnaissance Office (Top); GeoEye (now DigitalGlobe)/The National Security Archive (Bottom)
sensing paradigms with a new approach:
privately-owned space-based sensing,
Commercial companies began to see the potential for a
machine-aided processing, and common cloud-based data
multi-billion-dollar market providing commercial images
sharing. These new paradigms all leveraged the power of
to the government for national security, and the 2011
commercial companies to achieve a speed of development
National Security Space Strategy clearly identified the
and innovation unmatched by contemporary government
emerging competitive market. Reductions in the price
sensing capabilities.
per pound to orbit through reusable rockets and the use
of small CubeSats that could allow for more satellites
NATIONAL SECURITY APPLICATIONS
per launch, larger constellations of satellites, and
Several remote sensing and data technologies matured
therefore more frequent passes over areas of interest,
in the early 2000s, and commercial investment in these
made commercial systems the new sensing high ground.
technologies fueled innovation that better aligned
Commercial companies began combining advances in
commercial space remote sensing capabilities with
microelectronics, small satellites, and low cost to orbit
government needs. Specific to sensing, the traditional on-
to create proliferated low Earth orbit (LEO) sensing
orbit electro-optical and infrared imagery that fueled Cold
constellations: hundreds or even thousands of satellites
War awareness of Russian actions began to rapidly increase
in multiple orbital planes allowing for rapid revisit and a
in quality with the debut of commercial satellites such as
range of low- to high-resolution images.
QuickBird in 2001 and GeoEye-1 in 2008. Where 60 cm
resolution was top-tier in the early 2000s, 25 cm resolution These commercial advances combined with the ability
or better was the norm by the mid-2010s. to sense outside the visible and infrared (IR) spectrum
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 2

through synthetic aperture radar (SAR) and radio frequency of new commercial images could provide some value,
(RF) mapping to create new commercial and security but these images, held in a system disconnected from
applications, from moving target indication to rapid other sets of images, would require human copying and
geolocation of jamming. The promises were not just for translation between systems. If those images could instead
national security: commercial companies saw the potential be combined with all other commercial and government
utility for natural disaster response and even increased images and then made available to all IC agencies, the
awareness of changes in market conditions by observing new commercial data could have a non-linear impact on
the live movement of global rail, maritime, and truck decision speed and capabilities. Cloud-based storage and
transportation. For example, a low-resolution, high-revisit- retrieval proved not only important for access to data but
rate SAR image of several major soybean rail yards in the also for the emerging use of machine learning to gain
Midwest could help predict changes in the market based on insights from the data.
early warning of supply changes or supply chain disruptions.
The amount of data being collected began to increase
beyond the point where a human or group of humans
Commercial companies
could process all the imagery and other data products
began combining advances in
derived from space remote sensing systems. By the late
2010s, artificial intelligence, and specifically computer
microelectronics, small satellites, and
vision object detection and categorization in images,
low cost to orbit to create proliferated
was approaching performant levels. While AI was not yet
on par with human analysts, key efforts such as Project
low Earth orbit (LEO) sensing
Maven began to ask if machines, in the aggregate across
constellations.
hundreds of images over days, weeks, and months, could
begin to determine patterns of maneuver, massing, or force
Some national security organizations began to see the posture. Whereas human cognition can quickly identify
potential uses of these new capabilities as well. Rather large changes across a few variables, such as numbers
than relying only on low-revisit-rate exquisite national of aircraft, machines can detect subtle changes across
systems, the addition of commercial remote sensing could hundreds of seemingly disparate variables. A change in the
help analysts gain a better understanding of changes in number and disposition of missile-loading vehicles across
adversary pattern of life at key operating areas. For example, an adversary’s military bases, while perhaps not interesting
an increase in conventional bomber assets at a forward in one image, could become compelling when correlated
deployed location, viewable in traditional sensing, could with small changes in movements of support aircraft
now be augmented with commercial images from several across many other operating locations. It is these data-
other bases and support locations. Additionally, higher based insights over large areas that machines can provide
revisit rates meant more ability to see nuanced changes to humans to highlight possible changes in patterns of
in adversary posture at multiple locations. Moreover, data life—changes that could provide early warning of adversary
products derived from commercial SAR and RF satellites activities and intent.
could augment electro-optical imagery to better characterize
what an adversary is doing and how forces are operating. STRATEGIC COMPETITION
The revolution in commercial space remote sensing has the
At the same time as these advances in commercial space
potential to shatter the paradigms of how national security
and sensing capabilities were progressing, advances were
professionals think about indications and warnings of
also occurring in how data was stored and analyzed.
adversary actions. Rather than relying exclusively on
Data that was traditionally stored on hard drives and
high-demand, low-density government-owned national
on-premises storage began to find a new medium: the
assets, commercial sensing offers orders of magnitude
cloud. The ability to move from data silos and stovepiped
more coverage and revisit rates that can augment and
storage to common cloud-based environments was a key
queue the sensing capabilities provided by more exquisite
enabler for the commercial remote sensing revolution.
government-owned and government-operated systems.
Within the U.S. government, the data stovepipes of the
past were replaced as common data access began to show Artificial intelligence can unburden human analysts
utility for analysts across government agencies. One set from tediously numbering bombers and tanks in images,
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 3

and machines can begin looking at adversary actions Human-centric early warning today often results in late
in aggregate across vast areas at a scale and speed not awareness and reactive decisions. In the landscape of
possible with humans. Where humans can cultivate global strategic competition where actors seek decision
expertise in understanding how adversaries normally advantage to gain and exploit initiative, reactive nations
operate in a few key areas, machines can gather data from will struggle to achieve or regain dominance. By contrast,
across all domains, operating locations, and intelligence capabilities that enable faster understanding of adversary
sources simultaneously to inform their algorithms. Subtle actions enable a country to proactively deter and counter
changes in market prices for logistics goods that may aggression. For example, if commercial remote sensing
indicate a major military movement, overlooked by human SAR capabilities indicate that an actor is beginning rail
analysts in the noise of data, could be flagged by machines movements consistent with a buildup of forces to seize
and combined with other open-source data to create disputed territory, this awareness opens the opportunity
actionable insights. These machine insights, provided to for the United States and its allies and partners to take
humans via alerts, place analysts in their most effective diplomatic actions or move forces to complicate the
role: making decisions and recommendations based on adversary’s calculus before the final invasion decision is
the full context of the situation. AI systems can process made. In an era of grey zone competition where, according
the raw data to produce data products that enhance early to Russian chief of staff Valery Gerasimov, “wars are not
warning awareness and enable humans to make more declared, and having begun, proceed to an unfamiliar
informed decisions to drive a U.S. deterrence action. template,” it is vital to understand these subtle cues that
reveal an adversary’s intent. The vast quantity and ubiquity
The revolution in commercial space
of commercial space remote sensing data combined with
remote sensing has the potential to algorithms and cloud computing that use this data to
detect the subtle cues underlying grey zone actions may
shatter the paradigms of how national
provide an outsized impact on strategic competition—
security professionals think about especially considering that competition’s global nature.
indications and warnings of adversary Since commercial remote sensing mainly leverages
emerging LEO constellations, the terrestrial footprint
actions.
of these satellites is inherently global in nature. This
fact aligns well with the
increasingly global strategy
of competitors such as China,
which, through investments
including the Belt and Road
Initiative, seek leverage well
outside the Western Pacific.
Understanding how China
is taking actions to gain
influence throughout the
globe becomes a key aspect of
understanding the subtle cues
inside grey zone warfare.
U.S. Combatant Commands
have recognized the value of
commercial remote sensing
and the global integration
opportunity that it offers.
Through a series of recent
Representatives from all 11 U.S. combatant commands participate in the third series of
experiments involving all
Global Information Dominance Experiments (GIDE) at North American Aerospace Defense
11 regional and functional
Command and U.S. Northern Command Headquarters, July 13, 2021.
Source: U.S. Air Force photo by Tech. Sgt. Tommy Grimes
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 4

Combatant Commands, USNORTHCOM advanced the use of can make it difficult for commercial companies to work
commercial space remote sensing to gain an understanding with the government.
of how adversaries were moving globally and how the Joint
The Space Development Agency (SDA) is attempting to
Force could rapidly collaborate across the globe to create
modify the product-based approach in several ways. It is
dilemmas and achieve deterrence. These efforts are now
actively working with industry to leverage commercial
partnered with Deputy Secretary of Defense Kathleen
capabilities for satellite components, such as satellite buses
Hicks’ recently announced Artificial Intelligence and Data
and intersatellite links, by prioritizing commercial off-the-
Accelerator program to jump start effective data-sharing
shelf (COTS) capabilities. It also plans to use commercial
efforts and scale them across the Combatant Commands.
firms to operate its Tranche 1 satellite constellation,
This program comes on the heels of Secretary Hicks’ data
making it a government-owned, commercially operated
decrees instructing the Department of Defense (DoD)
(GOCO) space system. And it is streamlining the
to move off its paradigm of well-intentioned agencies,
contracting process by using a contracting mechanism
preventing siloed data from being shared across the force.
known as other transaction authority (OTA) rather than
Sensing data, in particular, falls prey to the tendency to
following the traditional procurement process under the
protect what is owned rather than provide it across the
Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR). According to SDA
government. Commercial space remote sensing is primed
director Derek Tournear, this approach is intended “to
to be a first example of the power of common data access
make sure that anyone that would like to bid and compete
across government agencies for decisionmaking and use by
has the opportunity to submit a proposal.”
AI for generating new insights. Rather than several disparate
However, buying space systems as products does not fully
agencies enacting their own commercial agreements
access the innovation and capabilities in the commercial
and then holding their newfound sensing data hostage,
space remote sensing market. Many commercial space
combining this sensing in common cloud environments
companies are built around a services-based business
can unlock new insights for strategic competition. While
model where the data collected can be sold to more than
commercial remote sensing is central to enabling a
one customer. The product-based model puts relatively
national security enterprise that can dominate in strategic
more risk on the government in terms of up-front costs,
competition, the way that the government integrates these
technology obsolescence, operating costs, and capacity
commercial capabilities is key.
limitations. Buying remote sensing as a service allows the
government to leverage private capital and put more of
ACQUISITION APPROACHES
these risks on the companies involved and, by extension,
One of the biggest obstacles for the U.S. government to
their investors. Buying space services rather than satellites
effectively access commercial space capabilities is the
gives commercial firms a higher incentive to drive down
acquisition and contracting system. Many pathways exist
operating costs and continually improve capabilities to win
for how DoD and the IC can leverage commercial systems
more work. And companies that are successful at selling the
depending on whether they want to buy capabilities as
same services to other customers (e.g., commercial as well
a product or as a service, and the way the government
as allied and partner governments) can use this additional
chooses to acquire these capabilities can in turn affect
revenue to invest in better capabilities, additional capacity,
what companies are willing to offer. The U.S. government
or lower prices to gain greater market share.
has traditionally procured space systems as products,
where it specifies requirements (often unique to the Many different approaches are available for the U.S.
military or intel community), assumes ownership of government to buy commercial space services in ways that
the satellites and ground systems, and operates these are compatible with commercially oriented businesses.
systems, albeit with support from contractors. This The most basic approach is to buy images or other data
approach is appropriate for capabilities that are truly products on a pay-as-you-go basis, with the government
unique to the government, where the technologies being one of many potential customers. For example, the
involved are highly sensitive or exquisite, and where the government can ask that a particular location be sensed at
potential for a commercial market does not exist (i.e., a particular time or request data from prior passes and pay
there are no other potential customers). But for space a negotiated fee for each request. A more comprehensive
capabilities where commercial companies can compete or approach is to buy subscription access to a company’s
may even have an advantage, the product-based approach catalog of data, giving the government full (but not
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 5

exclusive) access to current and historical data. In addition expand the capacity available to the government in a
to having full catalog access, the government could also crisis. The wording in the NRO’s RFP, however, is designed
include contract options to direct satellite tasking as to not only expand the government’s collection capacity
necessary to ensure certain locations or activities are but also to restrict capacity available to other users. When
sensed at specified times or to place a period of exclusivity activated, this contract clause would require the contractor
on when certain data can be made available to other users. to “permanently withhold all imagery collected by the
Importantly, the government would need to negotiate fair Contractor’s satellites over the designated area from resale
and equitable pricing for these options so that it does not or exposure to a public domain or interface, and shall
undermine the business model and financial health of the make the imagery available only to users approved by the
companies it is working with. Government.” Such a clause could potentially undercut
some commercial applications that are based on change
Buying space systems as products does
detection and consistent monitoring over time because
not fully access the innovation and the data would be permanently restricted (rather than
temporarily withheld). It also would be ineffective in
capabilities in the commercial space
preventing space remote sensing over certain regions
remote sensing market. of the world in a crisis—the ostensible reason for the
restriction—because companies not participating in the
A different approach would be to contract for exclusive program (including foreign-operated space remote sensing
use of a certain fraction of a space systems’ capacity, systems) would still be free to collect and distribute data
which would effectively be a time-sharing approach. without restriction. It would only limit the companies
During the periods in which the government has use of participating in the program, potentially placing them at a
the system, it could direct taskings and retain exclusive competitive disadvantage.
use of the data collected. For example, the government
When acquiring commercial space remote sensing services,
could contract for 50 percent of the daily capacity of
the government must also be mindful of how it sets
a satellite constellation and work with the contractor
requirements and the secondary effects this can have on
to specify collection priorities and taskings. The data
the market. In a truly commercial market, buyers exert
collected during the government’s time using the system
influence over sellers through patronage. They choose
would be passed to the government for its sole use, but
whom to buy from based on what companies are offering,
data collected during the other half of the satellites’
and the price buyers are willing to pay is a function of
operational capacity each day could be used by the
how well the services provided meet their needs. When a
company for other customers.
dominant customer, such as the U.S. government, attempts
The military and intelligence community have also to impose requirements on an industry, it can distort the
explored the idea of creating a space equivalent of market and limit the ability of companies to differentiate
the civil reserve air fleet (CRAF). CRAF allows U.S. themselves. Government-imposed requirements can
Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM) the ability to undercut the diversity of capabilities being offered and the
access additional airlift capacity quickly in an emergency unique characteristics that may make some companies
when the need for airlift exceeds the capacity of U.S. more competitive for other customers, which can
military aircraft. Air carriers are incentivized to commit ultimately narrow the market and limit the incentives for
aircraft to the CRAF program because it gives them the commercial investment and innovation.
opportunity to compete for regular airlift contracts—and
The acquisition strategy used for commercial space
their priority for bidding on task orders is higher the
remote sensing also needs to ensure it creates on-ramp
more aircraft they commit to CRAF.
opportunities for new companies to bid and compete
A draft request for proposals (RFP) issued by the National as their capabilities come online. The commercial space
Reconnaissance Office (NRO) in proposed a market is fast-paced, with new companies emerging
contract clause that appears intended to create something frequently. If the government wants to move fast and
akin to a civil reserve space fleet. But the contract clause innovate more rapidly, it needs to create opportunities for
as proposed differs from the CRAF model in several new companies to get on contract and begin competing for
important ways. CRAF is fundamentally designed to task orders on a rolling basis rather than waiting months
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 6

or sometimes years for contract opportunities. Smaller American leadership in space commerce.” The Department
firms can have cash-flow issues, and investors often want of Commerce began the review and update process shortly
to see a demonstrated ability to earn revenue before thereafter, and the updated regulations were issued in
committing more funds. The government can facilitate this 2020. Despite these updates to strategy and regulations,
by allowing companies to begin earning revenue as soon as the U.S. Commercial Remote Sensing Policy (NSPD-17)
their capabilities warrant it by offering contract on-ramps has not been updated since .
more frequently. The Biden administration appears to be continuing many
of the key elements of the previous administration’s space
POLICY ISSUES
strategy and policy initiatives. In its U.S. Space Priorities
The U.S. government is not just a dominant buyer (or Framework, which was released at the first meeting of
potential buyer) of commercial space remote sensing data. the National Space Council under the new administration,
It is also a regulator that controls what capabilities U.S. the Biden administration outlined several policy priorities
companies can build, how they operate, and what they for space. One of its priorities is to foster a “regulatory
are allowed to sell. Commercial licenses for space-based environment that enables a competitive and burgeoning
remote sensing are processed, approved, and supervised U.S. commercial space sector.” It intends to do this in part by
by the Department of Commerce’s National Oceanic and working “with allies and partners to update and harmonize
Atmospheric Agency, in consultation with the military, space policies, regulations, export controls, and other
IC, Department of State, and other relevant government measures that govern commercial activities worldwide.”
agencies. However, the U.S. government can only regulate
The United States therefore has a
the activities of U.S. companies and U.S. personnel. It
cannot regulate foreign companies or control what kind vested interest in maintaining a
of data they collect, when they collect it, or how the data
competitive advantage in commercial
is stored and distributed. For example, a foreign-owned
company can collect data over sensitive locations where U.S. space remote sensing so that the most
companies are restricted. Conversely, a foreign government
capable companies remain within its
could stop one of its companies from selling data to the U.S.
government during a crisis. The United States therefore has jurisdiction and accessible to the U.S.
a vested interest in maintaining a competitive advantage in
government.
commercial space remote sensing so that the most capable
companies remain within its jurisdiction and accessible to
A move toward more consistent regulations across allies
the U.S. government. The challenge, however, is balancing
and partners is essential to creating a level playing field
the need to protect national security interests with the
for commercial space companies. U.S. regulations for
desire to promote a more competitive commercial sector.
commercial space remote sensing have traditionally set
The are several tools through which the U.S. government thresholds for the level of resolution allowed by U.S.
can establish a favorable balance between security and commercial satellites based on the best resolution available
commerce. The National Space Strategy, last updated in from foreign sources—or what is expected to be available
, establishes four pillars that are intended to in the near future. This holds back U.S. companies until
drive a whole-of-government approach for space. One foreign competitors advance their capabilities, creating
of the four pillars calls on the government to “foster what is effectively a perpetual second-mover disadvantage.
conducive domestic and international environments” for Setting regulations in concert with other countries—rather
space by streamlining “regulatory frameworks, policies, and than in reaction to what they are doing—can break the
processes to better leverage and support U.S. commercial United States out of this dilemma.
industry.” This overarching strategy was complemented The Space Priorities Framework includes export controls
two months later by Space Policy Directive-2 (SPD-2), among the list of items it intends to harmonize with allies
which provided greater detail for how the streamlining and partners. This is important because export controls
of commercial space regulations should proceed. Section can serve as a “back door” means of regulating commercial
3 of SPD-2 called for a review and update of regulations space activities. Export controls can be used to restrict
pertaining to commercial remote sensing to “encourage commercial space activities that are already licensed or
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 7

do not require a license under existing U.S. laws and combatant commands,” “any gaps” in meeting current
regulations by restricting the release of data products (e.g., demands for ISR, and “an assessment of how commercial
images) derived from these systems. capabilities can be integrated into the current and
planned sensor-to-shooter programs across the services.”
The Space Policy Framework also states that “the United
It also requires a separate report detailing how DoD is
States will leverage new commercial space capabilities
implementing the policy guidance in the FY 2021 NDAA,
and services to meet national security requirements.”
This policy could potentially be a boost to commercial specifically with regard to leveraging commercial space-
space remote sensing companies if DoD and the IC follow based RF capabilities. The final version of the FY 2022
through with new programs and contract opportunities. NDAA also included a provision requiring the service
acquisition executive for space to “determine whether
The United States is at a critical point in how it regulates
existing or planned commercially available capabilities
commercial space remote sensing. The policy and
could meet all or a portion of the requirements” for space
regulatory missteps of the 1990s for commercial SAR
acquisition programs before they are formally established
satellites should serve as a lesson for policymakers
as a program of record. Overall, the language in the House
today. The U.S. government stifled the development
report and the text of the FY 2022 NDAA suggest that the
of commercial SAR satellites by U.S. companies and
defense committees continue to take a keen interest in
effectively ceded the market to Canada and Germany. To
this issue and may legislate further—potentially through
maintain U.S. leadership and a level playing field in this
appropriations as well as policy—if the reports requested
critical market segment, U.S. policies and regulations
and the FY 2023 budget submission do not satisfy
must continually adapt to ensure that U.S. companies are
congressional objectives.
not held back in terms of their capabilities until foreign
companies catch up or exceed them. While the regulatory
CONCLUSIONS
updates in 2020 were a step in the right direction, a key
factor in whether these changes will be effective is how the Space remote sensing has been an important component
new regulations are interpreted and applied. of U.S. intelligence collection and power projection
capabilities for more than six decades. While the
The House and Senate Armed Services Committees have
paradigms that initially developed for space remote
actively pushed the executive branch to use commercial
sensing (government-developed satellites, human
space remote sensing for national security missions
processing, and siloed data) served the nation well
in recent years. Section 1612 of the FY 2021 National
throughout the Cold War, advances in commercial
Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) requires DoD and
space remote sensing offer the potential to alter these
the IC to leverage commercial space remote sensing
paradigms in ways that provide new advantages. The
capabilities “to the extent practicable.” It specifically
commercial space remote sensing industry is advancing
requires the NRO and NGA to consider in their analysis
rapidly in terms of satellite technology, advanced
of alternatives for future capabilities “whether there is a
sensors and sensing methods, large constellations,
cost-effective domestic commercial capability or service
and high revisit rates. Moreover, the industry is
available that can meet any or all of the geospatial-
leveraging AI systems to rapidly process raw sensing
intelligence requirements of the Department of Defense,
data into actionable products for human analysts,
the intelligence community, or both.” If such a capability is
available, the law directs that the NRO and NGA will “give and it is using secure cloud-based systems for storage
preference to using such domestic commercial capability and dissemination to eliminate data silos. To be sure,
or service to meet requirements.” commercial systems will never be a replacement
for exquisite government-owned and government-
The FY 2022 NDAA also included several provisions
operated space remote sensing capabilities, and some
related to DoD’s use of commercial space services. The
missions may not be appropriate for commercial sensing
report accompanying the House version of the bill
capabilities. But as both Congress and the National
included language reinforcing the committee’s emphasis
Space Council have recognized, commercial space
on leveraging commercial capabilities. It directed DoD,
remote sensing should be an important component of
in consultation with NRO and NGA, to submit a report
the overall ISR architecture for DoD and the IC.
to Congress “identifying each commercial vendor that
provides global imagery to support Department of Defense As this report has noted, one of the main obstacles to
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 8

effectively leveraging commercial capabilities is the
acquisition and contracting system within the U.S.
government. The traditional approach of buying space
remote sensing capabilities as a product rather than a
service is incompatible with the business model of many
commercially oriented firms. Moreover, the multiyear
requirements development and funding process typically
used by DoD and the IC for acquisition programs is
far too slow to keep pace with the innovation cycle of
commercial space companies and the capabilities of
U.S. allies and adversaries alike. To fully leverage the
innovation, capabilities, and additional capacity offered
by commercial space remote sensing companies, the U.S.
government will need to adjust its acquisition approaches
to focus on buying services rather than products and
creating contract on-ramp opportunities on a more
frequent basis.
There appears to be agreement among members of
Congress and the Biden administration that a robust
commercial space remote sensing sector is important for
U.S. national security and that the military and IC should
more effectively leverage commercial capabilities. The real
measure of commitment, however, is whether these policy
objectives manifest themselves in contracts and funding
opportunities over the coming months and years.
Todd Harrison is the director of Defense Budget Analysis and
director of the Aerospace Security Project at the Center for
Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) in Washington,
D.C. Matthew Strohmeyer is a military fellow with the
International Security Program at CSIS.
This brief is made possible with generous support from
Hawkeye360, Planet, and Umbra.
CSIS BRIEFS are produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a private, tax-exempt institution
focusing on international public policy issues. Its research is nonpartisan and nonproprietary. CSIS does not take specific
policy positions. Accordingly, all views, positions, and conclusions expressed in this publication should be understood to
be solely those of the author(s). © 2022 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
Cover Photo: NASA
CSIS BRIEFS | WWW.CSIS.ORG | 9