July 13, 2020
Photo by: National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Eyes on the Prize
The Strategic Implications of Cislunar Space and the Moon
BY Spencer Kaplan
STRATEGIC INTEREST IN CISLUNAR SPACE AND THE The Moon’s scientific value stems from both its ability to
MOON is growing as launch capabilities and commercial serve as a testbed for the technology deemed critical to
ventures proliferate. Between the Moon’s vast reserves settle Mars and the opportunity it presents to gain
of civilization-changing resources and potential as a important insights into the Earth’s geology, the history
staging ground for missions to Mars and beyond, the of the solar system, and the existence of life on Earth.1
lunar and cislunar domains may become prime targets As the Moon is a celestial body reachable from Earth
for national security investment in the 21st century. with minimal gravity and low shielding from radiation, it
is uniquely positioned to host laboratories dedicated to
The Moon has three fundamental types of value:
deep space exploration research.
prestige, scientific, and strategic. Its prestige value
derives from the difficulty of achieving success on lunar Most importantly for this analysis is the Moon’s strategic
missions. Successful missions sent to the Moon are and economic value. Primarily, the Moon’s resources
often viewed as markers of technological and societal can be utilized to enable new, powerful types of
advancements, and few nations have managed to
successfully reach the Moon. This symbolic value can be Spencer Kaplan was a research intern for the Aerospace
leveraged to send a message to competing nations, as Security Project at the Center for Strategic and
the United States did with the Apollo program. International Studies in Washington, D.C.
AEROSPACE.CSIS.ORG | 1

terrestrial energy production and to facilitate deep and industrial factories for energy-intensive goods like
space exploration through on-site rocket fuel microchips, the domain could also be used to hide
production. To preserve a share of the Moon’s future potentially harmful satellites or to deny others access to
economic potential, countries may seek to develop a the Moon.5
presence at locations on the Moon with significant
The increasing number of cislunar opportunities, paired
resource concentrations. As many of the Moon’s
with the contested nature of the domain, suggest that
resources are not yet accessible, guaranteeing future
decision makers require a better-developed framework
access to the relatively limited resource-rich sites on the
for strategic thinking. This paper will analyze the
Moon increasingly appears to be a high priority for
strategic value of cislunar space and the Moon as well as
countries around the world.
how countries plan to leverage the cislunar and lunar
Recognition of the Moon as a strategic target is not new; domains to their advantage.
during the Cold War, planners in both the United States
What is Cislunar Space?
and the Soviet Union conceived of missions to build
lunar bases and detonate nuclear weapons on the lunar
Cislunar space is often referred to as the volume inside
surface.2 In addition to the surface of the Moon, some
the Moon’s orbit of the Earth and the region around the
military analysts aimed to strategically utilize the space
Moon. Many objects currently occupy cislunar space,
in between the Earth and the Moon—often thought of as
including satellites and meteorites. The Earth-orbiting
vacant space—to their strategic advantage. By
satellites in cislunar space are often categorized into
safeguarding some of the Soviet Union’s nuclear
orbital regimes by their altitude above Earth: low Earth
weapons hundreds of thousands of kilometers away,
orbit (LEO), medium Earth orbit (MEO), and
they could leverage the distance and time between the
geosynchronous Earth orbit (GEO). While cislunar space
Earth and the Moon to guarantee second-strike
technically starts at 160 km above Earth (LEO), This
capabilities because any attack on lunar weapons would
analysis will focus on the parts of cislunar space beyond
take several days to deliver to the Moon.3 This has since
GEO.
been banned by the Treaty on Principles Governing the
Beyond these most common orbits, some cislunar
Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
objects reside in low lunar orbit (LLO), which describes
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,
the region within 100 km of the Moon’s surface. Since
commonly known as the Outer Space Treaty, which
there is very little atmosphere on the Moon, objects can
prohibits states from orbiting or placing nuclear
orbit at very low altitudes. However, the Moon has
weapons on celestial bodies.4
irregularly distributed mass concentrations, called
Today, the strategic importance of cislunar space is
mascons, within its mantle, rendering its gravitational
growing. As countries and companies look to establish a
field uneven.6 Consequently, satellites in LLO may have
permanent presence on the Moon, cislunar space may
to make frequent station keeping adjustments to stay in
become increasingly important for transportation to
orbit. The gravitational perturbation effects of mascons
and from the moon, as well as to develop technologies
are so severe that there are only four orbital inclinations
for lunar and deep space missions. Furthermore,
that can support a stable orbit: 27º, 50º, 76º, and 86º.7
national security concerns about cislunar space are
Moreover, satellites located in orbits above 100km off
emerging. Though countries like the United States and
the Moon’s surface would be subject to increasingly
China are pursuing peaceful cislunar projects like
significant gravitational disturbances from the Earth
massive space-based solar arrays, habitation facilities,
2 | KAPLAN | Eyes on the Prize

and the Sun as their altitude above the Moon climbs.8 In their position. In the Earth-Moon system, the L1 point
sum, the gravitational environment surrounding the resides between the Earth and the Moon, the L2 point
Moon substantially limits operational capabilities for lies behind the Moon relative to the Earth, the L3 point is
satellites and future space stations. located directly opposite to the Moon in its orbit around
the Earth, the L4 point leads the Moon in its orbit, and
There are also specific locations in cislunar space that
the L5 trails the Moon in its orbit.
are of strategic and economic interest. The Lagrange
points are locations in space where the gravitational It is essential to understand the scale of cislunar space.
forces from two large bodies, like the Earth and the The average distance between the Earth and the Moon is
Moon, balance each other. Lagrange points are 384,000 km.10 The L2 Lagrange point, considered part of
important because spacecraft or satellites can stay in a cislunar space, is another 61,347 km past the Moon.11
stable orbit without having to expend much fuel.9 All For comparison, LEO, where fifty five percent of all
systems of two large bodies contain five Lagrange operational satellites are located, ranges between 160
points, two of which (L4 and L5) are stable, and three of km and 2,000 km off the Earth’s surface.12 The immense
which (L1, L2, and L3) are unstable, meaning spacecraft size of cislunar space, as well as its newfound
at those points require periodic corrections to maintain
| 3

accessibility, present critical strategic challenges and The Moon’s resources also have the potential to reshape
opportunities. life on Earth. Its abundant deposits of Helium-3—a
Helium isotope that could enable efficient nuclear
The Moon as a Strategic Target
fusion without harmful waste products—could provide
Earth with an extraordinary amount of energy,
Establishing a permanent settlement on another
unlocking new technologies and ending humanity’s
celestial body has often been seen as an important
reliance on fossil fuels.16 In addition to Helium-3, the
milestone for humanity. Yet, spacefaring countries like
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
the United States and China are not just motivated to
has detected the presence of rare-Earth elements (REE)
develop the Moon for symbolic reasons, but also
on the Moon. Since rare-Earth elements are contentious,
strategic purposes. The Moon’s physical conditions and
difficult to refine, and vital for national security
undeniable resource potential make it an attractive
applications, a country with the means to extract and
future destination for significant scientific, commercial,
refine them from the Moon would have a strategic
and security investment.
advantage over other countries.17
The Moon appears to be an encouraging location for in-
Although the Moon has clear commercial value in the
situ resource utilization (ISRU), or the production of
form of resources, they are currently inaccessible.
refined materials using resources found on-site.13
However, nations are beginning to position themselves
Notably, scientific findings from previous lunar missions
to preserve their ability to harness the Moon’s
suggest that the Moon’s poles house significant lunar ice
commercial value in the future. Notably, those nations
deposits, which can be used to create oxygen and
that develop sustained operations on the Moon first will
chemical fuels.14 The ability to manufacture rocket fuel
begin to establish de facto norms of behavior, enabling
on the lunar surface could facilitate novel missions
them to “set the tone” for future lunar operators. For
further into the solar system and beyond. ISRU could
example, countries motivated by open exploration and
also enable commercial companies to easily transport
commercial development (i.e., the United States) may
lunar resources from the Moon’s surface back to Earth.
seek to normalize cooperation and free access to all
The Moon’s low gravity would provide immense
parts of the Moon. By setting acceptable standards of
scientific value for future lunar settlements and allow
behavior early, actors who subsequently join the lunar
them to serve as a promising staging ground for future
surface may be more likely to follow these norms or
missions deeper into the solar system. The Moon’s weak
would at least be viewed as breaking the norms. In
surface gravity and lack of atmosphere mean that
addition to setting standards, developing a presence on
launching from the Moon’s surface to other locations in
the Moon early can guarantee access to certain
deep space requires less energy than launching from the
locations of increased scientific or commercial value,
Earth’s surface. Consequently, a space agency with a
like the Shackleton Crater, which lies on the South Pole
presence on the Moon or in lunar orbit could utilize
and likely contains ice.18 Doing so may be vital to
efficient mission architectures for deep space missions,
prevent other countries from engaging in exclusionary
enhancing their scientific capabilities or reducing their
behavior and denying access to such locations in the
costs.15 Thus, a country that builds a lunar base as a
future.
refueling and assembly outpost for space operations
may enjoy greater freedom to navigate the solar system
with ease.
4 | KAPLAN | Eyes on the Prize

Cislunar Space as a Strategic Target expended a percentage of the satellite’s fuel to do a fly-
by of the Moon, where they then utilized the Moon’s
While most of the Moon’s strategic value almost
gravity to assist the satellite to eventually re-enter
exclusively derives from its future economic value, the
GEO.20 This mission showed a new way cislunar space
cislunar domain has wide-ranging implications for
could invigorate missions to common orbital regimes.
contemporary and future national security. Security-
Some experts are concerned this same strategy, which
focused cislunar policy should consider how to both
saved AsiaSat-3, could also be used in an act of
secure future access to the Moon as well as defend
aggression. In a “surprise attack,” an adversary could
against attacks on terrestrial or orbital targets launched
deceptively launch a satellite on a translunar injection
from cislunar space.
trajectory but then alter its course near the Moon to set
it on a collision course with an essential national
Cislunar space and the Moon are strategically linked. A
security satellite. Since space situational awareness
presence on the Moon is futile without the ability to
(SSA) sensors are not typically focused on cislunar
freely travel between the Moon and the Earth through
space, satellite operators may not detect the incoming
cislunar space. Until a country develops the ability to
satellite, even though the attack would take around a
have a self-sustaining settlement on the Moon, it will
week to execute. Moreover, hostile satellites anchored
rely on the ability to transport crew and cargo to the
at Lagrange points would be very difficult to identify and
lunar surface and back, making it vulnerable to anti-
track without using SSA assets at or near these points,
access tactics in cislunar space. In a future conflict,
allowing them to stay “parked” for long periods.21 Losing
countries may seek to deny their adversaries access to
track of a potentially hostile satellite could be
the Moon because, among other potentialities, it could
catastrophic if it is later employed against a critical
be an important source of REE for military technology or
space system. Until LUNINT gathering improves,
Helium-3 for nuclear fusion energy. Having military
cislunar space will continue to be a significant
cislunar intelligence (LUNINT) and potentially defensive
vulnerability for civil, military, and commercial
and offensive weapons platforms stationed at cislunar
satellites.22
Lagrange points could give a country a strategic
advantage by allowing it to interfere with its adversary’s
Lunar and Cislunar Locations of Special
ability to access the Moon and its resources.
Strategic Significance
Cislunar space is a challenging domain for national
security practitioners because traditional intelligence Specific locations within cislunar space and on the
gathering and situational awareness platforms are not Moon’s surface are especially important as they hold
well-equipped to surveil satellites hundreds of more strategic value. These points are important for
thousands of kilometers away from Earth at high future commercial development or resource extraction.
resolutions.19 One particular concern is that hostile
The Moon’s Equator
actors could use cislunar space to attack satellites from
“above” rather than “below,” as is typically imagined of One of the most valuable resources on the Moon is
anti-satellite (ASAT) weapons. Helium-3. Ouyang Ziyuan, the Chief Scientist of the
Chinese Lunar Exploration Program, has emphasized
The first example of a satellite entering orbit from
the potential of lunar Helium-3 by saying it could “solve
“above” was the 1993 AsiaSat-3 satellite. After the
humanity’s energy demand for around 10,000 years at
satellite failed to reach its intended orbit, engineers
least.”23 The Earth has very little of the isotope because
| 5

its magnetosphere deflects solar wind, which is one
of the most common natural sources of Helium-3.
However, the Moon, lacking a magnetosphere, is
exposed to a significant amount of solar wind.
Thus, the parts of the Moon that are exposed most
often and most directly to the sun likely have large
deposits of Helium-3. Just as lower latitudes on
Earth are warmer because they receive more direct
sunlight, the equatorial regions of the Moon are
exposed more to Helium-3-carrying solar wind.24 Suspected polar ice deposits on the South and North Poles of the Moon.
Source: National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Therefore, efforts to secure lunar sites of strategic
during each orbital period. Thus, a lunar base would
significance should include the equator.
have more launch opportunities to access an orbiting
The Moon’s Polar Regions station if it were located by one of the poles. The
availability of lunar ice, combined with easy accessibility
The Moon’s poles are two often-cited locations of value
to on-orbit platforms, makes the Moon’s poles an
because of their geophysical characteristics. In 2018,
attractive strategic target for future lunar efforts.
NASA confirmed the presence of water ice at the Moon’s
poles using data collected by its Moon Mineralogy Lunar Surface Beneath the L1 and L2
Mapper (M3) instrument on India’s Chandrayaan-1
A great deal of the lunar poles’ strategic value comes
spacecraft. Specifically, the findings suggest ice is
from their ability to transfer people and cargo to orbit
widely but sparsely distributed at the north pole but
easily. Similarly, the points on the lunar surface
concentrated within craters at the south pole.25 While
underneath the L1 and L2 Lagrange points could also
the ice is itself valuable as a source of water and fuel, its
provide orbital accessibility benefits. Specifically,
location amplifies its utility. Due to the Moon’s small
engineers and scientists have proposed building lunar
axial tilt, there are locations on the Moon’s poles which
space elevators that connect the Lagrange points to the
are both almost constantly in the sun (rims of craters)
Moon's surface.27 By extending a strong cable from the
and constantly dark (bottom of craters). Having near-
L1 Lagrange point to the Moon’s surface, vehicles could
constant sunlight would allow a mining operation to
easily traverse cislunar space by “crawling” along the
always have solar power available. At the same time, the
cord.28 On the other side of the Moon, a space elevator
constant darkness of the crater depths leads to low
to the L2 Lagrange point could enable deep space
temperatures and accumulation of ice.26
missions by easily transporting cargo, crew, and vehicles
The poles have additional value because a lunar base at to the edge of cislunar space from the surface of the
either pole could theoretically have far more access to a Moon as well as enhance communications capabilities
space station orbiting the Moon in LLO than any other with the lunar far side. Though lunar elevators sound
position on the Moon. Since there are few stable orbits farfetched, engineers believe they could be constructed
in LLO, a country or company may choose to place a using materials available today (unlike terrestrial space
space station in an inclined orbit such that it would not elevators, which face additional gravitational,
require much propellant to remain in position. A lunar atmospheric, and space debris challenges).29
orbit with an inclination of 86º would be both stable and
A lunar space elevator would dramatically reduce the
nearly polar, meaning it would pass over each pole
cost of traveling through space since little fuel would be
6 | KAPLAN | Eyes on the Prize

necessary to go between the lunar surface and L1 or L2 operations will likely make use of a station at a Lagrange
as well as make the journey significantly safer because point to organize transportation of their materials.
vehicles would be moving in one dimension (as opposed Moreover, the L4 and L5 points in the Sun-Jupiter
to the three-dimensional travel of traditional system are known to contain “Trojan” asteroids, which
spacecraft).30 Improving the cost and safety of traversing are asteroids that gather over time at the Lagrange
cislunar space is critical to ensure the long-term viability points leading and trailing Jupiter. Scientists believe
of commercial enterprises like lunar resource mining or that the Earth-Moon L4 and L5 points may also house
space tourism. Accordingly, securing access to future Trojan asteroids that may contain precious metals and
tether sites of the space elevators—points on the Moon’s minerals which could be extracted for commercial or
equator directly underneath the L1 and L2 Lagrange scientific purposes.33
points—could be vital
The relative stability of
to future commercial
the Lagrange points
success on the Moon.
also allows for
Earth-Moon countries to place
Lagrange Points military satellites in
cislunar space and
The Lagrange points in
keep them “parked”
the Earth-Moon
with few station
system are
keeping requirements,
strategically important
very similar to how
because they are
nations utilize
favorable locations to
geostationary orbit
anchor commercial or
today. While satellites
military satellites and
in LEO, MEO, and GEO
space stations.
have “lifespans”
Because the
dictated by the
gravitational forces of
amount of propellant
the Earth and the
they carry to make
Moon are equal at the
course corrections,
Lagrange points,
stationary satellites at
satellites or stations
Lagrange points would
remain stationary relative to the Moon and Earth and
require very little fuel to remain in position, making the
would need little energy for station keeping.31
Lagrange points an appealing destination for long-term
Consequently, the Lagrange points could serve as an
civilian and military platforms. Moreover, the L2, L4, and
appealing place to build trade and logistics terminals
L5 points are attractive locations for future positioning,
where crew or cargo arriving on spacecraft from Earth
navigation, and timing (PNT), SSA, and communications
could be transferred to lunar landing vehicles.32
platforms because satellites at those points would be
Alternatively, crew and cargo could launch from the
able to “see” behind the Moon, a part of cislunar space
lunar surface, dock with the station, and take a new
that is not visible from Earth. As countries and
vessel back to Earth. Future commercial mining
companies increasingly develop the Moon, the strategic
| 7

importance of the Lagrange points as veritable station, the Chinese Space Station (CSS), will be
gateways to the Moon will steadily rise. constructed throughout the early 2020s, with Tianhe, its
core section, launching as early as 2021.38
International Efforts in Cislunar Space and on
China’s dual pursuit of human spaceflight and lunar
the Moon
exploration align with its plan to become the
China preeminent space power in the world by 2045.39
According to international relations expert Namrata
China’s main lunar program is the Chinese Lunar
Goswami, China’s space strategy calls for its national
Exploration Program (CLEP), which launches its flagship
space agency to make incremental steps toward long-
Chang’e missions. On its first mission in 2007, CLEP
term economic dominance of cislunar space. The steps
launched Chang’e 1, a satellite that traveled to LLO and
include building launch capacity, developing a
imaged the Moon’s surface. In addition to taking high-
permanent space station, creating systems to enable
resolution images of the Moon’s surface, Chang’e 1
supremacy in cislunar space, building a sustainable
surveyed the Moon for Helium-3 deposits. In 2009, China
presence on the Moon, and maturing its systems for
launched Chang’e 2 to the Moon on a mapping
deep-space exploration.40 Eventually, China plans to
mission.34 After identifying locations for future landers,
develop large space-based solar power arrays to beam
Chang’e 2 flew to the L2 Earth-Sun Lagrange Point and
energy to Earth and industrial facilities on the Moon.41
later rendezvoused with a near-Earth asteroid. Chang’e
2’s missions beyond the Moon were a significant While some countries see the Moon as a distant target,
development because they demonstrated China’s ability China is targeting lunar exploration and the economic
to access locations throughout and beyond cislunar development of cislunar space as an integral part of its
space.35 Launched in 2013, Chang’e 3 became the first grand strategy. Speaking to taikonauts in 2013, Chinese
space lander to soft-land on the Moon in almost 40 President Xi Jinping said, “The space dream is part of
years. The lander contained the original Yutu rover the dream to make China stronger. With the
which stopped working after technical problems development of space programs, the Chinese people
prevented it from properly preparing for the lunar night. will take bigger strides to explore further into space.”42
Chang’e 4, launched in 2018, made history as the first Moreover, high-ranking officials in China’s space
lander to land on the far side of the Moon. Significantly, program have described dominance of cislunar space
the mission featured a communications relay to enable (and the economic power that comes with it) as
direct communications with the lander on the far side of important for the “great rejuvenation of the Chinese
the Moon and Yutu-2, a rover that is currently in people.”43 The Moon itself is highly regarded by the
operation.36 In 2020, China plans to launch Chang’e 5, Chinese government; commenting on the Moon’s
which will return samples to Earth from the lunar strategic value, Ouyang, the designer of China’s lunar
surface. China is planning other sample return missions program, said, “Whoever first conquers the Moon will
throughout the 2020s and intends to develop a base on benefit first.”44
the Moon’s South Pole by 2030.37
The United States
China also has ambitious plans for crewed space
Like China, the United States is pursuing scientific and
exploration. Notably, China built and launched two
military missions that are strategically preparing it to be
crewed space laboratories in 2011 and 2016, though
an international leader in developing cislunar space and
both have since been retired. China’s permanent space
the Moon. The roughly analogous American counterpart
8 | KAPLAN | Eyes on the Prize

to the Chinese Chang’e program is NASA’s Artemis significant portion of the deterrence layer’s function is
Program. Under the Artemis program, NASA will conduct to provide cislunar space domain awareness capabilities
a series of crewed and uncrewed missions to the Moon for the military. To develop those capabilities, SDA has
to establish a permanent, sustainable civil presence in proposed placing three Advanced Maneuvering Vehicles
the late 2020s. Artemis 1, a three-week mission to lunar in cislunar space which could quickly rendezvous with
orbit and back set to launch in 2021, will be the any suspicious target for inspection and analysis.51 The
inaugural flight of NASA’s Orion capsule (uncrewed) and U.S. military, which includes the new Space Force, is
Space Launch System (SLS) rocket.45 also working with private vendors to develop a three-
dimensional interface for LUNINT collection and a PNT
In 2023, NASA intends to launch the first two modules of
constellation for cislunar space.52
the Lunar Gateway space station—NASA’s flagship
cislunar program—to a halo orbit around the L2 The military’s and NASA’s investments in cislunar
Lagrange point.46 The station, which is accessible by the capabilities may indicate that the United States
SLS and commercial platforms, will act as a staging considers cislunar space as both a vulnerability and an
point for future missions to the Moon and Mars as well opportunity. Unlike China, space does not appear to be
as enable sample return and other scientific missions.47 one of the critical centerpieces of America's grand
NASA will follow up on the Gateway missions with strategy, as it is not referenced in the National Defense
crewed missions to the lunar surface in accordance with Strategy, Defense Space Strategy or other key strategy
President Trump’s directions to land humans on the documents.53 However, the United States is making
Moon by 2024.48 quiet progress on a variety of commercial and military
technologies necessary to lead the development of
In addition to its crewed lunar program, NASA also
cislunar space.
intends to send a variety of landers and rovers to the
Moon over the next decade through its Commercial Others
Lunar Payload Services (CLPS) program. One of the first
Since the inception of its Chandrayaan program in 2003,
missions in this program is a lunar rover called Viper,
India has launched several missions to the Moon.
which will prospect the south pole to create a map of
Chandrayaan-1, launched in 2008, involved putting a
lunar ice resources. The Viper mission is of particular
satellite in LLO and deploying a lunar impact probe. The
importance for the commercial space industry because
mission was successful, and the probe provided critical
for a company to invest in building mining capabilities
data that led to NASA confirming the existence of water
on the Moon, it would need to have relative confidence
on the Moon.54 After the Chandrayaan-2 mission partially
that the resources exist in a profitable quantity. Other
failed in 2018, India announced Chandrayaan-3, which
CLPS payloads include scientific and technology
will consist of a lunar lander and rover. Chandrayaan-3
development experiments.49
will attempt to land at the Moon’s south pole.55 In the
The United States is also investing in intelligence and late 2020s, India intends to launch the Lunar Polar
military capabilities for cislunar space. The new Space Exploration Mission jointly with Japan. The mission will
Development Agency (SDA) is planning to develop a survey the region for water and test the technology
seven-layer satellite architecture that will increase the needed to develop a sustained robotic presence at the
military’s capabilities in space. One of the layers, the south pole.56
deterrence layer, focuses directly on identifying and
Japan also has significant lunar ambitions. In 2007,
potentially mitigating threats in cislunar space.50 A
Japan launched the Selenological and Engineering
| 9

Explorer (SELENE) mission to lunar orbit, which plans to launch an additional three missions to detect
consisted of one spacecraft and two sub-satellites. and possibly return samples of lunar resources.58
SELENE focused on identifying the distribution of Roscosmos is developing the Oryol (formerly known as
minerals on the Moon as well as conducting geologic Federation) spacecraft to bring future cosmonauts to
experiments. The Japanese Aerospace Exploration the Moon’s surface and eventually to Russia’s lunar
Agency (JAXA) plans to follow-up SELENE with the Smart base.59 Russia has also expressed interest in potentially
Lander for Investigating Moon (SLIM), which will partnering with NASA on the Gateway station.60
demonstrate precise lunar landing capabilities. In
Strategic Outlook
addition to its domestic initiatives, Japan is a key
partner on the NASA-led Gateway project and will
Given its enormity and apparent lack of accessibility,
provide habitation technology and logistics resupply.
cislunar space beyond GEO is often conceived as an
JAXA intends to utilize the Gateway for the Human
empty void that is only relevant when it is traversed by
Enhanced Robotic Architecture for Lunar Exploration
astronauts or spacecraft. Yet, between complex
and Science (HERACLES) project in 2026. HERACLES will
gravitational phenomena and resources that could
return samples to Earth from the lunar surface.57
revolutionize life on Earth and encourage deep space
exploration beyond the Moon, cislunar space represents
Russian scientists, like their Soviet predecessors, are
an immense challenge for analysts developing future
attempting to build a base on the Moon in the 2030s. To
commercial, military, and scientific policy. The cislunar
do so, Roscosmos, Russia’s civil space agency, is
environment today can be analogized to LEO in the
planning a series of missions under its Luna-Glob
early-1960s; some satellites had been launched, but
program that will gradually develop the necessary
access was generally limited. Similarly, though countries
capabilities to establish a presence on the Moon. Luna-
have launched spacecraft to the Moon in the past
25, Russia’s first lunar mission since 1976, will test soft-
decade, the launches have been infrequent and the
landing techniques and other technological
ability to exploit the resources of the Moon remain
advancements. Following that mission, Luna-26 will
limited. If countries like the United States, China, India,
orbit the Moon and determine possible landing sites for
Japan, and Russia pursue objectives in cislunar space
Luna-27, an uncrewed lander that will look for water in
and the Moon in earnest, strategists will need to realign
the Moon’s regolith. Russia is targeting 2021, 2024, and
their focus to include the entire Earth-Moon system.
2025 launch dates for Luna-25, Luna-36, and Luna-27,
respectively. After those three missions, Roscosmos
10 | KAPLAN | Eyes on the Prize

About CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research organization dedicated to
advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding former U.S. Senator Sam Nunn (D-GA).
Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of values—nonpartisanship,
independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity and professionalism, and talent development.
CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research, analysis, and recommendations. We
organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media appearances that aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and
salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policymakers and the thinking of key influencers.
We work toward a vision of a saferand more prosperous world.
CSIS is ranked the number one think tank in the United States as well as the defense and national security center of excellence for
2016-2018 by the University of Pennsylvania’s annual think tank report.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be understood to be solely those of
the author(s).
| 11

ENDNOTES
1 Lee Roup, "Did Small 'Moonlets' Create Our Moon, and Why Do We Care?," Al, January 15, 2017,

2 Charles Arthur Technology Editor, "USSR Planned to Atom Bomb Moon," The Independent, October 22, 2011,
 General Charles M. McCorkle,
Colonel Carey L. O'Bryan, Jr., and Colonel Leonard A. Eddy, “A Study of Lunar Research Flights,” Air Force Special Weapons
Center, June 19, 1959, Lt. Gen. Arthur Trudeau, “Project
Horizon: Volume I Summary and Supporting Considerations,” United States Army, September 9, 1961,

3 Plans to place nuclear weapons on the Moon were dropped in favor of faster delivery mechanisms. Source: N. Korenevskiy, “The
Role of Space Weapons in a Future War,” Central Intelligence Agency, September 7, 1962,

4 "Outer Space Treaty," United States Department of State, 
5 Ray Kwong, "China Is Winning the Solar Space Race," Foreign Policy, June 16, 2019, 
is-winning-the-solar-space-race/; "NRL Conducts First Test of Solar Power Satellite Hardware in Orbit," NRL News, May 18, 2020,
 Bruce Dorminey, "Death Of
A Sci-Fi Dream: Free-Floating Space Colonies Hit Economic Reality," Forbes, September 15, 2012,

reality/#d2987147431a; Noah Kulwin, "Jeff Bezos Thinks We Need to Build Industrial Zones in Space in Order to save Earth," Vox,
June 01, 2016, 
6 Denise Chow, "Mystery of Moon's Lumpy Gravity Explained," Space.com, May 30, 2013, 
gravity-mascons-mystery.html.
7 "Bizarre Lunar Orbits," National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
nasa/2006/06nov_loworbit/.
8 High altitude lunar orbits are theoretically possible but require elliptical orbits; Andres Dono Perez, “Lunar orbit stability for
Small Satellite mission design,” NASA Ames Research Center, May 26, 2015.

9 "What Is a Lagrange Point?" National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
is-a-lagrange-point/.
10 "About the Moon," National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
11 Claudio Maccone, "Figure 1: Locations of the Five Earth-Moon Lagrangian Points" from “The Lunar Farside Radio Lab Study of
the IAA,” ResearchGate, August 01, 2018, 
points-namely-where-the-Earth-and-Moon_fig1_228781180#:~:text=2.
12 Thomas Roberts, "Popular Orbits 101," Aerospace Security, March 30, 2020, 
orbits-101/.
13 Loura Hall, "Overview: In-Situ Resource Utilization," National Aeronautics and Space Administration, April 01, 2020,

14 Matt Williams, "Dust off Your Lunar Colony Plans. There's Definitely Ice at the Moon's Poles," Universe Today, September 05,
2018, 
15 Jeffrey Kluger, "NASA's Mars Mission Involves a Pit Stop on the Moon," Time, July 19, 2018, 
moon-mars/.
12 | KAPLAN | Eyes on the Prize

16 "Helium-3 Mining on the Lunar Surface," European Space Agency,

3_mining_on_the_lunar_surface.
17 "Is Mining Rare Minerals on the Moon Vital to National Security?" National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
 Valerie Bailey Grasso, “Rare
Earth Elements in National Defense: Background, Oversight Issues, and Options for Congress,” Congressional Research Service,
December 23, 2013, 
18 Charles Q. Choi, "Huge Moon Crater's Water Ice Supply Revealed," Space.com, June 20, 2012, 
Moon-water-ice-shackleton-crater.html.
19 Rachel S. Cohen, "Emerging Lunar Intelligence Field to Shape Space Ops," Air Force Magazine, April 22, 2020,

20 Andrew Pollack, "Trying to Save Satellite, Company Is Sending It to Moon," The New York Times, April 30, 1998,

21 Paul D. Spudis, "The Moon's Role in the New U.S. Space Force," Air & Space Magazine, August 17, 2018,

22 Though launches beyond GEO are currently rare, it is conceivable that they will be commonplace in future. As launches further
into cislunar space proliferate, the risk of a satellite evading detection will also increase.
23 Jack H. Burke, "China's New Wealth-Creation Scheme: Mining the Moon," National Review, June 13, 2019,

24 Bryan O’Reilly, “Lunar Exploration for HE-3,” Ohio State Department of Earth Science, 2016,
 Nikos Prantzos, Our Cosmic Future: Humanity's
Fate in the Universe (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 36.
25 Abigail Tabor, "Ice Confirmed at the Moon's Poles," National Aeronautics and Space Administration, August 17, 2018,

26 Paul Spudis, “The Moon: Port of Entry to Cislunar Space,” in Toward a Theory of Spacepower: Selected Essays (Washington, DC:
National Defense University Press, 2011), 241–51; Note that the technology necessary to operate mining equipment in
temperatures related to total darkness are untested.
27 Jerome Pearson, Eugene Levin, John Oldson, and Harry Wykes, “The Lunar Space Elevator,” Star Inc. 2004, 
tech-inc.com/papers/lse_iaf/LSE_IAF_04_Paper_Final.pdf.
28 To build a lunar space elevator, one would have to extend a counterweight beyond the Lagrange point.
29 Zephyr Penoyre and Emily Sandford, “The Spaceline: A Practical Space Elevator Alternative Achievable with Current
Technology,’ Arxiv.org, 25 August, 2019, 
30 Ibid.
31 It’s worth noting that the L1, L2, and L3 Lagrange points are considered unstable and stations at those points would require
periodic station-keeping maneuvers. However, the L4 and L5 points are stable and are therefore an attractive site for long-term
space colonization.
32 Spudis, “The Moon: Port of Entry to Cislunar Space.”
33 Elizabeth Howell, "Lagrange Points: Parking Places in Space," Space.com, August 22, 2017, 
lagrange-points.html.
34 Adam Mann, "China's Chang'e Program: Missions to the Moon," Space.com, February 01, 2019, 
chang-e-program.html.
35 Spudis, “The Moon's Role in the New U.S. Space Force.”
| 13

36 The communications satellite, Queqiao, is in a Halo orbit abound the L2 point; Luyuan Xu, "How China's Lunar Relay Satellite
Arrived in Its Final Orbit," The Planetary Society Blog, June 15, 2019, 
blogs/2018/20180615-queqiao-orbit-explainer.html.
37 Yurou ed., “China’s Chang’e Program,” "China to Build Scientific Research Station on Moon's South Pole," Xinhua,

38 Taikonauts is the official term for Chinese astronauts, similar to cosmonauts as the official term for Russian astronauts; China
Power Team, "What’s driving China’s race to build a space station?," China Power Project, December 7, 2016, Updated March 20,
2020, Accessed June 19, 2020, 
39 Ma Chi, "China Aims to Be World-leading Space Power by 2045," China Daily, Updated: November 17, 2017,

40 Namrata Goswami, "China's Future Space Ambitions: What's Ahead?," The Diplomat, November 20, 2019,

41 "China to Build Space-based Solar Power Station by 2035," Xinhua, December 2, 2019,

42 Ibid.
43 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2019 Report to Congress: Chapter 4 Section 3–China’s Ambitions in
Space,” , 
%20China%E2%80%99s%20Ambitions%20in%20Space%20-%20Contesting%20the%20Final%20Frontier.pdf.
44 Goswami “China’s Future Space Ambitions.”
45 Kathryn Hambleton, "Around the Moon with NASA's First Launch of SLS with Orion," National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, March 07, 2018, 
Foust, "First SLS Launch Now Expected in Second Half of 2021," SpaceNews.com, March 02, 2020, 
sls-launch-now-expected-in-second-half-of-2021/.
46 Objects in halo orbit utilize the gravitational characteristics of Lagrange points to enable stable orbits near a large body. In this
case, the Gateway will be in a Near-Rectilinear Halo Orbit that will have a seven day cycle taking the station between 1,600 km
and 68,260 km of the Moon’s surface. Stephen Clark, "NASA Plans to Launch First Two Gateway Elements on Same Rocket,"
Spaceflight Now, May 06, 2020, 
same-rocket/; "What are cislunar space and near rectilinear halo orbits?" Maxar Blog, August 28, 2019,

47 William Gerstenmaier and Jason Crusan, “Cislunar and Gateway Overview,” National Aeronautics and Space Administration,

48 Erin Mahoney, "NASA Accepts Challenge to Send American Astronauts to Moon in 2024," National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, April 09, 2019, 
challenge/.
49 Sean Potter, "NASA Selects Astrobotic to Fly Water-Hunting Rover to the Moon," National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, June 11, 2020, 
Moon; Karen Northon, "NASA Selects 12 New Lunar Science, Technology Investigations," National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, July 01, 2019, 
50 "Emerging Capabilities," Space Development Agency, 
51 Nathan Strout, "The Pentagon Wants to Solve a Deep Space Problem with Three Vehicles," C4ISRNET, August 27, 2019,

vehicles/.
14 | KAPLAN | Eyes on the Prize

52 Melissa Maday, "Xplore Receives USAF Award For Innovative Commercial Capabilities Around The Moon," SpaceWatch.Global,
April 17, 2020, 
the-Moon/; Cohen, “Emerging Lunar Intelligence Field to Shape Space Ops.”
53 “Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America,” U.S. Department of Defense, 2018,
 “Defense Space Strategy
Summary,” U.S. Department of Defense, June 17, 2020, 
Space-Strategy-Summary.pdf.
54 Elizabeth Howell, "Chandrayaan-1: India's First Mission to the Moon," Space.com, March 28, 2018,

55 Jackson Ryan, "India Confirms Third Attempt to Land at the Moon's South Pole for 2020," CNET, January 02, 2020,

56 Hiroki Sasaki, “JAXA’s Lunar Exploration Activities,” 62nd Session of United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space, July 17th, 2019, 
57 Ibid.
58 Meghan Bartels, "Russia Wants to Land 3 Next-generation Luna Spacecraft on the Moon by 2025," Space.com, May 07, 2020,

59 Eric Berger, "How Russia (yes, Russia) Plans to Land Cosmonauts on the Moon by 2030," Ars Technica, May 28, 2019,

60 Anatoly Zak, "Russia Pushing to Partner with NASA on Lunar Gateway," Ars Technica, January 05, 2018,

| 15