Salmon Swimming Upstream
charting a course in cislunar space
principal author
Clayton Swope
contributing author
Louis Gleason
a report of the csis aerospace security project

Salmon Swimming Upstream
charting a course in cislunar space
principal author
Clayton Swope
contributing author
Louis Gleason
a report of the csis aerospace security project

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
ABOUT CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy
research organization dedicated to advancing practical ideas to address the world’s
greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding
former U.S. senator Sam Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who
has served as president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set
of values—nonpartisanship, independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary
scholarship, integrity and professionalism, and talent development. CSIS’s values work in
concert toward the goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research,
analysis, and recommendations. We organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make
media appearances that aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and salience of
policy issues with relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policy-
makers and the thinking of key influencers. We work toward a vision of a safer and more
prosperous world.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should
be understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2024 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
ABOUT THE AEROSPACE SECURITY PROJECT
The Aerospace Security Project (ASP) is a trusted resource for policymakers, offering
insightful thoughts and in-depth analyses on policy issues, operational concepts, technol-
ogy trends, and economic drivers in the space and air domains. Our mission is to educate
and inform policymakers and the public, conduct independent research and analysis,
and convene experts with broad perspectives to advance creative and practical solutions
that address the security challenges facing the United States and our allies and partners.
ASP also fosters the next generation of scholars in national security space and air-power
policy through fellowship and internship opportunities.
Part of the International Security Program at CSIS, ASP is led by Senior Fellow Kari A. Bingen
and includes a distinguished group of expert affiliates spanning national security, civilian,
commercial, and international aerospace issues.
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
202-887-0200 | 
– II –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project was made possible by the support of the Smith Richardson Foundation. The
report’s authors would like to thank Kari Bingen, Jacob Bradley, Jacob Cohn, Ian Chris-
tensen, Matthew Daniels, Shayna, Gersten, Matt Gialich, Jack Goodwin, Pete Hays, Caleb
Henry, Kelsey Hartman, Daniel Hilgert, Marchel Holle, Julia Huh, Kaitlyn Johnson, Justin
Kugler, Josh Marshall, Phillip Meylan, Sarah Mineiro, William “Bill” Muntean III, Ioannis Nikas,
Steve Place, Ben Rimland, Laura Rostad, Katherine Stark, Christopher Verklan, Andrew
Woodcock, and Makena Young for their support in the research, review, and publication
process.
– III –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
CONTENTS
Executive Summary 1
Introduction and Background 4
National Cislunar Policies and Activities 7
International Space Governance Frameworks 17
Non-space International Frameworks with Analogues to Space Governance 21
Cislunar Governance and Policy Challenges 24
Cislunar Operational and Infrastructure Challenges 29
Key Considerations for Next Steps 35
Recommendations 42
Conclusion 45
About the Authors 47
Endnotes 48
– IV –

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
PHOTO // ITSME23/ROYALTY-FREE/GETTY IMAGES
– 1 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
“I think we’re going to the moon because it’s in the nature of the human
being to face challenges. It’s by the nature of his deep inner soul . . . we’re
required to do these things just as salmon swim upstream.”
— Neil Armstrong, 19691
umankind has had an on-again, off-again rela- problem poorly predicts motion. Other issues, such as the
Htionship with the Moon. During the 1960s, over 63 impacts of cosmic radiation and lunar dust on equipment
spacecraft, including several crewed Apollo mis- and humans, also pose hazards to cislunar missions.
sions, launched to the Moon.2 In contrast, during the 1980s,
no nation launched a lunar mission. Over the course of the The space governance and operator coordination issues
following decades, however, the world gradually fell back concerning cislunar activities are equally complex. Inter-
in love with our closest celestial neighbor. During the last nationally, there are no agreed-upon rules of the road for
four years alone, 11 nations and the European Space Agency operating in cislunar space or best practices for cislunar
have all sent payloads and spacecraft to the Moon. debris mitigation. Though cislunar space is covered by the
treaties that underpin international space law, these trea-
Most of these missions were operated by government agen- ties have sizable gaps and are subject to conflicting inter-
cies and focused on scientific research and exploration.3 pretations. Fortunately, while not focused on space, there
However, a few were carried out by companies such as Intu- are other non-space international treaties and frameworks
itive Machines and Astrobotic.4 A number of countries plan that could offer lessons for space governance.
to send humans to the lunar surface within the next 10 years,
and some have plans to establish a long-term human pres-
ence either in lunar orbit or on the Moon’s surface.5 At the REPORT OBJECTIVES AND APPROACH
time of writing, there was probably just one active mission
The goal of this report is to examine and assess oft-heard
on the lunar surface, a Chinese lander and associated rover,
claims of a new Moon race, growing lunar economy, and
and several active spacecraft in lunar orbits.6
need to extend military power into cislunar space.9 To write
While the majority of future space endeavors will undoubt- this report, the authors researched government and pri-
edly take place near Earth, more and more activities will likely vate sector activities planned for cislunar space by over 10
happen in cislunar space, or the area between geosynchro- nations, covering the next decade. They interviewed cislu-
nous Earth orbit and the Moon. From the perspective of the nar stakeholders from government agencies, private com-
United States, reasons to focus attention on cislunar space panies, and academia. Additionally, the authors assessed
include lunar science and exploration, future crewed mis- cislunar reports prepared by other researchers.
sions, and concerns about China’s space ambitions.7
Though there is certainly a lot of buzz about cislunar growth,
the authors of this report found evidence of only a modest
CISLUNAR CHALLENGES increase in cislunar activities over the next decade com-
pared to the past 10 years. Additionally, the authors found
Operating in cislunar space presents new technical and little sign of a business case for cislunar activities that is not
policy challenges that the United States will want to consider. closely tied to government funding and support. Almost all
While exponential growth in cislunar activities is unlikely over cislunar activities, no matter the mission’s nation of origin,
the next 10 years, there will be modest expansion. To maxi- have a civilian focus. The authors also could not identify
mize the chances of success for U.S. cislunar missions and any compelling strategic military value from cislunar space
ensure the long-term sustainability and safety of cislunar and did not foresee one developing in the next decade that
space, the United States should assume a global leadership could make a decisive difference in any conflict between
role and take actions, sooner rather than later, to address the United States and China, Russia, or another nation-state.
the anticipated cislunar challenges discussed in this report. However, national security organizations may want access
to cislunar SSA data for surveillance purposes.
The list of related operational challenges is long. There is
little space situational awareness (SSA) in cislunar space. But even under these conditions—modest growth in over-
The Global Positioning System (GPS) was not designed for all cislunar activities, no clear cislunar use cases without
this region, so without enhancements it cannot reliably governments as a customer, and no clear strategic mil-
provide cislunar navigation and timing services.8 In clas- itary value of cislunar space—there are reasons to focus
sical orbital mechanics, the motion of a near-Earth satel- on cislunar space and identify and address challenges
lite can be predicted as part of a two-body problem (i.e., facing cislunar operators. Through the Artemis program,
Earth and the spacecraft). In cislunar space, this two-body the United States is establishing significant cislunar equi-
– 2 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
ties, building the foundation for sustainable human activ- United States should consider international approaches
ity in cislunar space, investing in lunar infrastructure, and to building and operating cislunar infrastructure, combin-
creating an ecosystem of commercial cislunar services. ing resources, preventing duplication, and maximizing the
Addressing cislunar challenges discussed in this report gain for the cost to U.S. taxpayers.
is critical to the success of these endeavors. This report
specifically seeks to analyze and recommend ways U.S. In conclusion, this report’s authors could find no evidence
decisionmakers can address cislunar governance, coor- of a lunar gold rush and no indication of a real commer-
dination, and infrastructure challenges. cial lunar economy. Cislunar activity is supported almost
exclusively by government spending. Certainly, Britain’s
famed eighteenth-century economist Adam Smith would
In conclusion, this report’s not characterize the cislunar environment as a mar-
ket-based economy. There are currently no clear strategic
authors could find no evidence
military benefits derived from cislunar space derived from
of a lunar gold rush and no
cislunar space, with little chance a cislunar space system
indication of a real commer cial could influence the outcome of a conflict on Earth
lunar economy. Cislunar activity
EVOLVING FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS
is supported almost exclusively
by government spending.
Maybe someday, in the distant future, there will be a mar-
ket-based lunar economy and a reason to have a military
presence in cislunar space. This may happen if a cislu-
On governance challenges, the report first provides back- nar activity could unexpectedly produce significant com-
ground on international treaties and national U.S. space mercial value, such as mining of rare earth elements that
policies, laws, and regulations. Later, the report discusses could cost-effectively be returned and sold on Earth. This
specific policy and governance gaps that should be may also happen if the United States and China, ignoring
addressed to promote a safe and sustainable cislunar the precedent of Antarctica, cannot agree to forestall the
environment. The report also introduces and provides equivalent of a cislunar colonial land grab and resulting
background on several non-space international frame- rush of military assets to the cislunar region. Additionally,
works that govern other areas with similar characteristics dramatically lowering transportation costs to the Moon
as cislunar space, such as Antarctica, the Arctic, and inter- may also generate new lunar business cases.
national air and maritime domains. The authors frequently
Ultimately, the calculus fundamentally changes if—prob-
cite these existing frameworks when describing models
ably when—large numbers of humans start living on the
and approaches that could apply to cislunar space.
Moon and in other parts of the solar system. Many of us,
The report also outlines operational and infrastructure these authors included, foresee that future. But that is not
challenges confronting operators of cislunar missions, on the 10-year plan, probably not even on the 25-year one.
explaining why these cislunar challenges are both different There are, however, strong reasons to go to the Moon today
and similar to those confronting operators with missions in and in the foreseeable future: to explore the unknown,
orbits closer to Earth. The authors note that infrastructure learn, and advance science for the sake of all humankind.
challenges, such as generating power and ensuring com- That is reason enough to address the challenges described
munications, are primarily solved by hardware and equip- in this report.
ment—whereas operational challenges, such as traffic
coordination and collision avoidance, require both techni-
cal solutions and operator-to-operator coordination.
REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS
Finally, the report offers several key recommendations for
consideration by U.S. policymakers. First, the United States
should work to find understanding with China on address-
ing international space governance and operational coor-
dination challenges related to cislunar space, because
the vast majority of cislunar activity over the next decade
will be tied to these two nations. Second, the United States
should consider whether it furthers U.S. interests to keep
cislunar space nonmilitarized, taking an approach from
the U.S. playbook toward Antarctica in the 1950s. Third, the
– 3 –

INTRODUCTION
AND BACKGROUND
PHOTO // PHOTOS.COM/ROYALTY-FREE/GETTY IMAGES
– 4 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
around the Earth and Moon at which the gravitational pull of
DEFINING “CISLUNAR SPACE”
the Earth and Moon is exactly equal to the amount of cen-
In this report, “cislunar space” refers to the area between tripetal force needed for a small object, such as a satellite or
geosynchronous orbit around Earth (about 36,000 kilometers spacecraft, to move with them.13 Due to these gravitational
from Earth’s surface) and the Moon (approximately 384,000 dynamics, the Lagrange points are nearly stationary relative
kilometers from Earth’s surface, on average).10 Orbits around to the Earth-Moon rotating frame.14
the Moon, trajectories to and from the Moon, the five Earth–
Moon Lagrange points (L,L, L,L,andL), and the Moon itself
1 2 3 4 5 HISTORY OF CISLUNAR SPACE
are also included in this report’s definition. Effectively, three
different environments in which space operations can occur
Since Russia’s Luna 1 became the first spacecraft to reach
are included in this definition: the Moon’s surface, lunar orbits,
the vicinity of the Moon in , approximately 140
and Earth orbits and trajectories to and from the Moon.
missions have been launched to the Moon, either landing
on the lunar surface, entering lunar orbit, or conducting a
Like the Moon itself, most objects in cislunar space are orbit-
lunar flyby.15 Thirteen countries and the the European Space
ing Earth, though some objects are also orbiting the Moon.
Agency (ESA) have launched spacecraft toward the Moon.
However, due to Earth’s gravitational pull, orbits higher than
The first U.S. spacecraft to reach the vicinity of the Moon was
700 kilometers above the lunar surface are not stable.11 To
Pioneer 4, which conducted a lunar flyby in .16
further complicate matters, the mass of the Moon is irregu-
In 1990, Japan became the third nation to launch a lunar
larly distributed, which renders its gravitational field uneven.
probe, called Hiten, and the third nation to reach the lunar
This means that at altitudes lower than 100 kilometers from
surface when Hiten’s small orbiter, Hagoromo, was inten-
the Moon’s surface, only four lunar orbital inclinations sup-
tionally crashed into the Moon in 1993 after completing sev-
port stable orbits.12 Objects attempting to orbit the Moon
eral lunar orbits.17
below 100 kilometers at other inclinations must perform
frequent station-keeping maneuvers and expend fuel to
The majority of lunar missions have been launched and
remain in orbit.
managed by government entities, with only four space-
craft ever sent to the Moon operated by private sector
Objects in cislunar space are affected not only by Earth’s
organizations. Cislunar space saw the most activity at the
gravitational effects but also by the Moon’s gravity. As with
height of the space race between the 1950s and 1970s.
any two large celestial bodies, there are five Lagrange points
Interest in the Moon quickly declined by the 1980s; as
Figure 1: Cislunar Region wih Cone Denoting the Area of
Greatest Cislunar Activity
Source: CSIS Aerospace Security Project.
L

EARTH
L L L
3 1 2
MOON
L

– 5 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE

1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020
Figure 2: Launches to the Moon by Decade
Source: “Moon Missions,” NASA, accessed August 17, 2024, 
ence.nasa.gov/moon/missions/.
already noted, there were zero missions to the Moon from on their way to the Moon.19 To place this number into con-
1980 to 1989. Although there has been a steady increase text, over 12,000 objects—including satellites, scientific
in cislunar activity since 1990, the total number of lunar probes, landers, crewed spacecraft, and components of
missions since then is only about two-thirds that of mis- space stations—have been launched into space during
sions in just the 1960s. Almost all cislunar traffic to date has this same period.20 While the number of missions through
resulted from spacecraft traveling to the Moon, though cislunar space has increased over the past four decades,
spacecraft bound for other locations in the solar system the increase is small compared to the exponential growth
have passed through cislunar space.18 in the number of satellites launched into orbits closer to
Earth. Overall, missions through cislunar space are just a
Over the past decade, between 2014 and 2024, about 20 small fraction of the total number of spacecraft launched
missions sent from Earth have transited cislunar space from Earth.
LUNAR
LUNAR LUNAR Table 1: New Space Objects by Year
TOTAL LAGRANGE
ORBIT SURFACE
ORBIT Note: Data is current as of September 26, 2024.
Source: “Outer Space Objects Index,” UN Office for
2014 241 1 0 0
Outer Space Affairs, 
osoindex/index.jspx?lf_id=..
2015 222 0 0 0
2016 221 0 0 0
2017 456 0 0 0
2018 452 1 1 2
2019 586 1 0 2
2020 1,274 0 0 1
2021 1,813 0 0 0
2022 2,477 5 0 2
2023 2,890 0 0 3
2024 1,634 2 0 1
– 6 –

NATIONAL CISLUNAR
POLICIES AND ACTIVITIES
PHOTO // NASTASIC/ROYALTY-FREE/GETTY IMAGES
– 7 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
oday, cislunar activity remains limited because satellites for private sector orga nizations and space agen-
Tthere are few commercial cislunar use cases and cies from around the world looking to test their technolo-
requirements that are independent of a government gies on and in orbit around the Moon.
operator or customer. Most lunar activities are funded and
operated by governments, primarily for scientific research Other organizations are looking at using the Moon to preserve
and exploration to better understand the Moon and its Earth’s cultural heritage and biodiversity. For example, the UN
environs. Most commercial lunar missions are also closely Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
tied to government science and research requirements intends to send a memory disk containing the UNESCO pre-
and funding. For example, Japanese company ispace and amble in 275 human languages to the lunar surface on
U.S. companies Astrobotic and Intuitive Machines have ispace’s upcoming Hakuto-R 2.23 Additionally, a group of sci-
already launched and are planning more commercial entists wants to use the Moon to create a biorepository of
missions to carry government-sponsored scientific pay- cryopreserved seeds and living cells as a safeguard against
loads to the Moon, as well as nongovernment payloads.21 possible threats to life on Earth.24 In a similar vein, Interstellar
Lab’s Mission Little Prince aims to grow flowers on the Moon in
In addition to conducting scientific research, many Moon an environment-controlled plant pod.25
missions aim to demonstrate technologies such as lunar
rovers that could be used on future missions. Two upcom- For the near future, use cases such as scientific research,
ing lunar missions, part of the Chang’e program operated technology demonstrations, and, on a smaller scale, disas-
by China’s national space agency, will test technologies ter planning are the drivers for cislunar traffic. Notably, the
intended to support a future long-term uncrewed lunar United States and China are pursuing ambitious agendas
base.22 In addition to supporting NASA’s Commercial to create human habitats in lunar orbit and land people on
Lunar Payload Services (CLPS) program, future missions the Moon. Over the next several years, the authors of this
from Astro botic, Firefly Aerospace, and Intuitive Machines, report anticipate around 40 significant missions launching
among others, will carry a variety of payloads, including toward cislunar space, not including missions that merely
rovers, hoppers, sensors, scien tific experiments, and small transit cislunar space bound for deep space destinations.
Table 2: Significant Future
Cislunar Missions
Source: Authors’ research and analysis.
EXPECTED
MISSION NAME COUNTRY OF ORIGIN
LAUNCH YEAR
2024 Blue Ghost M1 (Firefly Aerospace), CLPS Mission United States
2024 Hakuto-R 2 Japan
2024 Intuitive Machines 2 - Athena, CLPS Mission United States
2024 Lunar Trailblazer, SIMPLEx Mission United States
2025 Artemis II United States
2025 Griffin Mission 1 (Astrobotic), CLPS Mission United States
2025 Beresheet 2 Israel
2025 Blue Moon Mark 1 (Blue Origin), Mission 1 United States
2025 DESTINY+ Japan
2025 Intuitive Machines 3, CLPS Mission United States
2025 Lunar Polar Exploration Mission (LUPEX) Japan and India
2025 Lunar Surface Access Service 1 (LSAS-1) Germany and Israel
2025 Oracle-Mobility United States
2026 Artemis III United States
2026 AYAP 1 Turkey
2026 Flexible Logistics and Exploration (FLEX) Mission 1 (Astrolab) United States
– 8 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
2026 Chang’e 7 China
2026 Blue Ghost M2 (Firefly Aerospace), CLPS Mission United States
2026 APEX 1.0 (Team Draper), CLPS Mission United States
Starship Human Landing System (HLS) Uncrewed Demon-
2026 United States
stration
2027 Luna 26 Russia
Lunar Gateway: Power and Propulsion Element (PPE) and
2027 United States
Habitation and Logistics Outpost (HALO)
2027 Oracle-Prime United States
2027 ZeusX Singapore
2028 Artemis IV and Lunar Gateway: I-Hab United States
2028 Chandrayaan-4 India
2028 Chang’e 8 China
2028 Gateway Logistics Services, Mission 1 United States
2028 Luna 27a Russia
2028 Luna 27b Russia
2030 Luna 28 Russia
Artemis V and Lunar Gateway: European System Providing
2030 United States
Refueling, Infrastructure and Telecommunications (ESPRIT)
2030 Blue Moon Mark 1 (Blue Origin), Uncrewed Demonstration United States
2030 Unnamed Chinese crewed mission China
2031 Argonaut, European Large Logistics Lander (EL3) Mission 1 European Space Agency
2031 Artemis VI and Lunar Gateway: Airlock and External Robotics United States
2032 Artemis VII United States
At this point, the report authors should acknowledge the
challenges in counting cislunar missions. Rather than Many future cislunar missions
attempting to count all missions, the authors identified look like matryoshka, or Russian
significant future missions that represented the most con-
nesting, dolls; they are complex
siderable and impactful cislunar undertakings.
systems of systems, with some
Many future cislunar missions look like matryoshka, or Rus-
providing lunar ridesharing.
sian nesting, dolls; they are complex systems of systems,
with some providing lunar ridesharing. Most Artemis mis-
sions have many moving parts, including the Orion space-
diversifying the types of entities launching to cislunar space
craft, modules of the Lunar Gateway, and space vehicles
and increasing the number of individual organizations with
associated with the Starship Human Landing System (HLS).
payloads in lunar orbit and on the Moon’s surface.
Additionally, China’s Chang’e 6 mission included a lander,
ascender, return vehicle, mini rover, and an orbiter built by
This report considers each CLPS mission a significant mis-
Pakistan. The future Chang’e 8 mission is also expected to
sion but not individual payloads, though many of these
include international payloads. Each Chang’e and Artemis
payloads are described in the report. In general, this report
mission is included in the significant mission list.
does not count instruments or experiments that remain
associated with or near another spacecraft, lander, or
The CLPS program epitomizes the concept of lunar rideshar-
rover as a significant mission. For example, a memory disk
ing, transporting NASA payloads and creating opportunities
sponsored by UNESCO that will be carried on Hakuto-R 2 is
for smaller companies, international partners, and other
not included in the significant mission tally.
organizations to send missions, including scientific instru-
ments, rovers, and orbiters, to the Moon. This approach is
– 9 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
If the report authors could not find clear indications of ◊ maintaining “leadership in space exploration and
funding or recent progress for a future concept or mission— space science”;
meaning the mission’s existence is based only on a press ◊ advancing “the development and use of space-based
release—the authors did not include the mission in Figure
Earth observation capabilities that support action on
1. For missions beyond 2030, it was often difficult to differ-
climate change”;
entiate real plans from aspirations, as many decisions
on government funding for activities so far into the future ◊ fostering “a policy and regulatory environment that
have yet to be made. The authors also questioned whether enables a competitive and burgeoning U.S. commer-
Russia has the financial resources to execute its upcoming cial space sector”;
cislunar plans, which include at least three lunar missions, ◊ protecting “space-related critical infrastructure”
but still includes those on the significant mission list. and strengthening “the security of the U.S. space
industrial base”;
Additionally, the fully assembled Lunar Gateway is not spe-
cifically listed in the table, though completion of the station ◊ defending “national security interests from the growing
will be a significant achievement. Finally, one mission in the scope and scale of space and counterspace threats”;
table—DESTINY+—has a lengthly transit time through cis- ◊ investing in science, technology, engineering, and
lunar space on its way to the parent body of the Geminids mathematics education;
meteor shower.26
◊ playing a lead role in “strengthening global gover-
nance of space activities”;
United States
◊ bolstering “space situational awareness sharing and
Policies
space traffic coordination”; and
In , the White House released the United
◊ prioritizing “space sustainability and
States Space Priorities Framework, which outlined various
planetary protection.”
goals related to national and economic security and scien-
tific advancement for U.S. activities in space.27 Those goals The framework emphasizes retaining U.S. leadership in
include space and broadening and deepening international space
collaboration. Though this document does not focus on
cislunar space specifically, its priorities apply to all U.S.
activities and initiatives in space.
Figure 3: Example Commercial Lunar
Mission Supporting CLPS - Intuitive
Machines IM-2
Source: Intuitive Machines (reprinted with permission).
LAUNCH RIDESHARE OTHER PAYLOADS:
Intuitive Machines IM-2 (Athena) Nokia Network-In-a-Box 4G LTE
NASA Lunar Trailblazer Base Unit
AstroForge Brokkr-2 (Odin) Dymon Yaoki Microrover
Epic Multi-Payload Delivery System Columbia Material Testing
Lonestar Datacenter In a Box
Intuitive Machines
Micro-Nova Hopper
Nokia 4G LTE Mobile
User Element
Arizona State
University (imager)
IM-2 (ATHENA) NASA CLPS PAYLOADS:
German Aerospace
Polar Resources Ice Mining Experiment 1
Center (radiometer)
The Regolith and Ice Drill for Puli Space (neutron detector)
Expoloring New Terrain (Trident)
Lunar Outpost Lunar
Mass Spectrometer for Observing
Voyage 1 Rover
Lunar Operations (MSolo)
Nokia 4G LTE Mobile
Laser Retroreflector
User Element
MIT AstroAnt Microbot
MIT Depth Camera
MIT HUMANS (audio record)
– 10 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
In addition to these national space priorities, the White sion (FCC) to regulate use of these technologies in the United
House Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), States. This law also applies to U.S. entities wanting to use
together with the National Science and Technology Coun- spectrum to communicate from, to, and in cislunar space.32
cil, developed and published the National Cislunar Science
and Technology Strategy in 2022. The strategy seeks to The National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 sepa-
foster interagency cooperation and advance U.S. cislunar rated military and civilian space government functions
science and technology leadership. It defines four objec- and emphasized the peaceful character of U.S. pursuits in
tives: “support research and development to enable long- space. The act also established NASA, the first U.S. govern-
term growth in Cislunar space”; “expand international S&T ment organization dedicated to the civilian use of space.33
[science and technology] cooperation in Cislunar space”;
The Commercial Space Launch Act of 1984 provided the
“extend U.S. space situational awareness capabilities into
Department of Transportation authority to regulate com-
Cislunar space”; and “implement Cislunar communications
mercial spaceflight, including commercial launch ser-
and PNT [positioning, navigation, and timing] capabilities.”28
vices; required the government to assume responsibility
Though OSTP does not itself direct funding or administer
for large third-party damages that could arise from U.S.
space programs, its cislunar strategy will likely influence
commercial space activities; and laid the foundation for
spending and priorities across the U.S. federal government.
future regulation of commercial human spaceflight.34
Although China is not specifically mentioned in the United
The U.S. Commercial Space Launch Competitiveness
States Space Policy Framework or National Cislunar Science
Act of 2015 extended the moratorium until 2023 on regu-
and Technology Strategy, Beijing’s central role as a motiva-
lation of commercial human spaceflight activities, which
tor for U.S. cislunar activities is undeniable. Some U.S. experts
has since been extended to early 2025. The law also
have argued that China could obtain a first-mover advan-
explicitly allowed U.S. citizens and companies to own and
tage and become the dominant power in cislunar space,
sell any resources extracted from bodies in space, such
to the detriment of U.S. interests.29 Additionally, the current
as asteroids and the Moon, permitting them to “facilitate
NASA administrator, Bill Nelson, has expressed concern that
commercial exploration for and commercial recovery
China could try to restrict U.S. access to lunar resources if
of space resources.” The text also states that the United
it establishes a long-term presence on the Moon before
States, in accordance with the Outer Space Treaty, cannot
the United States does.30 Other U.S. experts worry about
use this law to “assert sovereignty or sovereign or exclu-
the impacts of China’s cislunar activities on U.S. prestige
sive rights or jurisdiction over, or the ownership of, any
and influence, framing cislunar plans within the context of
celestial body.”35 Notably, the United Arab Emirates (UAE),
broader geopolitical competition between the two powers.31
Luxembourg, and Japan have all enacted similar laws
Finally, many government actors—including the United that allow the ownership and transfer of ownership of
States, China, Russia, and the North Atlantic Treaty Orga- space resources.36
nization (NATO)—have stated that space could be used
for warfighting. Though cislunar space is not the primary Regulations
focus of U.S. military attention on the space domain, the Today, the U.S. government regulates elements of every
Department of Defense (DoD) is leading several initiatives, private U.S. space activity.37 The Department of Transpor-
described later in this report, focused on cislunar space. tation oversees private spaceports and licenses launch
However, it is not clear how cislunar space fits into the and reentry of spacecraft, requiring information about the
overall national security strategy, because the DoD has space payload as part of the licensing process. The FCC
neither articulated broad cislunar goals nor put forward licenses spectrum use and imposes associated require-
a cislunar strategy. ments regarding space sustainability on licensees. Any
satellite or spacecraft wishing to broadcast radio fre-
quencies to or from any territory of the United States must
Enacted Law
Over the past 90 years, the United States has enacted receive a license from the FCC, including foreign satellites
numerous laws related to military, civilian, and commer- seeking to serve the U.S. market. The Department of Com-
cial space activities, which would apply not only to near- merce licenses remote-sensing satellites, including ones
Earth orbits but also to cislunar space. Title 51 of U.S. Code conducting non-Earth imaging, such as imaging of other
contains laws related to national and commercial space satellites in space.
programs. Applicable laws related to defense and military
Beyond these regulations, the United States is considering
space programs are mostly found in Title 10.
proposals to regulate novel private sector space activi-
The Communications Act of 1934 provided the basis for fed- ties, a process often referred to as “mission authoriza-
eral regulation of telephone, telegraph, and radio commu- tion.”38 These novel activities include commercial habitats,
nications and was later amended to include requirements in-space manufacturing, and on-orbit refueling, none of
for commercial satellite licensing and use of radio spectrum. which are clearly addressed by existing licensing schemes.
The act established the Federal Communications Commis-
– 11 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
Figure 4: NASA Crewed Lunar Missions
Milestone Timeline
Source: “Fiscal Year 2025 Budget Request,” NASA, last updated August
29, 2024, 

2030 2032
Artemis III; HLS Uncrewed
2022 Artemis V; Lunar Gateway: Artemis VII; Pressurized
Demo; HLS Crewed
Artemis I ESPRIT; Sustaining Lunar Rover; Sustaining
Demo; Lunar Gateway:
HLS Crewed Demo HLS Services
PPE and HALO
2028 2031
Artemis IV; Lunar Artemis VI; Lunar Gateway:
2025 Gateway: I-Hab and Airlock, External Robotics,
Artemis II Gateway Logistics and Gateway Logistics
Services; Sustaining Services; Sustaining
HLS Uncrewed Demo HLS Services
Activities Artemis V and VI will also complete lunar landings and con-
To date and for the foreseeable future, the majority of U.S. tinue efforts to construct the Lunar Gateway.49
missions that transit cislunar space, reach lunar orbit, or
To enhance its Deep Space Network to support upcoming
land on the Moon are directly or indirectly funded by NASA
lunar missions, NASA is building and expanding a network
and focus on space exploration. Today, most NASA funding
of Lunar Exploration Ground Sites (LEGS) so the agency
for cislunar missions supports the Artemis program, an ini-
can remain in continuous communications with the Moon
tiative to reestablish a human presence and build a long-
during its orbit around Earth.50 NASA is also developing the
term base on the Moon, as well as lay the foundations for
a future crewed mission to Mars.39 According to NASA, the LunaNet framework and Lunar Communications Relay and
Navigation Systems (LCRNS) project to enable cislunar net-
goals of the Artemis program are to make new scientific
working and connectivity services.51
discoveries, realize economic benefits from returning to the
Moon, and inspire a new generation of explorers.40
In addition to the Artemis program, NASA is currently funding
missions to the Moon as part of the CLPS program, an initia-
Achieving those goals will come at a high cost. According to
tive through which the agency contracts with companies
the NASA Office of Inspector General, the agency will have
to deliver freight to the lunar surface.52 Two CLPS awardees,
spent approximately $93 billion on the Artemis program
Astrobotic and Intuitive Machines, have already sent com-
(including work on the Space Launch System) between 2012
and 2025.41 In 2022, NASA launched the uncrewed Artemis mercial spacecraft to the Moon carrying NASA payloads.
While the Astrobotic spacecraft suffered a malfunction en
I mission, which placed the Orion capsule into lunar orbit
and returned the craft to Earth.42 The first crewed Artemis route and was not able to complete its mission, the Intuitive
Machines spacecraft touched down on the Moon in Febru-
mission, Artemis II, will take four astronauts into Earth orbit
ary 2024, completing the world’s first successful commercial
and a free-return trajectory around the Moon no earlier
than 2025.43 The subsequent Artemis III mission, planned for lunar landing. Currently, NASA has several CLPS contracts
(i.e., trips to the Moon) on the books to deliver payloads to
no earlier than 2026, will take astronauts to the lunar sur-
face and target a landing site near the Moon’s south pole.44 the lunar surface. Many NASA payloads planned for CLPS
missions were built through the Lunar Surface Instrument
In addition to facilitating the Artemis program’s second and Technology Payloads (LSITP) program.53
human landing on the Moon, the third crewed Artemis mis-
Focused on planetary exploration, NASA’s Small Innova-
sion, Artemis IV, will dock with the Lunar Gateway, a planned
tive Missions for Planetary Exploration (SIMPLEx) program is
space station that will provide habitation space for astro-
also funding missions to the Moon. The aim of SIMPLEx is to
nauts and serve as a communications hub and science
laboratory.45 NASA plans for the station to use a near-recti- build small, low-cost spacecraft for launches as secondary
payloads on other missions. For example, a SIMPLEx mis-
linear halo orbit (NRHO) associated with the Earth–Moon L
Lagrange point.46 In-space assembly of the Lunar Gateway is 2 sion called LunaH-Map was launched on Artemis I in 2022.54
planned to start in 2028.47 NASA is collaborating with ESA, the Though the LunaH-Map mission experienced propulsion
problems after deployment, it did conduct a lunar flyby
Canadian Space Agency, the Japan Aerospace Exploration
and returned some data to Earth. The only other SIMPLEx
Agency (JAXA), the UAE, and commercial partners on the proj-
ect.48 Planned for no earlier than 2030 and 2031, respectively, mission to the Moon, a lunar orbiter called Lunar Trailblazer,
is currently scheduled to launch in 2025.55
– 12 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
The DoD is also funding work related to cislunar space. the Oracle-Prime satellite will operate in a halo orbit asso-
Specifically, the Defense Advanced Research Projects ciated with the Earth–Moon L Lagrange point and test tech-

Agency (DARPA) is leading a project that aims to move niques to monitor space objects that transit cislunar space.
large payloads in cislunar space using a nuclear thermal
rocket (NTR). The Demonstration Rocket for Agile Cislu- There are also several U.S. companies attempting to build
nar Operations (DRACO) program will produce a baseline and launch missions to the Moon for commercial purposes.
design for the NTR reactor, build the reactor, and launch For example, Astrolab is developing the Flexible Logistics
it into space to conduct experiments on the technologies and Exploration (FLEX) lunar rover, which will be launched
in orbit.56 The DRACO flight experiment could take place on SpaceX’s Starship rocket. Astrolab has agreements
as soon as 2027. DARPA is also funding the 10-Year Lunar from eight customers to carry commercial payloads on
Architecture (LunA-10) Capability Study, through which 14 the rover to the Moon’s surface in 2026.60
companies are proposing architectures for future lunar
infrastructure.57 Initial study results were presented in Australia
.58 In partnership with NASA, Australia plans to build and send
a rover to the surface of the Moon on an upcoming Arte-
Additionally, the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) is mis mission, perhaps as early as 2026.61 Support for the
developing two satellites, Oracle-Mobility and Oracle-Prime, development of the rover comes in part from Australia’s
designed to provide SSA information on objects in cislunar Moon to Mars initiative, which awards grants to Australian
space.59 The Oracle-Mobility satellite will test new naviga- space companies, aiming to grow the country’s space
tional techniques needed for cislunar operations and object economy and give it a greater role in future missions to the
tracking and is expected to launch no earlier than 2025. Moon. Moon to Mars additionally funded the development
Applying lessons learned from the Oracle-Mobility mission, of scientific instruments to be used for other U.S.-led lunar
Figure 5: Commercial Lunar Payload Services
Landing Sites
Source: “Commercial Lunar Payload Services (CLPS) Deliveries,” NASA,

– 13 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
missions.62 However, Australia does not currently have an the Moon’s south pole and returned a sample of the lunar
agreement with the United States to send an Australian regolith (a layer of loose, dust-like material that covers
astronaut to the Moon as part of the Artemis program. the Moon’s surface). The last two missions, Chang’e 7 and
Chang’e 8, are expected to launch in 2026 and 2028, respec-
Canada tively. Chang’e 8 will test technologies required to build a
The Canadian Space Agency has two programs focused on permanent base and could be powered by nuclear tech-
the Moon: the Lunar Exploration Accelerator Program (LEAP), nology. Both missions would land in the lunar south pole.66
which manages the science, technology, and commercial
In , China declared that crewed missions would be
lunar payloads opportunities for Canadian industry and
added to CLEP, with a crewed landing on the lunar surface academic partners, and Canadarm3, a robotic arm built by
planned for 2030.67 Separately, China also announced plans Canadian company MDA Space that will be installed on the
in 2019 for a future scientific research station to be con-
Lunar Gateway to manipulate and maneuver objects on the
exterior of the station.63 Canadarm3 will perform a similar structed within the next 10 years at the Moon’s south pole.
This vision has likely evolved into the planned International role to the first Canadarm, used on the Space Shuttle orbiter,
Lunar Research Station (ILRS), a joint venture between China
and Canadarm2, currently installed on the International
and Russia announced in 2021.68 At least 10 additional coun-
Space Station (ISS). In return for supplying Canadarm3, NASA
tries have signed up to support the ILRS, including Venezuela,
offered Canada the opportunity to send science, technol-
Belarus, Pakistan, Azerbaijan, South Africa, Egypt, Nicaragua,
ogy, and commercial lunar payloads and fly two Canadian
astronauts to the Moon on Artemis missions.64 Thailand, Serbia, and Kazakhstan.69 China is also planning a
GPS-like constellation for lunar orbit that will provide satellite
navigation for the Moon.70 To recruit international partners
China
for its crewed research station, China announced the cre-
In 2004, China announced the Chinese Lunar Exploration
ation of the International Lunar Research Station Coopera-
Program (CLEP)—also known as the Chang’e Project—which
tion Organization (ILRSCO) in 2023.71
would consist of a series of robotic lunar missions built and
operated by the China National Space Administration. As
China is currently operating the Queqiao 1 relay satellite in
originally envisioned, China planned for eight Chang’e
a halo orbit associated with the Earth–Moon L Lagrange
missions, six of which have been completed. The series of 2
point, providing communications for China’s missions to
Chang’e missions has operated lunar landers, rovers, orbit-
the side of the Moon not facing Earth.72 Operating in a frozen
ers, and sample-return activities.65 In 2024, China’s most
elliptical orbit around the Moon, the Queqiao 2 satellite also
recent CLEP mission, Chang’e 6, successfully landed on
serves as a communications relay for lunar missions.73
SAMPLE RETURN MISSION NAME MISSION TYPE
Figure 6: Chang’e Timeline
2007 Chang’e 1 Orbiter
Source: David R. Williams, “Future Chinese Lunar Missions,” NASA,

2010 Chang’e 2 Orbiter
2013 Chang’e 3 Lander and
Rover
2014 Chang’e 5-T1 Sample-Re-
turn Demo and
Testing
2018 Chang’e 4 Communi-
cations Relay
Satellite, Lander,
and Rover
2019 Chang’e 5 Sample-Return
2024 Chang’e 6 Sample-Return
2026 Chang’e 7 Orbiter, Lander,
Hopping Probe,
and Rover
2028 Chang’e 8 Lander, Rover,
and Prospect-
ing Robot
– 14 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
In , China released a road map for a series of SE, a German aerospace technologies group, on the Lunar
projects aimed at building lunar infrastructure, including Surface Access Service (LSAS) program, which supports
elements related to communications and SSA, as well as commercial lunar payload delivery. The first LSAS mission
GPS-equivalent services for lunar and deep-space users.74 is planned for 2025.86
Europe Japan
Through ESA, Europe is closely involved in NASA’s Artemis Japan has maintained an active lunar exploration pro-
missions. Most notably, ESA produces the European Service gram for over 30 years. In 1990, it sent the Hiten spacecraft
Module (ESM) for the Orion crewed capsule.75 Already tested to the Moon, making it the third country after the Soviet
on Artemis I, the ESM will be used on all Artemis missions.76 Union and United States to launch a lunar mission. Japan
In addition, ESA will be providing several components for did not send another spacecraft to the Moon until 2007,
the Lunar Gateway, specifically a habitation module, a when it launched the SELENE mission, also called Kaguya,
refueling and storage module, and a module that will con- composed of three separate spacecraft: a main orbiter, a
tain communications equipment for linking with the lunar relay satellite, and another satellite designed to map the
surface and satellites in lunar orbit.77 In return for these con- Moon’s gravity field.87
tributions, ESA will be able to send two European astronauts
to the Moon as part of the Artemis program. Japan’s most recent lunar mission was the Smart Lander
for Investigating Moon (SLIM), designed to demonstrate
ESA is also designing Argonaut, a lunar lander that can per- precision lunar landings.88 As it descended to the lunar sur-
form a variety of different missions. Argonaut will be able to face in , SLIM successfully deployed two lunar
carry cargo such as scientific payloads, power-generation landers. Unfortunately, the lander touched down with its
and -storage equipment, and lunar rovers to the Moon’s solar arrays misoriented away from the Sun, which meant
surface. Currently, ESA is planning to use the Ariane 6 rocket that it could not generate the amount of power required
to launch Argonaut missions.78 for normal operations. Even in this state, SLIM survived sev-
eral lunar nights—but has not communicated with ground
To support Artemis, Argonaut, and other lunar missions, controllers on Earth since .89
ESA established a program called Moonlight to provide
PNT services for the Moon, as well as communication and Japan has several missions planned over the next few years.
data relay services between the Earth and Moon. Currently This includes the Hakuto-R 2 mission, planned by Japanese
scheduled to launch in 2026, the Lunar Pathfinder is the first company ispace scheduled for late 2024, which will carry a
spacecraft developed as part of this initiative. The satel- lunar lander and micro rover.90 Toyota and JAXA are currently
lite will orbit the Moon, communicating with Earth using an developing a crewed, pressurized lunar rover that will be flown
X-band link and with missions on the Moon using S-band to the Moon on a future Artemis mission.91 As part of the NASA
and ultra-high frequency links.79 It will be launched with the CLPS initiative, the Japanese company Dymon is also plan-
CLPS Blue Ghost M2.80 ning to launch a lunar rover called Yaoki on an upcoming
Intuitive Machines mission to demonstrate its ability to sup-
India port future NASA missions.92 Additionally, Japan will cooperate
In , India became the fourth nation to success- with India on the aforementioned joint LUPEX mission.
fully land on the Moon, landing the Chandrayaan-3 probe
in the lunar south pole region.81 India is working with Japan As part of the Artemis program, Washington and Tokyo
signed an agreement in for a Japanese astro-
on the Lunar Polar Exploration (LUPEX) mission, expected to
naut to be the first non-U.S. national to crew an Artemis
be launched no earlier than 2025. Japan agreed to provide
mission to the lunar surface.93
the rover and launcher for LUPEX, while India agreed to pro-
vide the mission’s lander.82 Additionally, India is in the early
stages of planning its Chandrayaan-4 mission with the aim Russia
of returning a sample of lunar regolith to Earth.83 Russia’s most recent mission to the Moon, the uncrewed
Luna 25 lunar lander, failed when the probe crashed into
the Moon’s surface in 2023.94 Several more Luna missions
Israel
are in various stages of planning and development, with
In 2019, two private entities from Israel—SpaceIL and
some scheduled for launch in the next five years. These
Israel Aerospace Industries—launched the Beresheet
upcoming uncrewed missions are part of the Luna-Glob
lunar lander, the first privately funded attempt to reach
program, which aims to create a fully robotic lunar base
the Moon. The lander ultimately crashed into the Moon
based on plans from 1997. This program would set the stage
after its gyroscopes failed on approach to the landing
site.84 SpaceIL announced plans in 2020 to build a second for later crewed missions to the Moon.95
Beresheet lander for launch in 2024, but there is no public
Planned for launch in 2027, the lunar orbiter Luna 26 is the next
indication of subsequent progress on this mission.85
Russian mission to the Moon. It will carry a scientific payload,
Israel Aerospace Industries is also partnering with OHB
as well as serve as a communications relay between the
– 15 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
Moon and Earth. In 2019, Beijing and Moscow agreed to coop- load on an upcoming Astrobotic CLPS mission.103 The UAE also
erate on both Russia’s Luna 26 mission and China’s Chang’e developed a lunar rover that flew aboard ispace’s Hakuto-R
7 mission.96 Originally, ESA had also intended to collaborate 1 mission but was lost in the lander’s crash.104 Following the
with Russia on Luna 26; however, following Russia’s invasion of crash, Prime Minister and Vice President Sheikh Mohammed
Ukraine in 2022, the agency canceled these plans and with- bin Rashid Al Maktoum signaled that the country will make
drew from work with Russia on the Luna 27 mission, a lander another attempt at a lunar landing.105 Additionally, the UAE
planned for the lunar south pole.97 Russia has claimed it will has other lunar plans, providing an airlock for the Lunar Gate-
complete Luna 26 and Luna 27 independently, with the latter way and making the UAE the only non-ISS partner nation pro-
consisting of a primary mission (Luna 27a) and a backup viding hardware for the new station.106
(Luna 27b) in the event Luna 27a fails.98
Similarly, in , Pakistan sent the iCube Qamar, a
As early as 2009, Russia had been planning a new, reus- CubeSat designed to orbit the Moon and take photos of the
able, crewed space capsule for use in low Earth orbit (LEO) lunar surface, as a payload on board China’s Chang’e 6
and for transportation to the Moon. This new Orel space- mission.107 In 2022, Mexico initiated its Colmena project, an
craft would be designed to transport up to four humans. In effort to promote Mexican participation in lunar explora-
2020, Russian officials announced plans for an uncrewed tion through the development of microrobots, five of which
test launch of Orel in 2023 that never happened.99 Russia were launched aboard Astrobotic’s Peregrine 1 mission.108
also said it was planning an uncrewed mission to the Moon While the mission’s failure destroyed the payload, a second
in 2028, but there are no signs that it remains on track to Colmena mission is slated for 2027.109 Turkey is planning on
meet this goal. And although it announced in 2007 that it launching its lunar orbiter AYAP 1 in 2026, followed by AYAP
aimed to field its own Lunar Orbital Station, there has been 2, which aims to land a rover on the Moon in 2028.110 Finally,
no subsequent indication of work on its development.100 New Zealand plans to conduct SSA research and create a
cislunar SSA capability in partnership with NASA.111
Given budget constraints—and the failure of Luna 25 in
2023—it is unlikely that Russia will be able to launch any of
these proposed missions. Sanctions imposed on Russia
since its invasion of Ukraine have severely limited its access
to Western technologies and microelectronics, further
stalling Russian efforts to start or continue work on future
Moon missions.
Given budget constraints—and
the failure of Luna 25 in 2023—
it is unlikely that Russia will be
able to launch any of these
proposed missions.
South Korea
Launched in 2022, the Korea Pathfinder Lunar Orbiter (KPLO),
also known as Danuri, is South Korea’s first spacecraft to
operate beyond geostationary Earth orbit (GEO). The KPLO
was designed to survey the lunar surface and help iden-
tify possible landing sites for future missions. It is currently
orbiting the Moon.101 The South Korean space agency is
planning an uncrewed mission to the lunar surface in 2032
and actively participates in UN discussions on lunar norms
and sustainability.102
Other Countries
Additional countries have flown payloads on another nation’s
lunar missions in the past several years or have plans to do
so in the next decade. For example, the UAE is sponsoring an
experiment created by students at AGH University of Science
and Technology in Poland for inclusion as a rideshare pay-
– 16 –

INTERNATIONAL SPACE
GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORKS
PHOTO // NNEHRING/ROYALTY-FREE/GETTY IMAGES
– 17 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
here are several space-specific international treaties Space Affairs (UNOOSA) acts as the secretariat for COPUOS,
Tand other international agreements that address helping to implement space treaties and General Assembly
space issues, as well as the U.S.-led Artemis Accords. resolutions that form the basis of international space law.116
While no treaty deals solely with cislunar space, the pro-
visions of the space-specific agreements cover cislunar Other than the OST, there are four other legally binding
space no differently than any other domain. international agreements that govern space. Each applies
to spacecraft, people, and activities in cislunar space.
THE OUTER SPACE TREATY AND The Rescue Agreement of 1968 requires that parties to the
agreement provide assistance, when possible, to spacecraft
RELATED AGREEMENTS personnel in distress or in the event of an accident or emer-
gency landing. Additionally, should a party to the agreement
Evolving from several arms control resolutions debated
become aware of spacecraft personnel in distress, they are
in the United Nations during 1966, the Outer Space Treaty
required to notify the launching nation and the UN secre-
(OST) of 1967 was the first international treaty concern-
tary general. The agreement also permits nations to request
ing space.112 It serves as the foundation for international
assistance recovering their space objects that land in ter-
space law and addresses all government and private
ritories outside of their jurisdiction. The launching nation is
sector space activities carried out by parties to the treaty. required to cover any costs incurred during recovery efforts.117
Although the treaty does not reference cislunar space, it
does specifically reference the Moon—and thus, due to its The Liability Convention of 1972 states that countries are
broad applicability to all space activities, does apply to liable for any damages incurred from all space objects
cislunar space. launched from their territories.118 The crash of a nuclear-pow-
ered Soviet satellite onto Canadian territory in 1978 resulted
There are currently 114 parties to the OST, including all major
in the only claim to date made under this convention.
spacefaring nations.113 Key provisions of the treaty state that
The Registration Convention of 1976 requires that states
◊ “the exploration and use of outer space . . . shall be
submit details to the United Nations about their space-
carried out for the benefit and in the interests of all
craft and satellites launched into space. The associated
countries . . . and shall be the province of all mankind”;
UN registry of space objects contains information such as
◊ outer space shall be “free for exploration and use by the name of the launching nation, an appropriate designa-
all States”; tor of the space object or its registration number, date and
location of launch, basic orbital parameters, and general
◊ outer space is “not subject to national appropriation by
function of the space object.119
claim of sovereignty, by means of use or occupation,
or by any other means”;
Though most of the Moon Agreement of 1984 merely
◊ states shall not place nuclear weapons or other weap- reemphasizes provisions of the OST, it also includes new
ons of mass destruction in orbit or on celestial bodies, language specifying that the Moon is “the common heri-
or “station such weapons in outer space tage of mankind” and providing clarity on the use of lunar
resources. The treaty specifies that all references to the
◊ “the moon and other celestial bodies shall be used . .
Moon also apply to all other celestial bodies in the Solar
. exclusively for peaceful purposes,” with no weapons
System, including orbits and trajectories to, from, and
testing of any kind, military maneuvers, or the estab-
around them. Regarding the lawful use of lunar resources,
lishment of military bases;
the treaty planned to establish an international regime
◊ astronauts shall be regarded “as envoys of mankind”; to administer the exploitation of resources on the Moon,
◊ states shall be responsible for national space activi- other planets, asteroids, and any of the Solar System’s other
ties, whether carried out by “governmental agencies celestial bodies.120 The regime was never implemented
or by non-governmental entities”; because there are only 17 parties to the treaty as of .121 The Moon Agreement has had little impact on inter-
◊ states shall be liable for damage caused by their
national space law, as most spacefaring nations, including
space objects; and
the United States, Russia, and China, decided not to sign it.
◊ states shall avoid “harmful contamination” of space
and celestial bodies.114 In addition to these five legally binding international space
agreements, UNOOSA often highlights five non-binding res-
The Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
olutions approved by the General Assembly that articulate
(COPUOS), which played a key role in creating the OST, was
key principles of international space law. The earliest of these
originally established by the UN General Assembly in 1958
resolutions is the Declaration of Legal Principles Governing
as an ad hoc committee that became a permanent body
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
in 1959 tasked with addressing the exploration and use of
Space, which predates the OST and was passed in 1963. The
space for the benefit of all humanity.115 The UN Office for Outer
– 18 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
other resolutions, passed in the 1980s and 1990s, present prin- Union (ITU) is now a UN agency responsible for issues per-
ciples for international television broadcasting from satel- taining to information and communications technologies.
lites, remote sensing of Earth from space, and nuclear power Most of its mission is focused on Earth, but a key part of
sources in space, as well as a declaration on the importance its responsibilities relates to the space environment. The
of international cooperation in space for the benefit of all ITU is responsible for international coordination of radio
people, with a particular focus on developing nations.122 spectrum use, including spectrum used by satellites. It
facilitates international coordination of spectrum use for
In 2010, COPUOS established the Working Group on the spacecraft orbiting Earth—meaning the ITU has effectively
Long-term Sustainability of Outer Space Activities to iden- had a regulatory role for most spacecraft, since every
tify issues impacting space sustainability—such as space crewed and uncrewed spacecraft in orbit since Sputnik 1
debris, SSA, space weather, and national regulatory regimes in 1957 has relied on radio communications.129
for space—and develop ideas and voluntary guidelines to
improve them. In 2019, COPUOS adopted a set of 21 voluntary The ITU groups satellites orbiting Earth into two categories:
best-practice guidelines for long-term sustainability that GEO, also called GSO, or non-geostationary orbit (non-
had been negotiated and approved by the working group.123 GSO). Due to the finite space for satellites in GEO—some-
times compared to beachfront property on Earth—the ITU
To address the use of space resources, including those on has developed rules that balance the access of all nations
the Moon, the legal subcommittee of COPUOS also created to these valuable slots and approval of new systems on a
the Working Group on Legal Aspects of Space Resource first-come, first-served basis.130
Activities in 2022, giving it a five-year mandate to examine
the benefits of establishing a framework for use of space To date, there are very few ITU rules or decisions that relate
resources and whether such a framework might require new specifically to cislunar space or the Moon. The union’s
international agreements.124 Establishment of this working first foray into regulating spectrum use in cislunar space
group represents a consensus view of COPUOS members happened in 1971, when it added a provision to the Radio
that the OST does not adequately address the issue of space Regulations, the ITU’s legally binding spectrum rules, lim-
resource use and denotes members’ willingness to consider iting the potential for interference to radio astronomy in
new international instruments to tackle it.125 the shielded zone of the Moon (SZM). The SZM is defined
as the lunar surface area and adjacent part of space that
Finally, during their official annual meetings in , are shielded from emissions originating from within 100,000
COPUOS members agreed to establish the Action Team on kilometers of Earth’s center (i.e., the far side of the Moon).
Lunar Activities Consultation (ATLAC), which aims to provide The rule was designed to keep this naturally quiet zone free
recommendations for international consultative mecha- from human-made radio-signal interference so that the
nisms on sharing information and best practices, ensur- SZM could be used for radio astronomy in the future.131
ing safety, facilitating interoperability for lunar activities,
protecting the lunar environment, and mitigating the cre- Since then, the ITU has not promulgated additional formal
ation of debris in lunar orbit. ATLAC membership is open to rules focused on cislunar space or the Moon. In 1997, it
any COPUOS member, though key participants will include urged members to carefully assess the impacts of com-
the United States and China.126 One expert involved in the munications relay systems between the Earth and Moon.
establishment of the action team noted to this report’s More recently, attendees at the 2023 World Radio Confer-
authors that it was designed to facilitate such discussions ence, a gathering organized by the ITU every three to four
between the United States, China, and Russia on lunar gov- years to update the Radio Regulations, approved studies
ernance and coordination.127 The group will share its final to look at frequency bands for lunar and cislunar commu-
recommendations during COPUOS meetings in 2027. nications.132 The results of the studies will be presented and
debated at the 2027 conference.
While not directly related to cislunar space or the Moon,
it is worth noting that UNOOSA supports the work of the
International Committee on Global Navigation Satellite THE ARTEMIS ACCORDS
Systems (ICG). The ICG serves as a coordinating body for
operators of such systems, working to facilitate compati- The Artemis Accords are non-binding multilateral agree-
bility, interoperability, communications, and transparency ments between the United States and 43 other countries
to benefit all global users of PNT services.128 that contain various provisions related to norms of behavior
in space. The United States has stated that these accords
are intended to help facilitate operational implementation
THE INTERNATIONAL of obligations derived from the OST and other international
space agreements.133
TELECOMMUNICATION UNION
The Artemis Accords established new norms among signa-
Originally established by the International Telegraph
tories aimed at improving the transparency, peacefulness,
Convention of 1865, the International Telecommunication
– 19 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
and interoperability of space activities. Among other com-
mitments, signatories agree to release scientific informa-
tion gathered through civil space exploration to the public
and other Artemis signatories; make reasonable efforts
to adhere to existing interoperability standards for space
infrastructure; protect space sites considered significant to
human heritage; and prevent the accumulation of orbital
debris around the Moon.134
Though legal experts continue to disagree on the mean-
ing of OST language related to using space resources, the
Artemis Accords assert that the extraction and utilization of
space resources can be done without violating the OST.135
Specifically, they state that the use of space “does not
inherently constitute national appropriation under Article
II” of the OST. Furthermore, they call for the development of
international practices and rules governing the extraction
and use of space resources.136
The Artemis Accords are the first international agreement
to implement a concept referred to as “safety zones,”
which are designed to prevent the activities of one nation
from causing harmful interference to the activities of
other countries—for example, to or by lunar launch and
landing sites. Both launches and landings on the Moon’s
surface create plumes of regolith and debris, which may
damage or blind nearby spacecraft. Artemis signatories
are expected to notify and coordinate with the creators
of safety zones before conducting space activities within
these areas. However, some experts have suggested safety
zones may constitute “national appropriation” in violation
of Article II of the OST.137 But it can be noted that international
maritime law does provide precedent for safety zones,
albeit in a different domain.138
Russia has criticized various elements of the Artemis
Accords for being U.S.-centric. China has said the accords
reinforce competition rather than cooperation in space.
Neither nation has signed the Artemis Accords nor sig-
naled an interest in supporting the Artemis program.139
Conversely, there is no indication that the United States
would collaborate with China or Russia on the ILRS. China
suggested during a presentation at the International Astro-
nautical Congress in 2023 that the ILRS framework would
eventually include space sustainability principles akin to
the Artemis Accords.140
– 20 –

NON-SPACE INTERNATIONAL
FRAMEWORKS WITH ANALOGUES
TO SPACE GOVERNANCE
PHOTO // NNEHRING/ROYALTY-FREE/GETTY IMAGES
– 21 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
here are several domains on Earth that have simi- Antarctica or its ice shelf until 1820.148 Since that first sight-
Tlar jurisdictional characteristics as space, including ing, seven countries have made territorial claims on the
Antarctica, the Arctic, the high seas, and international continent, with some national claims overlapping with
airspace. Each of these areas possesses its own estab- others. The Cold War added another dimension to the
lished international governance mechanisms, which can geopolitics of Antarctica: though neither the United States
provide lessons for future space governance frameworks nor the Soviet Union made territorial claims, both operated
and evolutions of current international space law. This sec- research stations there. Additionally, neither saw Antarctica
tion provides an overview of these non-space agreements as having strategic military value, with both nations seek-
and frameworks, and the subsequent section draws paral- ing to prevent the militarization of the continent.149
lels to space governance and identifies lessons that could
be used to help address associated gaps. Though some claimant nations to territory on Antarctica
initially objected, the United States pursued the develop-
ment of and eventually succeeded in establishing an inter-
THE LAW OF THE SEA TREATY national treaty that preserved the freedom of scientific
research and peaceful use of the continent without adju-
Signed in 1982, the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea dicating or deciding on any territorial claims. Convened by
(UNCLOS), also called the “Law of the Sea Treaty,” established the United States in 1958, the Antarctic Conference, which
the international legal framework for maritime activities and produced the Antarctic Treaty, only included the 12 nations
uses of ocean resources. Key provisions of the treaty include with contemporary scientific equities in Antarctica during
granting nations the right to assert sovereignty up to 12 nau- the International Geophysical Year (IGY) of 1957 to 1958.150
tical miles from shore, giving all states freedom of naviga- Signed in 1959, the Antarctic Treaty serves as the foundation
tion and overflight of the high seas, and setting up rules for for a system of treaties and agreements that today provide
exploring and exploiting sea-floor resources.141 Currently, 167 the international governance framework for the continent.151
parties and the European Union have ratified the treaty—
with the notable exception of the United States, which has As part of the treaty framework, signatories began meeting
cited concerns that treaty provisions on the use of seabed regularly to discuss issues related to Antarctica, such as
resources were not free-market friendly.142 environmental protection and cooperation on research.
Officially called the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
Established in 1994 in accordance with UNCLOS provisions, (ATCM) process, these meetings now occur each year, and
the International Seabed Authority (ISA) authorizes and con- participants make decisions by consensus. These annual
trols seabed mineral extraction and works to protect the sea- meetings have provided opportunities for treaty Consulta-
floor environment. To justify such regulation, UNCLOS asserts tive Parties to develop specific, legally binding agreements,
that ocean resources, outside of those under national juris- with greater precision than the original treaty on rules cov-
diction, are the “common heritage of mankind.” The work ering specific activities in Antarctica.152 The ATCM process
and policies of the ISA are governed by an assembly made has also been a mechanism for treaty parties to update
up by representatives of all parties to UNCLOS, a 36-person and address contemporary issues that were not foreseen
council elected by the assembly, and a secretary-general at the time the treaty was drafted.
elected by the assembly for a four-year term.143 To date, it
has authorized over 30 seabed mining-exploration con- Currently, key legally binding documents of the Antarctic
tracts.144 As the ISA has not yet finalized regulations for com- Treaty System include the original 1959 treaty, the Proto-
mercial mining, held up by calls for a global moratorium due col on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the
to alleged environmental impacts, it has yet to issue any Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
approvals for commercial deep-sea mining projects.145 Resources, and the Convention for the Conservation of Ant-
arctic Seals.153 These documents and resolutions, decisions,
At the same time as the original UNCLOS negotiations in the recommendations, and other measures adopted by past
1980s, the United States enacted the Deep Seabed Hard Min- ATCMs cover many topics, such as peaceful use and scien-
erals Resources Act to provide a licensing framework for U.S. tific collaboration, environmental protections, preservation
companies wanting to mine the seafloor.146 Though the United of historic sites, management of tourism, designation and
States has issued licenses for seafloor mining, some experts management of protected areas, mapping, safety, infor-
argue that U.S. companies could face international legal risks mation sharing, logistical cooperation, and weather and
should they begin commercial mining without ISA approval.147 meteorological cooperation.154
Since 1998, commercial mining in Antarctica has been pro-
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AND
hibited. Prior to this ban, several treaty parties had been
working on a treaty addendum that would have regu-
ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM
lated future resource extraction. Growing concerns about
Antarctica is the only continent without an indigenous impacts of human activities to Earth, not just in Antarctica
human population. No human is believed to have seen but around the world, and the rise of the environmental
– 22 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
movement in the 1980s led to the abandonment of the mandate covers a wide range of topics, including sustainable
addendum.155 At that time, Australia and France initiated development of the Arctic region and environmental protec-
efforts to oppose plans to allow future mining. Even today, tion, but specifically excludes one topic: military security.162
there is limited interest in Antarctic mining, as experts
question its business viability. There is no budget or secretariat for the Arctic Council.
The council is only a forum and lacks the ability to imple-
ment or enforce any of the guidelines or recommenda-
THE INTERNATIONAL REGULATIONS tions approved during council meetings. However, council
members negotiated and concluded the Arctic Search and
FOR PREVENTING COLLISIONS AT SEA
Rescue Agreement in 2011, which addresses responsibili-
ties and coordination for international search and rescue Until the 1860s, most maritime nations developed and used
activities in the region.
their own navigation rules and practices.156 In 1863, the
United Kingdom and France agreed on a set of maritime
rules that were eventually adopted by 30 countries, includ- THE CONVENTION ON
ing the United States. A well-known guide to these regu-
lations, published in 1867 by British official Thomas Gray, INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION
was called The Rule of the Road, the progenitor of all future
references to such guidelines as “rules of the road.”157 To The Convention on International Civil Aviation, signed in 1944,
established rules for airspace, aircraft registration, safety
expand on these regulations, the United States convened
the first International Maritime Conference in 1889 to dis- and security, personnel licensing, aircraft communica-
cuss additional measures needed to prevent maritime col- tions, customs and duties, and environmental protections
lisions.158 Throughout the next 70 years, a regular cadence and addressed national jurisdictional questions related to
of major international maritime conferences updated and air travel. It recognizes states’ sovereignty over the airspace
revised these rules. directly above their territory, which includes land areas
and territorial waters. Parties to the convention must enact
Then in 1972, all contemporary international navigation and national laws that enforce convention rules and regulations
maritime rules were replaced entirely by the International and provide aircraft navigation services in their sovereign
Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, also known as territories. Convention rules apply in the airspace above
Collision Regulations (COLREGs), which specify the rules of international waters, known as “high-seas airspace.”163
the road for ships at sea with the aim of preventing acci-
dents.159 The COLREGs are published and maintained by The convention also set up the International Civil Aviation
the International Maritime Organization (IMO), a UN agency Organization (ICAO), the UN agency charged with coordi-
established in 1948 that focuses on ensuring safety at sea. nating standards and best practices for international air
Nations become a member of the IMO by ratifying the Con- travel regarding topics such as air navigation, navigational
vention on the International Maritime Organization, where- infrastructure, flight procedures, cross-border aviation,
upon they are required to enact the COLREGs as national and air-accident investigations. The ICAO is governed by
law within their own jurisdictions.160 a council—consisting of 36 members elected from the 193-
member nations of the organization—that is responsible for
adopting new standards and rules.164
THE ARCTIC COUNCIL
The Arctic Council is an intergovernmental forum estab-
lished in 1996 to promote cooperation, coordination, and
engagement between countries with territory in the Arctic.
Only nations with Arctic territory—Canada, Denmark, Fin-
land, Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden, and the United
States—are members of the council, though representa-
tives of Indigenous peoples can join as permanent partic-
ipants. Additionally, non-Arctic nations can be admitted
as observers. Senior officials representing each member
nation convene every six months to discuss past accom-
plishments and future work of the council, as well as issue a
nonbinding declaration. Every two years, the council holds
ministerial-level meetings.161
The council itself was not established by a formal interna-
tional treaty but rather by the Ottawa Declaration, signed
by representatives of the future council’s membership. Its
– 23 –

CISLUNAR GOVERNANCE
AND POLICY CHALLENGES
PHOTO // NSA DIGITAL ARCHIVE/ROYALTY-FREE/GETTY IMAGES
– 24 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
here are policy, legal, and regulatory questions that in this report, some of which date to before the founding of
Timpact current activities, as well as the future evo- the United Nations, have proven durable.
lution of human activities, in cislunar space. These
cislunar questions are generally the same ones that exist This section attempts to understand the reasons for that
today for all other areas of space, whether in near-Earth durability and discern lessons that can be applied to future
orbits or beyond the Moon.165 Governance questions appli- space governance. For example, unlike the Antarctic Treaty
cable to cislunar space, therefore, should be addressed System or UNCLOS, the OST did not establish a consultative
as much as possible so that resulting frameworks apply mechanism or process for treaty parties to update space
broadly to all regions of space. governance rules or address new issues that have arisen
due to technological change, increasing commercial
activities, and increased military interests in space.167 The
These cislunar questions are report authors discuss international space governance
gaps and describe how non-space international agree-
generally the same ones that
ments and frameworks have addressed similar concerns
exist today for all other areas and considerations in their respective domains. Though
of space, whether in near-Earth the Moon Agreement is effectively not relevant to interna-
tional space law, it is discussed as a reference that could
orbits or beyond the Moon.
help serve as a guide for a new agreement.
To tackle cislunar governance questions, this report exam- PERMISSIBLE ACTIVITIES IN SPACE
ines broader space governance matters, identifying key
unresolved issues that resulted from either gaps in national Broadly speaking, activities in cislunar space could include
and international frameworks or technological advance- government activities of either a civilian or military charac-
ments that were not foreseen when space treaties were ter and commercial, private sector activities. The OST and
negotiated. Today, there are three main deficits in interna- Moon Agreement provide some, albeit broad, direction on
tional space governance, which the report authors assert permissible uses of space, including cislunar space. The
should be addressed to facilitate the safe, sustainable, and OST calls for the exploration and use of space for the ben-
secure development of cislunar space. Governments should efit of all nations but does not provide a comprehensive
list of permissible activities. However, it does enumerate
◊ modify and elaborate upon rules regarding permissi-
various non-permissible space activities, such as national
ble activities in space,
appropriation of space and the placement of nuclear
◊ further define property rights in space and use of weapons or other weapons of mass destruction in space.
space resources, and Without referencing outer space writ large, the OST says
that the Moon and other celestial bodies should only be
◊ establish rules of the road for human-made objects
used for peaceful purposes.168
in space.
As the Moon is likely the first celestial body other than Earth The OST and Moon Agreement language relating to permis-
on which humans might live and work, new space gover- sible activities drew upon the Antarctic Treaty, which placed
nance rules applying to cislunar space will not only involve similar, but not identical, constraints on what nations could
spacecraft in space but also probably people and equip- do in Antarctica.169 Like outer space, Antarctica was reserved
ment interacting on the lunar surface. for peaceful purposes, with an emphasis on scientific explo-
ration and research. Any activities of a military nature are
The OST and three related space agreements—the Rescue prohibited. Similarly, the OST prohibits military activities on
and Liability Conventions and Rescue Agreement (not the Moon and other celestial bodies, but not in outer space.170
including the Moon Agreement due to its low number of
signatories)—that established the foundations for interna- Since signing the Antarctic Treaty, signatories have
tional space law somewhat address these issues. However, refrained from militarizing the continent, though experts
there are no consensus definitions or meanings of certain disagree on what constitutes militarization. In contrast,
key treaty phrases.166 there are military interests in space today. However, it is
not clear what military advantages could be obtained spe-
Though there are few similarities between life on Earth and cifically in or from cislunar space. Advocates for extending
the harsh vacuum of space or surface of the Moon, ele- military operations into cislunar space acknowledge that
ments of governance frameworks used to regulate areas the Moon’s distance precludes it from having any direct
on Earth beyond national borders, such as Antarctica and and meaningful impact on terrestrial operations but sug-
the high seas, should be assessed when considering how gest actions from cislunar space could affect space sys-
to update international space governance frameworks. tems nearer to Earth.171 In particular, these arguments assert
The non-space governance frameworks described earlier that cislunar space is a high ground that can be used for
– 25 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
deploying weapons against satellites in lower orbits and Scientists in China have proposed another cislunar use
conducting space observation and surveillance.172 for space monitoring, publishing a paper on using a lunar
gravity assist for placement into retrograde GEO, along
the same plane on the same plane as Earth’s equator.175
However, it is not clear what Such an orbit, which would run in the opposite direction
military advantages could be of standard drift, would allow a spacecraft to get a view
of the entire GEO belt every 12 hours but pose significant
obtained specifically in or from
collision risks to other satellites in GEO, with one expert
cislunar space.
noting it would be akin to driving a car the wrong way on
a highway.176 Additionally, a retrograde GEO system would
not be able to examine any one spacecraft in detail due
For example, one report expressed concerns that China
to the high relative velocities between such a monitoring
might use the Moon’s gravity to slingshot hostile space-
system and other satellites in GEO drift orbits. There is also
craft around the Moon and into position to attack satellites no clear benefit to using such a monitoring satellite rather
in GEO or other orbits.173 While technically possible, such
than existing SSA sensors placed on Earth.
technology—if developed and deployed—offers no stra-
tegic advantage over the myriad of counterspace weap- The larger question is: Under what circumstances should uti-
ons that could be launched today. It would also be a much lizing cislunar space for observation or collecting SSA data be
more time-consuming way to deliver a weapon targeting a characterized as a military use? Certainly, a military-owned
satellite in GEO than other possible methods. Slingshotting and -operated satellite presumes a military use. But, as noted
around the Moon to reach GEO takes a lot of time and is earlier in this section, improvements to cislunar SSA systems
designed to save spacecraft fuel—not the kind of maneu- should be the focus of civilian and commercial operators.
vering that would underpin a successful military attack.174 Civil-government or commercial cislunar capabilities that
observe and characterize space activities, including a retro-
One could argue that launching a counterspace weapon
grade GEO system, could collect the same information and
from cislunar space toward a satellite in GEO or lower orbits
data as military-operated systems but would not carry the
could offer a way to stage a surprise attack from an unex-
same militarization concerns. However, there is no reason
pected direction. While true, this advantage dissipates
military users should not have access to SSA data available
once it becomes known that such weapons are being
from civilian and commercial sources.
deployed and possibly used. Improved cislunar SSA could
certainly help provide advance warning of such activities, Ultimately, the raison d’être for extending military forces
but since the vast majority of expected future cislunar mis- into cislunar space seems tied more to national honor and
sions are civilian, these SSA improvements should be the fear that China might do something there first than to a
responsibility of civilian and commercial operators. How- real strategic military goal. If this is true, the situation looks
ever, military users could acquire cislunar SSA data from no different than Antarctica in the 1950s. To save time and
these sources, like they acquire other commercial space military resources that could best be used elsewhere, the
services like satellite communications. two superpowers of that day wisely made the decision to
keep military interests and the Cold War out of Antarctica.
Another reason given by proponents of conducting military
activities in cislunar space is that it affords an ideal van- In addition to questions about military uses of cislunar space,
tage to conduct space observation and surveillance and to this report examines commercial, private sector uses. Like the
assess counterspace operations at lower orbits. In reality, a Antarctic Treaty, the OST is silent on commercial, for-profit
system placed on the Moon or in halo orbits associated with activities in cislunar or any part of space. But the OST does
the Earth–Moon L and L points could not provide continuous, create room for broadly nongovernmental space activities
1 2
persistent surveillance of any point on Earth or in lower Earth by including a clause requiring nations to authorize and
orbits. Earth itself would block cislunar observation platforms continuously supervise all national space activities by gov-
from having a persistent view of activities in near-Earth orbits. ernmental and nongovernmental entities. This language
satisfied both the Soviet Union, which sought to limit space
Additionally, the Moon rotates around Earth about every 28
to government-only missions, and the United States, which
days, so it is not a static observation point relative to Earth. sought to permit commercial space developments.177
A system in cislunar space would lose track of areas for
long periods of time. Plus, a spacecraft near the Moon is 10 In the late 1950s and early 1960s, there was arguably little
times further from Earth (nearly 400,000 kilometers) than a commercial appetite for space beyond nascent plans for
spacecraft in GEO (about 36,000 kilometers). A network of commercial communications satellites—and certainly
sensors located on Earth, however, can provide persistent no business plans built around the extraction of space
monitoring of activities in GEO, as is done today. resources from the Moon, asteroids, or other space objects.
– 26 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
Space activity is now dominated by the private sector, mentation issues, like UNCLOS did with the ISA and the
though a significant percentage of commercial space Antarctic Treaty System with its consultative meetings,
activities are financed by governments. However, few of there has not been an easy way to clarify this ambiguity.
these current private sector space activities are related to
the extraction or use of space resources. Experts generally agree that the OST prohibits national
claims to territory in space, including territory on a celes-
Once it is possible to realize economic gains from resource tial body, such as the Moon or an asteroid.182 But nations
extraction (or some other activity) on the Moon or other may still want to use these locations for their own national
celestial bodies, nations will want a way to claim and pro- purposes. And the issue is that although outer space is
tect their shares, as well as their national entities involved large, there are certain locations, trajectories, or orbits
in those activities. The International Seabed Authority (ISA) that will have more value than others. There are probably
established by the UNCLOS is an attempt to internation- only so many space objects that can safely occupy a given
ally regulate seabed mining, partly to avoid a rush to grab location, trajectory, or orbit at the same time. For orbits,
seafloor territory and bypass any motivations for a coun- this is sometimes called “orbital carrying capacity.”183 The
try to use armed force to assert national rights to ocean Artemis Accords somewhat address this issue by creating
resources. The question, discussed in the next section, is safety zones, though the original intention of safety zones
whether a similar arrangement could work for space. was to prevent harmful interference from one nation’s
space activity on another nation’s space mission.
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN SPACE AND In cislunar space, many users will probably want to operate
around the Earth–Moon Lagrange points, particularly L and
USE OF SPACE RESOURCES 1
L . Though only points in empty space, the Lagrange points

are special due to the gravitational balance between the
Property rights stipulate how a resource can be owned
Moon and Earth at these locations. Spacecraft can orbit these
and used and have existed in some form since ancient
points using a Lissajous orbit or halo orbit. Halo orbits asso-
times. Today, property rights are closely tied to national
ciated with the L point are particularly useful because they
sovereignty, determined by national law, and provided by 2
provide a spacecraft a continuous line of sight to Earth and
the nation-state to entities under its jurisdiction. The one
the far side of the Moon. Orbits associated with the L point are
notable instance in which property rights originate from 1
useful because they provide a spacecraft a continuous line of
an authority other than the nation-state is the bottom of
sight to both Earth and the near side of the Moon.
the ocean, which is defined by UNCLOS as the “common
heritage of mankind.”178 In this case, property rights to the
In addition to orbits associated with Earth–Moon Lagrange
seabed and ocean floor, including to resources within those
points, space in low lunar orbit (LLO) around the Moon will
areas, are shared by all nations and people. According to
also be valuable. Only certain inclinations in LLO are stable.
this principle, no nation or entity can unilaterally claim or
Finally, the “peaks of eternal light”—the locations near the
distribute those resources. Only the ISA, as established by
lunar poles exposed to the most sunlight each day—will
UNCLOS, has that right.179
also be valuable because they will be the best locations to
build solar power infrastructure.184
The use of resources in any domain is closely tied to prop-
erty rights, namely that the decision to use a resource
Due to this legal uncertainty, there is currently no frame-
is predicated on the ability of that entity to first assert
work for adjudicating competing national claims to
ownership of it. In space, property rights and national sov-
valuable locations in cislunar space, such as halo orbits
ereignty are somewhat constrained by the OST. Specifi-
associated with the Earth–Moon L Lagrange point or high-

cally, Article II of the OST states that space, “including the
value crater-ridge real estate (i.e., peaks of eternal light) on
moon and other celestial bodies, is not subject to national
the Moon. There is also no universally agreed-to framework
appropriation by claim of sovereignty, by means of use or
among all spacefaring nations on the legality of exploiting
occupation, or by any other means.”180 As already noted,
lunar resources such as ice and minerals. To date, nations
legal scholars disagree on the meaning of “national
have extracted small amounts of material from the lunar
appropriation,” with some arguing it prohibits any prop-
surface for analysis, sometimes bringing those samples
erty claims while others assert it allows for private appro-
back to Earth. But the salient question is how to address
priations of space resources.181
space resource use at scale, potentially for commercial
gain. There is no space equivalent to the ISA for internation-
The OST does not provide clear direction on how national
ally licensing and regulating resource extraction (though
laws and regulations apply to space, but it does tac-
the Moon Agreement would have established such a
itly permit nations to exercise a degree of sovereignty in
mechanism). This ambiguity creates significant uncer-
authorizing and continuously supervising their national
tainty for legal protections for space activities and may
space activities. Since the OST did not establish consul-
hinder private sector space investments.
tative bodies that regularly meet to discuss treaty imple-
– 27 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
Most nations, including the United States, did not support internationally agreed-to set of rules or regulations on
the approach taken by the Moon Agreement on space spacecraft behaviors or collision avoidance, though some
resources. The United States criticized UNCLOS and the nongovernmental organizations—such as the Space Safety
Moon Agreement for designating a region as the “common Coalition, which has international participation—have put
heritage of all mankind” as counter to free market princi- forward guidelines for space behaviors.188
ples. This language was a main reason the United States
decided not to ratify UNCLOS.185 Opponents of the Moon The only reference to space behaviors is contained in Arti-
Treaty also expressed concerns that one of the goals of cle IX of the OST. This section stipulates that treaty parties
the agreement’s proposed regulatory regime would be must conduct their space activities “with due regard to the
equitable sharing of benefits from lunar resources, as they corresponding interests of all other States Parties to the
worried this approach could disadvantage private sector treaty” and should consult with each other in cases where
initiatives.186 This precedent suggests that a workable inter- one nation’s activities could “cause potentially harmful
national framework for distributing space resources should interference” to another’s.189 As with other terms used in
not mirror such an approach. the OST, there is no definition of “due regard” or “harmful
interference” in the text and no treaty-specific mechanism
To address the ambiguity of the OST language, the United or venue to provide the needed clarifications.
States asserts through the Artemis Accords that the
extraction and utilization of space resources does not inher- Outside the United Nations, the United States has tried
ently constitute national appropriation and can be accom- to make progress on space safety through the Artemis
plished in compliance with the OST.187 By signing the Artemis Accords. Helpfully, the Artemis Accords establish a “safety
Accords, many other nations have supported this interpre- zone” concept—originally envisioned by the Hague Space
tation. But there is no international consensus on the term Resources Working Group Building Blocks—intended to pre-
“space resource,” which does not appear in the OST text. As vent harmful interference between national space activ-
noted earlier, COPUOS has established a special working ities.190 However, the Artemis Accords do not create new
group to discuss the legal uncertainties around the term. obligations for parties to the OST, which already requires
signatories to coordinate when they expect “harmful inter-
As another reference, the Antarctic Treaty System currently ference”—a term that remains undefined in either treaty.
bans commercial resource extraction from Antarctica,
though there was a failed attempt in the 1980s to add a new The long-term sustainability guidelines developed by
agreement establishing a mineral extraction regime. But COPUOS could help shape future efforts to develop COL-
the Antarctic Treaty never claimed that Antarctica was the REG-like rules for space, but the guidelines themselves
common heritage of humankind. Spectrum is another finite lack the required specificity to serve as rules of the road
resource, albeit somewhat different from seabed minerals for space operations. The ATLAC recently established by
or Antarctic oil deposits. To optimize the use of spectrum, COPUOS also could develop the foundation for future rules
the ITU facilitates international coordination—but does not of the road for lunar space activities.
license spectrum, a role performed by national regulators.
Ultimately, though the United States has made clear it has
no intention of claiming territory in space, whether on the
Moon or anywhere else, its position on the use of space
resources and concepts like safety zones could be dis-
ingenuously used by China and Russia to grab territory,
claiming they were only following U.S. precedent. Open-
ing this door has the potential to create a rush to claim
resources, which effectively means claims on associated
lunar real estate by designating safety zones. This is exactly
what the OST aimed to prevent, as well as what the Antarc-
tic Treaty, the UNCLOS through the ISA, and the ITU sought
to avoid in their own domains.
SPACE RULES OF THE ROAD
The main reason to develop rules of the road for space,
including cislunar space, is to prevent collisions between
space objects. In the sea domain, this was the same goal
that drove the development and introduction of the COL-
REGs designed to prevent collisions of ships. There is no
– 28 –

CISLUNAR OPERATIONAL AND
INFRASTRUCTURE CHALLENGES
PHOTO // MIKROMAN6/ROYALTY-FREE/GETTY IMAGESIMAGES
– 29 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
here are several cislunar operational and infra- it passes over a radar site. At all other times, its position is
Tstructure challenges that, if unaddressed, will cause predicted based on Keplerian orbital dynamics.
increasingly significant impediments to the safety,
sustainability, and efficiency of cislunar operations. Though Irrespective of the sensor phenomenology, detecting and
some of these challenges result from a lack of physical infra- tracking objects in cislunar space requires, at a minimum,
structure and equipment needed to support a sustained a network of terrestrial sensors located around the globe.
crewed and uncrewed lunar presence, others stem from Unlike objects in GEO, whose orbital period is the same as
gaps in coordination mechanisms and agreed-to pro- Earth’s rotation, objects in cislunar space, as well as in LEO
cesses for operating in cislunar space. This section outlines and medium Earth orbit (MEO), orbit Earth at a rate different
several of these challenges, attempting to describe specifi- from the speed at which Earth revolves on its axis.
cally whether the problem stems primarily from inadequate
Objects in LEO and MEO orbit Earth at a speed faster than
infrastructure or a lack of operator coordination processes.
the rotation of Earth on its axis, while objects in cislunar
orbit at a slower rate than Earth’s rotation.194 Terrestrial sen-
SPACE SITUATIONAL AWARENESS sors tracking objects in cislunar space need to hand off
and receive custody of tracked objects as cislunar space
Fundamentally, SSA is knowledge of the current and pre- rotates from and into the sensors’ fields of view. Detecting
dicted future locations of objects in space.191 Objects in and tracking objects in cislunar space will require a new
space can be detected and tracked using a variety of sen- approach that differs from the ones used for LEO, MEO,
sors, such as radar, optical, laser-ranging, and radio-fre- and GEO objects. Additionally, the power requirements for
quency (RF) technologies. Terrestrial radar systems are ground-based radar to reach cislunar space would likely
typically used for detecting and tracking objects in LEO, rule out its use for detecting and tracking cislunar objects.195
including operational and non-operational spacecraft and
Finally, any Earth-based sensor would lose custody of
debris fragments. For GEO, terrestrial optical telescopes are
objects in lunar orbit as they transit around the side of the
usually used for detecting and tracking objects, as radar
Moon that is always facing away from Earth. Given that
signals are usually not powerful enough to track objects at
the rotational period of an object in stable lunar orbit is as
such distances. Satellites equipped with optical sensors
little as two hours, it would be possible to quickly reacquire
and cameras can also provide SSA data. Since virtually
the position of space objects once they reappear on the
all operational spacecraft emit RF signals, RF receivers on
Earth-facing side.196 Keplerian orbital dynamics would apply
Earth or other spacecraft can be used to detect and track
active spacecraft in all orbits.192 to stable lunar orbits, so it would be possible to predict the
position of objects during transit around the Moon’s far side.
In addition to data derived from these sensor systems,
many satellites are equipped with GPS receivers, allowing
SPACE OBJECT TRACKING AND
operators to know the precise location of their satellites at
any time. Some operators choose to share location infor-
TRAFFIC COORDINATION
mation for their satellites with other operators, government
entities, or third parties such as the Space Data Association, The DoD began tracking and cataloging satellites with the
an international nongovernmenal organization that facili- launch of Sputnik in 1957. In the 1960s, it started developing
tates operator-to-operator information sharing.193 mathematical equations and source code used to pre-
dict the positions of satellites in Earth orbit. By the 1970s,
All these SSA technologies were designed to track objects
the DoD and NASA adopted a standardized model and the
in lower Earth orbits, though most could be used for track-
two-line element (TLE) set format for space object tracking
ing objects in cislunar space. For example, terrestrial opti-
and position predictions.197 After the public release of the
cal telescopes and RF sensors could track operational
models, the TLE format became the industry standard for
spacecraft. Spacecraft with optical sensors and cameras
predicting satellite position.198
in cislunar space could likely also be used for cislunar SSA
purposes. However, just as it is not feasible to use radar for Today, TLE datasets are used for various purposes. In conjunc-
tracking objects in GEO, power requirements make it diffi- tion with operator-to-operator information and maneuver
cult to use terrestrial radar systems to track cislunar objects. plan sharing, government and private sector satellite oper-
Laser-ranging systems might be feasible for tracking objects ators use TLE data for planning and managing daily satellite
in cislunar space. operations. Militaries use TLE data to track the satellites and
spacecraft of other nations as part of SSA operations. Astron-
An object in GEO can be tracked by an optical telescope or
omers and amateur space object trackers on Earth use TLE
RF receiver at a fixed location on Earth’s surface. Objects
datasets to plan space observations. Launch operators and
in LEO are tracked by ground-based radars that do not
government and commercial operators planning on-orbit
maintain positive custody of each tracked object as it
activities also use TLE data for planning purposes.
orbits Earth. Rather, an object’s position is confirmed when
– 30 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
Keplerian orbital mechanics, used to model objects in GEO spacecraft and ground stations on Earth. The position
or lower orbits, assume any two objects with mass—for of the Apollo Command Module could be calculated by
example, Earth and a spacecraft—will impact each other’s measuring the Doppler shift of signals from the space-
orbital position. This is called a “two-body problem.” Unlike craft, transmitting and analyzing ranging signals sent to
objects in these lower orbits, objects in cislunar space are the spacecraft, and using two receivers on Earth to con-
also affected by the mass and gravity of the Moon. This duct VLBI analysis on Apollo signals. Additionally, the Apollo
is called a “three-body problem.” This means that cislu- spacecraft were equipped with inertial guidance systems,
nar trajectories cannot be effectively approximated or which do not require external signals to operate.203 For Arte-
predicted using equations designed for Keplerian orbital mis missions, NASA’s Orion capsule uses an inertial guid-
mechanics.199 Object predictions from models used today ance system, GPS receivers, star-tracking technology, and
for objects in GEO or lower orbits would remain accurate an optical camera-based navigation system. Like Apollo,
for only a very short period because the TLE format and its Orion—or any cislunar spacecraft emitting radio signals—
underlying equations are not suitable for non-Keplerian, can be tracked from Earth using VLBI techniques.204
three-body-problem conditions.
In addition to the provision of real-time data on position,
Since 2011, NASA has relied on the Multimission Automated a spatial reference and associated coordinate system
Deepspace Conjunction Assessment Process (MADCAP), is needed for both cislunar space and the surface of the
managed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, to assess Moon to precisely measure locations within the given ref-
the risks of collision for spacecraft orbiting the Moon and erence framework. A three-dimensional reference system
Mars. Given the lack of SSA infrastructure beyond GEO, the would be needed for cislunar space, while a two-dimen-
positions of spacecraft orbiting the Moon and Mars are sional system would suffice for the lunar surface.205
provided by operators using radiometric tracking involv-
ing ground-based antennas.200 Some scientists are also Commonly used for objects in Earth orbit, an Earth-fixed coor-
trying to use very long baseline interferometry (VLBI) to dinate system using x, y, and z measurements from Earth’s
track objects in cislunar space.201 Both of these techniques center could be used for objects in cislunar space. Alterna-
require that the object being tracked emit a radio signal, tively, a Moon-fixed coordinate system could be created
so this method could not be used to track non-operational using x, y, and z measurements from the center of the Moon.
satellites or inert space debris or fragments. Either a spherical coordinate system using latitude and lon-
gitude or a standardized Cartesian coordinate system that
models the Moon as a flat plane would work for the Moon’s
POSITIONING, NAVIGATION, surface. An example of a Cartesian coordinate system used
for Earth is the Universal Transverse Mercator. Currently, the
AND TIMING
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, NASA, the U.S. Geo-
logical Survey, and the U.S. Space Force are collaborating on
Currently, global PNT data from satellites is provided by four
an effort to design a reference system for the Moon.206
different navigation satellite systems: the United States’ GPS,
Russia’s Global Navigation Satellite System (GLONASS), Chi-
In addition to the difficulties receiving timing data from
na’s BeiDou Navigation Satellite System, and the European
GPS or other existing PNT systems in cislunar space, time
Union’s Galileo. The systems are all located in MEO at alti-
itself behaves differently on the Moon due to the theory
tudes between 19,000 kilometers and 24,000 kilometers.202
of relativity. The motion of the Moon relative to Earth, as
There are also two regional PNT systems: the Indian Regional
well as its lower gravity, means that time actually moves 56
Navigation Satellite System (NavIC) and Japan’s Quasi-Ze-
microseconds faster on the Moon than on Earth each day.
nith Satellite System (QZSS).
While this difference may seem unimportant on the sur-
face, precision time measured to nanoseconds is typically
Since these satellite networks are designed to provide PNT
needed for navigation. Even if the moon had its own PNT
data to terrestrial users, their signals are directed toward
constellation, potentially like what ESA envisioned as part
Earth and not deep space. Unless PNT signals are received on
of its Moonlight initiative, there would still be a 56-micro-
Earth and redirected into cislunar space or PNT satellite sys-
second discrepancy per day between lunar time and Earth
tems are redesigned to transmit into space as well as toward
time.207 In , as part of the National Cislunar Sci-
Earth, spacecraft in cislunar space would need some other
ence and Technology Strategy, the White House directed
way to reliably determine their position and establish timing.
NASA to lead and coordinate with other federal agencies
As described in earlier chapters, the United States, China, and
on efforts to establish a lunar time standard.208
Europe have plans to create lunar PNT infrastructure.
It is worth recalling that the Apollo missions were able to
DEBRIS AND DETRITUS
use two different navigation methods on their journeys to
the Moon and back. Their main source of navigation data
Only 12 humans have been to the Moon, but humankind
came from radio signals exchanged between the Apollo
has already left a significant amount of trash on the lunar
– 31 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
surface. The current tally includes boosters from over NASA later cleared the spacecraft for launch, determining it
50 crashed landings, almost 100 bags of human waste, could withstand the expected radiation.215 Meanwhile, Fire-
and miscellaneous items such as golf balls, boots, and a fly’s first CLPS mission, slated for launch in 2024, will carry
feather. In total, it is about 200 tons of trash.209 the RadPC-Lunar payload, a radiation-tolerant computing
system built under the LSITP program, to test the architec-
To date, according to experts, there are only a few dozen ture’s ability to operate in high-radiation environments.216
pieces of human-made space debris in cislunar space.210
But it may prove difficult to keep debris levels low, as there Existing technologies can be used to shield equipment and
are no internationally agreed-to, end-of-life disposal spacecraft from radiation levels expected on and near the
guidelines for spacecraft operating in cislunar space and Moon; however, since shielding adds costs and weight,
no standard debris-mitigation procedures. Additionally engineers designing lunar systems will need to carefully
cislunar operators are already facing increased collision balance requirements for radiation protection with other
risks between the few spacecraft in lunar orbit, heightening considerations impacting overall system requirements.
the risk that collisions produce debris fragments.211 A lack
of agreed-to, cislunar, operator-to-operator, space-safety,
LUNAR REGOLITH
coordination, and data-sharing mechanisms—particularly
ones that include China—probably leads to increasing col-
The solid rock of the Moon’s surface is covered in regolith, a
lision risk and debris-fragment creation.
layer of loose, dust-like material composed of small, elec-
Any debris fragments near the Earth–Moon L and L trostatically charged particles made by meteor impacts.
4 5
Lagrange points might produce particularly acute risks to The average particle size of this lunar dust is about 72
cislunar operators in these areas. At these stable equilibria, micrometers. For comparison, the width of a human hair
balanced gravitational forces trap both natural and arti- is on average about 100 micrometers and the size of a
ficial debris into clouds, posing physical risks to satellites particle of grass pollen is about 25 micrometers.217 Medi-
stationed at or around these points. This same problem um-grain sand is about 500 micrometers in size.
does not exist at L, L , or L , all of which are unstable equilib-
1 2 3 As there is virtually no air on the moon, wind does not dis-
ria and thus allow debris to dissipate more easily.212
turb the regolith. Rather, the regolith can be disturbed by
electrical force (since it is composed of charged particles),
RADIATION micrometeoroid impacts, and engine landing and launch
plumes. Due to the low gravity of the Moon and lack of air to
Objects in cislunar space are exposed to higher levels of solar slow down the particles by drag, engine plumes can eject
radiation (also called “solar energetic particles”) and cosmic regolith at very high speeds (measured in several kilome-
radiation (also called “galactic cosmic rays”) than those ters per second) over very large distances.218 Additionally,
experienced nearer to Earth, posing a risk to microelectron- these plume–surface interactions are presently poorly
ics and human safety. Unprotected by either an appreciable understood, making the effects that lunar landings may
atmosphere or magnetic field, the lunar surface is battered have on surrounding spacecraft unpredictable. A pay-
by intense solar radiation when facing the Sun. load built by NASA flying aboard Firefly’s first CLPS mission,
known as Stereo Cameras for Lunar Plume Surface Studies
Due to the orbit of the Lunar Gateway around the Moon, (SCALPSS) 1.1, will image the behavior of the regolith as the
it will be positioned in interplanetary space 80 percent of lander touches down on the Moon to better understand the
the time.213 This is a very different environment than near- surface effects of lunar landings.219 The collection of in situ
Earth orbit—the location of every other long-term habitable data will complement NASA’s existing efforts to model and
space station to date, where the main source of radiation is predict these interactions.220
the inner Van Allen belt, produced when cosmic radiation
interacts with Earth’s magnetic field. When compared to Previous operations on the Moon have demonstrated that
past stations, the Lunar Gateway will experience notably regolith can harm electrical and mechanical systems.
higher levels and greater intensities of cosmic radiation, Lunar regolith and dust also pose a risk to humans, caus-
which has a higher relative biological effectiveness (i.e., to ing issues with respiration. Since the early days of the space
what extent a dose of radiation affects human tissue) than race, operators of missions to the Moon have had to con-
Van Allen–belt radiation.214 tend with the impacts of lunar regolith on their missions.
In fact, as Apollo 17 commander Gene Cernan observed,
Microelectronics can unexpectedly fail if they are not “Dust is probably one of our greatest inhibitors to a nominal
appropriately designed to withstand the expected levels operation on the Moon.”221 Lunar activities that disturb and
of radiation in cislunar space. In , NASA revealed generate plumes of regolith have the potential to cause
that microelectronics in the Europa Clipper spacecraft problems, especially in areas such as the lunar south pole,
probably do not have sufficient radiation hardening to sur- where there is expected to be a relatively high density of
vive the radiation environment around Jupiter; however, missions from a variety of nations.
– 32 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
HUMAN HAIR
100 microns
LUNAR DUST
72 microns
POLLEN
30 microns
Figure 7: Regolith Size
Source: Kristen John, “The Challenge of Lunar Dust,” NASA, June 8,
2022, 
The%20Challenge%20of%20Lunar%20Dust%20-%20v4.pdf.
To address concerns about lunar dust, many experts cite the materials brittle and damage connections.225 To survive the
need for greater coordination between lunar operators to intense cold and heat, electronic equipment on the lunar
prevent harmful interference between space systems, par- surface needs to have power to regulate temperature.
ticularly around spacecraft launch and landing sites. The
concept of a safety zone enshrined in the Artemis Accords The lunar night itself also creates power-generation and
is one such effort to establish a coordination approach to power-storage challenges that will need to be addressed
mitigate impacts of lunar dust on lunar operations. for sustained operations. For example, spacecraft orbiting
the Moon and on the lunar surface using solar power must
In addition to policy solutions, experts have raised tech- have sufficient battery capacity (or another form of power
nical solutions to the hazards posed by dust. To this end, storage) to operate throughout the lunar night.
NASA has developed an electrodynamic dust shield, which
prevents dust accumulation using electric fields, and plans There are several locations on the Moon that, while not
to send this payload to the Moon in 2024 aboard the Blue always receiving light, are exposed to longer periods of sun-
Ghost M1 mission.222 NASA is also exploring the use of dif- light than most locations on the lunar surface. Referenced
ferent materials to prevent dust accumulation on sensitive earlier in the report, these are called peaks of eternal light, a
surfaces such as solar panels, sensors, and optical sys- term whose original meaning referred to theoretical points
tems. To test the “stickiness” of lunar regolith to different on any celestial body that are always lit by the Sun.226 On
objects, NASA is launching its Regolith Adherence Charac- the Moon, these points are located on the ridges of craters
terization payload aboard Blue Ghost M1 to measure rego- in both the north and south poles.
lith accumulation rates across different test materials.223
Placement of solar power generation equipment at these
locations would have the advantage of being able to pro-
HEAT AND POWER duce electricity more consistently. These locations will
undoubtedly become valuable lunar real estate, and infra-
Temperatures on the lunar surface range from 250 degrees structure built by one nation on these ridges could influence
Fahrenheit (121°C) during the lunar daytime to −208 degrees the value of nearby positions. Specifically, construction of
Fahrenheit (−133°C) at night. There are some places on the equipment at one location may impact the ability of other
Moon where temperatures can drop to −410 degrees Fahr- nearby locations to see the Sun, possibly creating shadow-
enheit (−246°C) or lower.224 Microelectronics cannot typically ing over what had previously been a peak of eternal light.
survive these extreme temperature swings, which can make Currently, there is no lunar power grid to transmit electric-
– 33 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
ity from these locations near the poles to other parts of the Any increase in cislunar activities will place additional
Moon. Additionally, the accumulation of lunar dust and rego- strain on already taxed communications capacity able to
lith on the surface of solar panels risks dampening electricity support lunar missions. In addition, given that one side of
generation. This risk will be particularly pronounced in areas the Moon always faces away from Earth, connectivity for
of potentially high landing activity, such as the lunar south all parts of the Moon will also require a way to relay data
pole, due to plume–surface interactions.227 from the far side of the Moon. This will necessitate a relay
satellite or infrastructure on the lunar surface to transmit
Looking beyond solar power, nuclear power systems offer data around the Moon. As noted earlier, China is currently
attractive solutions for the Moon because they are not operating two lunar relay satellites and has plans to build
dependent on the Sun and can provide consistent gen- additional lunar communications infrastructure. Described
eration throughout the lunar day and night. In 2022, NASA in earlier sections, the U.S. LunaNet framework and the
and the U.S. Department of Energy announced contracts European Moonlight initiative are also focused on fielding
with three companies to begin work designing concepts new lunar communications capabilities.
for nuclear power systems to be placed on the Moon.228
Additionally, Roscosmos announced in that it is Several private companies are currently attempting to
considering building a nuclear power plant on the Moon in establish private communications networks in hopes of
partnership with China.229 supplying lunar communication capabilities as a service
to lunar and cislunar operators. Intuitive Machines is plan-
ning on launching its Khon-series relay satellites aboard
COMMUNICATIONS its CLPS missions.233 These satellites will form the core of
Intuitive Machines’ Khonstellation, its cislunar data-relay
A spacecraft in orbit around Earth can only communicate
service. In 2024, NASA awarded Intuitive Machines a con-
when it has line of sight to ground stations, also called
tract for providing lunar communications and navigation
“gateways,” that are configured to support communica-
services, in addition to awarding Intuitive Machines a study
tions for that particular spacecraft. Often, a spacecraft is
contract for a lunar communications and navigation user
not in continuous communications with Earth, as there are
terminal and Aalyria Technologies a study contract on
times during its orbit when there are no suitable ground
lunar networking.234 Also slated to launch aboard an Intu-
stations within line of sight. In some cases, satellites in
itive Machines mission is a Nokia cellular network funded
orbit share ground station infrastructure, so satellite oper-
through NASA’s Tipping Point initiative that will enable com-
ators have to preschedule transmission times on specific
munication between the Nova-C lander, the Micro-Nova
ground-based antennas.
hopper, and Lunar Outpost’s rover, establishing the first
cellular network on the Moon in order to demonstrate the
However, satellites in GEO can maintain continuous com-
feasibility of such a network for future missions.235 Addi-
munications with one ground station, rather than having
tionally, ispace is planning on deploying two relay satellites
to hand off communications between ground stations,
during its APEX 1.0 mission, slated for 2026, as part of a future
because the orbits of those satellites mean they are always
data-relay service.236
stationary relative to a point on Earth’s surface. For this
reason, NASA operates a constellation of satellites in GEO
that can maintain communications with specific ground
stations while serving as a data relay for spacecraft in
lower Earth orbits.230
Due to the large distances, communications between Earth
and spacecraft beyond GEO require larger ground-based
antennas with higher gain than those used for communica-
tions with spacecraft in near-Earth orbits. This means that
NASA equipment and other similar infrastructure designed
for communications with spacecraft beyond GEO, such as
NASA’s Deep Space Network (DSN), is limited and usually in
high demand. Communications are scheduled for short
windows dependent not only on the availability of band-
width, but also on when the ground infrastructure has line
of sight to the spacecraft. Like the DSN, China operates a
deep-space communications network that could support
lunar communications.231 The European Union also oper-
ates a deep-space communications system called Euro-
pean Space Tracking (ESTRACK).232
– 34 –

KEY CONSIDERATIONS
FOR NEXT STEPS
PHOTO // MIKROMAN6/ROYALTY-FREE/GETTY IMAGES
– 35 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
ooking forward, it is worth restating the anticipated ties equally applies to activities in other parts of space.
Lamount of U.S. and foreign cislunar activity expected in
the decade ahead. In total, there are about 40 significant As international space activities increase, particularly
missions, though often several payloads are associated with by the United States and China, space will become less
each mission, from all nations headed to the Moon over the safe and secure if these deficits are not addressed. A lack
next several years, with many of those missions associated of agreed-to and followed space rules of the road will
with NASA’s Artemis program and CLPS initiative.237 increase spacecraft collision risks. A lack of consensus by
spacefaring nations on property rights, space resources,
There is no indication of a lunar gold rush because there and permissible activities will lead to a greater chance of
are no strong revenue-generating businesses centered misunderstandings and miscalculations by space powers,
around cislunar activities anchored by commercial cus- potentially increasing geopolitical tensions and sparking
tomers. The Moon’s surge in commercial activity is tied conflict on Earth. Ultimately, a lack of consensus increases
mostly to NASA’s CLPS program, where many payloads many dimensions of risk: risk of misunderstandings, risk of
ferried to the lunar surface are for NASA and commercial collisions, risk to businesses and investment decisions, risk
rideshare payloads are effectively subsidized by NASA. to life and property, and risk of conflict.
Truly commercial uses of the Moon remain a chimera, with
no obvious sign this could change in the next several years. These hazards are particularly acute for cislunar space. For-
The cislunar domain is dominated by government activi- tunately, there are various international efforts trying to fill
ties, with the missions planned for the next decade oper- these gaps, some by the United Nations and another, poten-
ated by governments, strongly tied to government funding tially complementary initiative in the United States’ Artemis
and use, or taking advantage of government-subsidized Accords. No matter the forum or agreement, the solution
rideshare missions. should involve both the United States and China. In 2023, the
United States and China together accounted for around 80
percent of the world’s space launches. Most of the planned
There is no indication of a lunar missions to cislunar space over the next decade are spon-
sored or supported by these two countries.
gold rush because there are
no strong revenue-generating Agreement between the United States and China on an
businesses centered around approach to address the cislunar space governance gaps
discussed in this report would de facto establish the interna-
cislunar activities anchored by
tional standard. But neither the United States nor China can
commercial customers. unilaterally fill those gaps, as each nation will throw sand in
the gears of any attempt by the other to impose its will on
the world. This is no different than U.S. and Soviet behavior
Though the United States has released a cislunar tech- during the Cold War. Other entities such as Russia, India, and
nology strategy, it has not articulated a comprehensive ESA are still important, but they are not kingmakers.
national cislunar strategy or goals, nor a cislunar national
security strategy. However, the U.S. Space Priorities Frame- While there is no need to disregard or contradict the OST
work provides sufficient guidance to help shape U.S. cis- and other international space agreements, addressing the
lunar efforts. Given the lack of clear commercial business identified space governance gaps need not happen as
cases for cislunar space, with no indication this absence part of UN processes. There are over 100 nations in COPUOS,
is due to government action or inaction, efforts aimed at only a small fraction of which operate spacecraft. An even
addressing the cislunar challenges identified in this report smaller fraction has a space launch capability, and fewer
should primarily focus on furthering U.S. government still have cislunar plans. The COPUOS ATLAC could provide a
requirements and not premature—or potentially imagi- forum for U.S. and Chinese dialogue on cislunar governance
nary—commercial ones. questions, though it is too early to predict its chances of suc-
cess—especially as COPUOS members continue to disagree
on whom to name as vice chairs of the body.
ADDRESSING CISLUNAR
Looking for ways to address thorny international issues
GOVERNANCE GAPS outside of UN processes is not a new idea. Consider the
Antarctic Treaty, whose groundwork was laid not at the
This report asserts that international space governance
United Nations but by the IGY and a subsequent confer-
frameworks lack needed clarity and definition in three
ence organized by the United States that included only 12
main areas: space rules of the road, property rights and
nations. Interestingly, the United States has endorsed a
resource use, and permissible activities. These governance
concept for an International Lunar Year, taking inspiration
gaps are not unique to cislunar space. The same lack of
from the IGY and International Polar Year of 2007 to 2008,
clarity and definition for these areas in current space trea-
possibly opening the door for an approach to cislunar
– 36 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
space modeled after Antarctica.238 Additionally, the Arctic topic with potential adversaries. The council’s founders
Council was formed using a similar mindset; only nations instead focused on areas where member interests over-
with Arctic territory have a vote. These models could be lapped, such as sustainable development and environ-
applied to new cislunar space governance negotiations. mental protection of the region.
This might mean setting criteria for participation in a new
international convention on space issues that relates to a Another lesson from the non-space frameworks is that
nation’s stake and existing presence in space. Only nations there is no one-size-fits-all approach for structuring nego-
that meet the criteria get a seat at the table. tiations or the final form of an agreement. Except for the
Arctic Council, all of the non-space frameworks discussed
At a minimum, the United States and China need a seat, originate from official treaties. Though it is merely an inter-
particularly on measures and frameworks designed to governmental forum, deliberations in the Arctic Council
ensure the safe and sustainable use of the space envi- have produced three official treaties and been effective
ronment. Approaches that produce multiple governance at maintaining dialogue and coordination between Arctic
frameworks overlapping with the same operational envi- nations. Of the non-space frameworks, only UNCLOS origi-
ronments and geographical regions of space increase nated directly from a UN-facilitated process. For example,
risks for space operators. International air travel and the negotiations that produced the Convention on Inter-
maritime shipping only work as well as they do because national Civil Aviation pre-dated the creation of the United
national leaders negotiated and agreed to one set of rules Nations. The Antarctic Treaty was negotiated specifically
governing global air travel and one for maritime traffic. outside of the United Nations so that the agreement would
not be influenced by the UN General Assembly and mem-
It would not be a good outcome to have more than one bers with no contemporary presence on the continent.
set of rules of the road for space—for example, one agreed
upon by the United States and its traditional allies and one
agreed upon by China and perhaps Russia. That would be Another lesson from the non-
like having cars on the same highway following different
space frameworks is that there is
sets of traffic rules. There is no reason to think China could
no one-size-fits-all approach for
unilaterally impose its own rules on the United States or that
the United States could impose its own rules on China. This is structuring negotiations or the
arguably the limit of the Artemis Accords, as China is unlikely
final form of an agreement.
to sign onto it. But the principles outlined in the accords
could be used during any future discussions and negotia-
tions with China on new cislunar space governance rules.
A final lesson—perhaps the most important of the three—
is that the non-space frameworks described in this report
are durable because they can evolve over time. Each of the
LEARNING FROM EXISTING
frameworks has consultative mechanisms baked into its
GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORKS structure so there is no need to negotiate a new treaty or
agreement and involve the entire UN General Assembly or
To frame and inform initiatives aimed at filling cislunar the 102-member COPUOS to make decisions. These mecha-
space governance gaps, this report introduced and dis- nisms have allowed framework parties to update and clar-
cussed existing treaties and arrangements covering non- ify aspects of their governance structures to keep up with
space domains that could offer lessons for space. Since no changes in technologies, societal preferences, business use
existing non-space framework has every element needed cases, environmental considerations, and other factors that
to cover all space governance gaps, the report’s authors have changed over time. Some of these agreement-spe-
have described which parts of each system could apply to cific mechanisms take the form of annual or regular meet-
space and cislunar activities. ings at which binding and non-binding decisions can be
made. Of the space-specific treaties and frameworks noted
One lesson from the non-space examples is that national
in this report, only the ITU has such a mechanism, which has
leaders did not let unbridgeable differences on issues
probably contributed to the union’s longevity.
tangential to core topics undermine efforts to negotiate
consensus positions. For example, the Antarctic Treaty
avoids any position on territorial claims, as the treaty BUILDING LUNAR INFRASTRUCTURE
drafters realized that no consensus on that issue was pos-
sible. Insistence on addressing claims would have torpe- Improving cislunar infrastructure can optimize U.S. cislunar
doed the agreement. In a similar vein, the Arctic Council efforts, particularly activities aiming for a long-term, sus-
excludes military matters from its agenda, recognizing that tained presence on the lunar surface. Specifically, NASA’s
all nations with Arctic territory already use the region for vision for the Moon will require processes and systems that
military purposes and have no desire to coordinate on that can provide power and communications, protect elec-
– 37 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
tronics and humans from radiation, provide positioning aNet communications framework, an open-architecture
and navigation services, collect cislunar SSA information, approach intended to facilitate allied collaboration around
manage cislunar space traffic to minimize spacecraft col- lunar connectivity.
lision risks, and mitigate the risks to lunar operations from
regolith dust. There are several helpful examples for structuring interna-
tional cooperation in space. One is the ISS model, which
Many planned lunar activities will happen in the same assigned responsibilities for the provisions of certain
areas, specifically in the south pole, so there will be a need space-station components to individual countries. A nearly
for one nation’s systems to coexist near other nations’ identical model is the Artemis program, which trades oppor-
missions. Effective solutions for this issue are not primarily tunities to fly payloads and astronauts on Artemis missions
technical ones but depend on the development of coordi- for equipment, systems, and components provided by other
nation mechanisms and baseline agreement regarding countries for use in the Artemis architecture and Lunar Gate-
how to behave on the Moon and in lunar orbit. Improved way. Notably, other than the UAE, all other nations contribut-
coordination mechanisms between spacecraft operators, ing to the Lunar Gateway are also ISS partners. A third model
both transiting space between GEO and the Moon and in is ESA’s Ariane project, which led to the development of the
lunar orbit, would likely go a long way toward mitigating the Ariane 1 rocket and creation of Arianespace, a company that
threat of cislunar spacecraft collisions and minimizing risks operates this family of launch vehicles.
of new debris creation.239
It is worth taking a closer look at the approach used for
As noted, efficiently supporting upcoming U.S. lunar activ- the Ariane project, which is the same way that ESA funds
ities will require certain technological solutions, including and manages all its projects. For the original Ariane proj-
communications, power, and navigation and positioning ect, about 10 partner nations pooled funds and assigned
information. Though the United States, ESA, China, and other one organization to act as project manager.240 Each partner
spacefaring entities can continue to pursue their own cislu- nation signed up for the project knowing it would receive a
nar goals, there is an opportunity to address infrastructure certain rate of return on national funding provided to the
challenges using an international model. The United States project. Specifically, domestic firms in each partner coun-
is already thinking internationally by developing the Lun- try received contracts totaling 80 percent of the amount
Figure 8: Selected Planned Activities in the Lunar
South Pole Area
Source: Authors’ research based on multiple sources.
EXPECTED
MISSION NAME COUNTRY OF ORIGIN
LAUNCH YEAR
2025 Intuitive Machines 2 - Athena, CLPS Mission United States
2025 Griffin Mission 1 (Astrobotic), CLPS Mission United States
2025 Lunar Surface Access Service 1 (LSAS-1) Germany and Israel
2025 Lunar Polar Exploration Mission (LUPEX) Japan and India
2025 Blue Moon Mark 1 (Blue Origin), Uncrewed Demonstration United States
2026 Artemis III United States
2026 Flexible Logistics and Exploration (FLEX) Mission 1 (Astrolab) United States
2026 Chang’e 7 China
2026 Starship Human Landing System (HLS) Uncrewed Demonstra- United States
tion
2026 Starship Human Landing System (HLS) Crewed Demonstration United States
2028 Chang’e 8 China
2030 Artemis IV United States
2035 International Lunar Research Station China and Russia
TBD Blue Moon Mark 2 (Blue Origin) United States
– 38 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
invested by their governments.241 This approach allows approach has merit but recognize that it would take time to
partners to invest in their own domestic industries and pool negotiate and establish the foundations for an internation-
resources for greater impact. alized cislunar infrastructure operator, effectively equiva-
lent to a lunar public utility company.
There are several benefits to modeling an effort on the Ariane
project for building and operating lunar infrastructure. The In the meantime, something should be done to reduce the
first is that it allows for cost sharing across many nations inter- risk of collisions for spacecraft operating in cislunar space,
ested in developing and using lunar infrastructure for their including in lunar orbit. There is also a need to coordinate
own national efforts. If there were commercial use cases for activities on the lunar surface, particularly in the Moon’s
developing such infrastructure on the Moon, there would be south pole due to the amount of expected activity there
no need for an international, government-sponsored activity, (see Figure 8). Even with the paltry number of active space-
as market forces would be driving the development of lunar craft orbiting the Moon—only about a handful today—there
infrastructure. But government missions and missions pri- are increasing collision risks.242 Fortunately, unlike orbits
marily supported or subsidized by government funding are closer to Earth, there are very few known human-made
the only real customers for lunar infrastructure services. An debris objects or fragments in cislunar space and only one
international, government-funded and -driven approach recent example of human-made debris unintentionally
would thus ensure the final product matches space agen- hitting the Moon’s surface.243 International agreed-to rules
cies’ science and exploration needs. and norms on mitigating the creation of cislunar debris—
accepted by both the United States and China, as well as
Another benefit to an internationalized initiative is that it other lunar operators—could go a long way in protecting
could attenuate national pressure to compete for certain the cislunar environment from new human-made debris.
lunar real estate, such as peaks of eternal light (ideal for
solar power infrastructure) or Earth–Moon Lagrange points One way to address both cislunar space traffic coor-
(ideal for communications nodes). Internationalized cis- dination and deconfliction and prevent the creation of
lunar architecture could also be an anchor for peaceful new cislunar debris is to incorporate these elements into
coexistence in space, just as the ISS maintains a peaceful international space governance frameworks. Though the
link between the United States and Russia today. Finally, authors of this report believe that negotiators and diplo-
an international approach can be structured to provide mats, especially U.S. and Chinese ones, can ultimately find
benefits to national industries. The Ariane 1 and ESA models common ground on these and other space governance
guarantee national governments’ return on investment issues, the authors recognize this may take time. Until
that gets funneled directly back to their domestic industrial then, cislunar governmental and private sector spacecraft
bases. The ISS and Artemis programs, while structured dif- operators from all nations can do a lot on their own, taking
ferently, do the same thing. These models effectively offer matters somewhat into their own hands.
protectionist returns to domestic industries while pursuing
international collaboration. Spacecraft operators can vastly reduce the risk of colli-
sions and events that could cause new cislunar debris by
increasing coordination and data sharing. No operator
IMPROVING OPERATOR wants its satellite to collide with another or to hit a piece of
space debris, so arguably all operators share a common
COORDINATION AND DATA SHARING
goal, one of self-interest.
Ideally, new cislunar monitoring infrastructure, possibly
comprising systems on Earth and the Moon as well as
Spacecraft operators can
spacecraft in cislunar space, will provide comprehensive
vastly reduce the risk of
SSA services for operators of cislunar spacecraft. Infra-
structure could also provide positioning and tracking data collisions and events that could
about spacecraft and human-made systems operating
cause new cislunar debris by
on the Moon’s surface. There are plans in the next 10 years
increasing operator-to-operator
to build and launch space systems to collect SSA data in
cislunar space. One or two SSA data-collecting satellites, coordination and data sharing.
however, would only be able to provide coverage on a very
small portion of cislunar space—just a drop in the ocean.
Outside of diplomatic channels or government-to-gov-
Building robust and comprehensive SSA infrastructure
ernment negotiations, operators and other space stake-
will be costly and take time. As noted in the previous sec-
holders from the United States, China, and other nations
tion, one idea to address this need would be to create an
are working together in forums such as the Consultative
international partnership to build cislunar infrastructure,
Committee for Space Data Systems and International
such as an SSA network. The authors of this report think this
Organization for Standards to establish mechanisms and
– 39 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
best practices for improved information sharing. These cause a reevaluation of this calculus, but that does not rule
efforts are not tied specifically to cislunar space, but to out the consideration that a nonmilitarized cislunar space
space operations more broadly and touch on issues such is the right answer now. And “right answer now” means
as data standards, sharing spacecraft position informa- “for the foreseeable future”—a span measured in many
tion, and operator notification procedures to forestall colli- decades. In the far distant future, realistic plans for human
sions. Such discussions could eventually include elements colonies on the Moon and other planets, lunar economic
important to cislunar operators, particularly consider- equities threatened by space piracy, cislunar deployment
ations for landing and launch from the Moon’s surface and of weapons of mass destruction targeting Earth or non-
measures to prevent the creation of new cislunar debris. Earth locations would mean reevaluating the wisdom of
These discussions can also help build trust between U.S. keeping military activities out of cislunar space.
and Chinese space stakeholders.
The United States faced similar considerations regard-
ing Antarctica in the 1950s. At that time, Washington was
MILITARY USE AND concerned that the Cold War could extend to Antarctica,
sparking both a territorial land grab and race to establish
NATIONAL SECURITY
military dominance there. Smartly, the United States saw
no benefit from that development and worked diplomati-
Outer space up to GEO is widely used for military purposes,
cally to preserve the status quo, which meant keeping mil-
with significant national security equities in those regions
itary activities out and preserving the region for scientific
of space. The U.S. military relies on space to fight and win
research. Fortunately, the Soviet Union agreed to insulate
wars, with satellites between LEO and GEO performing
Antarctica from military activities as long as it could be
all or parts of critical missions, such as navigation, mis-
a party to the negotiation and subsequent agreement. It
sile warning, and communications. Additionally, the U.S.
is critical to highlight that this arrangement only worked
economy depends on space, with power utilities, commu-
because the United States gave the Soviet Union a seat at
nications networks, and financial institutions using pre-
the negotiating table.
cision timing derived from GPS satellites. Commercial air
travel is increasingly dependent on GPS. Many American
Both the United States and China talk publicly about
households, businesses, and first responders use satellites
national security considerations for cislunar space. But the
for broadband connectivity. In these regions of space, the
core considerations on both sides are national prestige
United States has many reasons to protect and defend its
and fears about getting shut out of cislunar opportunities,
equities—which do face counterspace threats. rather than strategic military advantage.245 As with Ant-
arctica, it may be better for the United States and China to
But beyond GEO, things start to look very different. There
keep military uses and activities away from cislunar space
are no current cislunar assets that enable joint operations.
for as long as possible.
The United States would gain no clear strategic military
advantage over China or any potential adversary from mil-
What happens if the United States seeks to preserve the
itary activities in cislunar space. No technology that could
nonmilitarized cislunar status quo through an agreement
be conceivably deployed within the next few decades
with China and other nations, with compliance monitored
could influence military outcomes on Earth. There is also
via new civil and commercial cislunar SSA capabilities?
no appreciable economic activity or national presence to
Achieving this outcome would free up U.S. defense fund-
defend and protect other than initiatives focused on sci-
ing and resources for better use elsewhere, possibly on
ence and exploration. Though future human habitation
other military space capabilities closer to Earth. China, like
or significant economic activities on other planets could
the Soviet Union regarding Antarctica, might be recep-
change these dynamics, there is no sign this will happen
tive to preserving a nonmilitarized cislunar environment.
anytime soon. If the military needed SSA data on cislunar
But if China does not agree on that goal, the United States
space, it could obtain that from systems operated by civil-
should let China waste resources. Every renminbi spent on
ian or commercial entities.
a Chinese military cislunar development—to win a race
that would grant it no strategic advantage—is a renminbi
Every dollar the U.S. military spends on a cislunar-focused
not spent on some other system that could truly harm U.S.
project is a dollar taken away from another effort that likely
national security. For the foreseeable future, nothing China
has more effect on U.S. national security. In particular, if U.S.
could do in cislunar space would alter the military calculus
defense and military officials are concerned about fielding
on Earth should it ever find itself in a direct conflict with the
capabilities to deter and address threats from China by
United States.
2027, any resources spent today on cislunar national secu-
rity capabilities could be better spent elsewhere.244 Nothing
In the interest of optimizing the use of military resources,
the U.S. military deploys to cislunar space can help win a
the United States may want to consider whether DoD cis-
war on Earth, whether with China or anybody else. Tech-
lunar programs, such as those at DARPA and AFRL, should
nological developments and other circumstances could
be funded from the defense or non-defense budgets.
– 40 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
Programs like AFRL’s Oracle-Mobility and Oracle-Prime
are designed to test cislunar SSA and tracking technolo-
gies, which could support civilian and commercial cislu-
nar activities and align with NASA’s cislunar infrastructure
needs. There is no reason such programs could not be
managed and funded by NASA or another civilian agency.
Additionally, the U.S. government could contract with com-
panies, who could build and operate commercial systems,
to provide cislunar SSA data and services. Alternatively or
concurrently, the United States could undertake an inter-
national approach to building such cislunar infrastructure.
In either case, DoD and other national security users who
want SSA data for cislunar space domain awareness, such
as for monitoring China’s cislunar activities, could obtain
such data from civilian or commercial systems.
– 41 –

RECOMMENDATIONS
PHOTO // MIKROMAN6/ROYALTY-FREE/GETTY IMAGES
– 42 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
ased on the preceding observations on potential this report do not see any now or in the foreseeable future
Bpaths forward, the authors offer the following recom- and assert that cislunar space looks like Antarctica did in the
mendations for consideration by U.S. policymakers: 1950s. If it does not foresee any strategic national security
objectives, the United States should advocate for the same
Address governance gaps and coordination with China: approach taken in Antarctica, meaning no military uses
To create a safe and sustainable cislunar environment so of cislunar space, reinforcing the OST provisions already
that the United States can achieve its national objectives, prohibiting military activities on the Moon and other celes-
the United States should address cislunar space gover- tial bodies. This would require an agreement between the
nance and coordination gaps in a manner that includes United States and China, ideally including other spacefaring
input from China. These governance gaps include agree- nations, to keep military interests out of cislunar space. Such
ment on permissible activities, property rights and space an agreement could be negotiated outside of the United
resources, and space rules of the road. Additionally, the Nations, mirroring the approach taken for the Antarctic
United States should work with China to increase opera- Treaty. Arguably, this process could proceed hand in hand
tor-to-operator data and information sharing related to with the first recommendation in this section, meaning that
space safety. Other nations should be included, but coor- part of the effort to create a cislunar space council might
dination protocols and governance agreements and prin- involve efforts to ensure the nonmilitarized status of cislunar
ciples negotiated without China are not worth the time. space. This approach does not rule out U.S. national secu-
Ideally, solutions to address these issues for cislunar space rity interest in monitoring cislunar space and assumes DoD
can address these issues across all of space too. and other national security users could acquire cislunar SSA
data from civilian or commercial sources for such purposes.
There are several possible approaches that could be used
by the United States to address cislunar governance gaps.
Pursue international collaboration on infrastructure:
An approach modeled on the Arctic Council—not a treaty Solutions to address cislunar infrastructure require-
but an intergovernmental agreement—could provide a ments can best be addressed internationally by pooling
body through which the United States and China, as well resources and creating shared capabilities that potentially
as other spacefaring nations meeting certain member- lessen the motivations for friction over desirable lunar real
ship criteria, could discuss cislunar space governance estate such as the peaks of eternal light. An international
and coordination. As with the Arctic Council, this approach approach that allows partner nations to earn returns on
would exclude direct involvement with the United Nations their investments and support domestic industries pro-
and its full membership. In taking the first steps in estab- vides an incentive to participate. The Ariane project offers
lishing such a cislunar space council, the United States one model for consideration. Such internationalized infra-
could look to the Ottawa Declaration, which established structure could help preserve the peaceful, scientific use
the Arctic Council, for guidance. An International Lunar of the Moon and cislunar space, creating a strong founda-
Year conference—already being discussed by the United tion for the United States and other nations to pursue their
States—could also aim to facilitate discussions on cislunar scientific research and exploration goals. Shared interna-
governance among nations with lunar equities. Should it tional ownership of cislunar architecture could also form
pursue any of these paths, the United States could base the sinews of peace between nations with cislunar activ-
its negotiating positions on the Artemis principles. But as ities, even in times of tension. Arguably, the ISS has served
the report’s authors have already noted, it is not realistic to that purpose, remaining one of the last places of peaceful
expect that China would sign the Artemis Accords, since it collaboration between the West and Russia over the past
was not consulted during their formulation. two years. Future internationalized cislunar infrastructure
could serve the same purpose and advance not only U.S.
Additionally, the United States could try to find consen-
national interests, but the interests of all humankind.
sus with China on cislunar coordination issues through
UN arrangements such as the ATLAC. As noted in an ear- The report’s authors also want to reiterate a few things that
lier section, this action team was established to provide the United States does not need to do. There is presently no
a forum for U.S.-Chinese discussions on cislunar space need for a specific U.S. cislunar strategy or national secu-
coordination. Ultimately, a modest goal for the ATLAC may rity cislunar strategy. Existing U.S. space goals and strat-
be to build trust between the two powers. Trust is needed egy documents are sufficient, though U.S. government
for both sides to grow more comfortable directly engag- implementation plans will prove useful. While investments
ing with each other on cislunar space safety, coordination, in new cislunar SSA technologies and systems are import-
and governance issues—and later in drafting more com- ant, improved coordination mechanisms and operator
prehensive agreements on broader space governance, data sharing can vastly improve cislunar space safety and
coordination, and safety issues. sustainability. Incremental steps today to improve cislunar
SSA data collection are sufficient to meet the anticipated
Ensure nonmilitarized status: The United States should
traffic, giving the United States time to develop a holistic
assess whether there are compelling strategic cislunar
and thoughtful architecture for a future cislunar SSA net-
military uses or goals. The authors of this report assert that
– 43 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
work. Taking steps to create agreed-to rules to prevent the
creation of new cislunar space debris further lessens any
urgency to build cislunar SSA infrastructure. Additionally,
there is no need for U.S. military projects focused on cis-
lunar space.
Ultimately, the authors acknowledge that these recom-
mendations—collaborating with China, limiting military
activities beyond GEO, and internationalizing lunar infra-
structure—challenge aspects of conventional U.S. thinking
on space. This means that implementing one or all of these
recommendations will require significant political will. But
the United States should not be afraid to make a course
correction resulting in an outcome that better aligns with
U.S. interests, even if that path seems hard.
– 44 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
CONCLUSION
PHOTO // MIKROMAN6/ROYALTY-FREE/GETTY IMAGES
– 45 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
“We choose to go to the Moon. . . . We choose to go to the
Moon in this decade and do the other things, not because
they are easy, but because they are hard.”
— President John F. Kennedy, 1962246
The current geopolitical environment makes it harder to
CONCLUSION
work collaboratively with China. The Cold War provided a
There is a lot of promise—and hype—around the future of similarly tense environment—yet it was against this back-
humankind in cislunar space. But there are also hard real- drop that the United States, Soviet Union, and dozens of
ities. Only the United States and China are positioned to nations produced the OST and several subsequent space
develop and launch crewed spacecraft to the Moon. Russia agreements. This context produced the Apollo-Soyuz
has ambitious plans for crewed lunar missions but insuffi- mission, laying the groundwork for the ISS decades later.
cient resources to make them happen. Without the United Cislunar space and beyond is probably the best environ-
States and China, there would be very few missions to cis- ment—maybe the only environment today—where the
lunar space over the next decade. Several other nations are United States and China, as well as many other nations,
planning uncrewed missions to the Moon, but most of these can find common ground on shared interests. The United
missions are hitching a ride on a U.S. spacecraft. While States should seize this opportunity, both for U.S. national
some of these future missions will be operated by compa- interests and for humankind more broadly.
nies, they are still inextricably tied to government funding
and objectives—particularly to NASA funding. Today, there
are few, if any, realized business cases separate from the
government for cislunar activities.
Almost all activities in cislunar space, including in orbit and
on the surface of the Moon, focus on science and research.
As with Antarctica, there is no clear or obvious strategic
military benefit derived from cislunar space. Militarily “win-
ning” in cislunar space, no matter how one defines it, would
do nothing to alter the outcome of a conflict between the
United States and China—or any other possible adversary.
Military funding and resources can be better spent else-
where. It is in the interests of the United States to keep mil-
itary uses out of cislunar space as long as possible and to
retain the focus on science, leaving open the door to future
business use cases such as mining.
There is no indication of a lunar gold rush, though cislu-
nar traffic has steadily increased since the 1980s. If there is
one area of increased activity deserving of attention, it is
the lunar south pole. There will likely be more overlapping
activities from various nations at the lunar south pole than
anywhere else on the Moon. Governments’ investments in
technologies and infrastructure and their efforts to address
space governance gaps should be aimed at making sure
that activity in this region and in lunar orbits can be done
safely, sustainably, and efficiently. Given that the current
focus is science and exploration, the United States should
continue to collaborate with partners worldwide, poten-
tially taking an international approach to building and
operating cislunar infrastructure to meet these goals. Fur-
thermore, the United States should try to collaborate with
China, particularly on cislunar space governance and
operational space safety coordination.
– 46 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Clayton Swope is the deputy director of the Aerospace
Security Project and a senior fellow in the International
Security Program at the Center for Strategic and Inter-
national Studies (CSIS). Before joining CSIS, Swope led
national security and cybersecurity public policy for
Amazon’s Project Kuiper, an initiative to increase global
broadband access through a constellation of satellites in
low Earth orbit. While at Amazon, he also worked on cloud
policy issues. Prior to his time at Amazon, Swope served
as a senior adviser on national security, space, foreign
affairs, and technology policy issues for a member of the
U.S. House of Representatives. He also worked for more than
14 years at the Central Intelligence Agency, serving largely
in the Directorate of Science and Technology. He holds a
bachelor of science in mechanical engineering from the
University of Notre Dame.
Louis Gleason is a former research intern for the CSIS Aero-
space Security Project. Prior to CSIS, Louis worked on the
policy team at Astroscale U.S. He is a graduate of Boston
College and is currently applying to law school to study air
and space law.
– 47 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
13 “What Is a Lagrange Point?” NASA, updated March 27, 2018,
ENDNOTES

lagrange-point/.
Executive Summary
14 M. J. Holzinger, C. C. Chow, and P. Garretson, A Primer
1 Norman Mailer, Of a Fire on the Moon (Penguin Random on Cislunar Space (Wright-Patterson Air Force Base:
House, 2014), 42. U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory, 2021), 
afrl.af.mil/Portals/90/Documents/RV/A%20Primer%20
2 David R. Williams, “Lunar Exploration Timeline,” NASA on%20Cislunar%20Space_Dist%20A_PA2021-1271.
Goddard Space Flight Center, updated July 17, 2024, https:// pdf?ver=vs6e0sE4PuJ51QC-15DEfg%3d%3d, 7.
nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/lunar/lunartimeline.html.
15 “Moon Missions,” NASA, accessed August 17, 2024, https://
3 Elizabeth Howell, “Missions to the Moon: Past, Present and science.nasa.gov/moon/missions/.
Future,” Space.com, July 15, 2023, 
16 “Pioneer 4,” NASA, accessed August 17, 2024, 
all-moon-missions.
nasa.gov/mission/pioneer-4.
4 Jonathan Amos and Harrison Jones, “First Commercial
17 “Hiten/Hagoromo,” NASA, accessed August 17, 2024, https://
Moon Mission Marks New Era for Space travel,” BBC,
science.nasa.gov/mission/hiten-hagoromo/.
February 23, 2024, 
environment-68381392.
18 “Every Mission to the Moon, Ever,” The Planetary Society,
accessed August 17, 2024, 
5 Vivian Wang, “China Announces Plan to Land Astronauts
space-missions/every-moon-mission; and Stephanie
on Moon by 2030,” New York Times, May 28, 2023, https://
Waldek, “Europe›s JUICE Probe Will be 1st to Use Gravity

of Earth and Moon to Slingshot to Jupiter,” Space.com,
moon-2030.html; and Denise Chow, “The Space Between
November 20, 2023, 
Earth and the Moon Is About to Get a Little More Crowded,”
spacecraft-executes-major-maneuver
NBC News, January 22, 2023, 
science/space/space-earth-moon-get-little-crowded- 19 Ibid.
rcna64333.
20 “AEI Space Data Navigator” (database), American Enterprise
6 Andrew Jones, “China’s Yutu 2 Rover Still Going Strong after Institute, accessed August 17, 2024, 
4 Years on the Moon’s Far Side,” Space.com, January 26, org/.
2023, 
years-moon.
National Cislunar Policies and Activities
7 Mandy Mayfield, “China’s Cislunar Space Ambitions Draw 21 Ramin Skibba, “This Private Moon Lander Is Kicking Off a
Scrutiny,” National Defense Magazine, May 29, 2020, https:// Commercial Lunar Race,” Wired, April 25, 2023, 
 wired.com/story/ispace-moon-lander/.
china-cislunar-space-ambitions.
22 David R. Williams, “Future Chinese Lunar Missions,” NASA
8 Ben Ashman, “GNSS to the Moon,” presentation to the Civil Goddard Space Flight Center, updated April 22, 2024,
GPS Service Interface Committee, September 21, 2021, 
 future.html.
9 Sue Nelson, “Moon Race 2.0: Why So Many Nations and 23 UNESCO, “UNESCO’s Lunar Mission: Preserving Humanity’s
Languages and Cultures on the Moon,” press release, May
Private Companies Are Aiming for Lunar Landings,”
10, 2024, 
BBC, February 16, 2024, 
lunar-mission-preserving-humanitys-languages-and-
article/20240216-moon-race-20-why-so-many-nations-
cultures-moon.
are-aiming-for-lunar-landings; Mark Holmes, “The Lunar
Economy: From Vision to Reality,” Via Satellite, July 22, 2019,
24 Mary Hagedorn et al., “Safeguarding Earth’s Biodiversity by

Creating a Lunar Biorepository,” BioScience 2024, no. 0 (July
from-vision-to-reality/; and Leonard David, “Why Is There So
31, 2024): biae058, 
Much Military Interest in the Moon?” Space.com, December
advance-article/doi/10.1093/biosci/biae058/7715645.
8, 2023, 
moon. 25 Jacqueline Feldscher, “Interstellar Lab Wants to Send Roses
to the Moon,” Payload, June 10, 2024, 
Introduction and Background com/interstellar-lab-wants-to-send-roses-to-the-moon/.
10 “Cislunar,” Merriam-Webster.com, accessed July 16, 2024, 26 Andrew Jones, “Japan’s Mission to Bizarre Asteroid Phaethon
 Delayed to 2025,” Space.com, November 6, 2023, https://

11 Trudy E. Bell, “A New Paradigm for Lunar Orbits,” Phys. phaethon-launch-delay.
org, December 1, 2006, 
paradigm-lunar-orbits.html. 27 The White House, United States Space Priorities Framework
(Washington, DC: The White House, ), https://
12 Trudy E. Bell, “Bizarre Lunar Orbits,” Phys.org, November 7, 
2006, States-Space-Priorities-Framework-_-December-1-2021.
html. pdf.
– 48 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
28 Cislunar Technology Strategy Interagency Working Group, 42 “Artemis I,” NASA, updated March 27, 2024, 
National Cislunar Science and Technology Strategy nasa.gov/mission/artemis-i/.
(Washington, DC: National Science and Technology
Council, 2022), 43 “Artemis II,” NASA, updated July 25, 2024, 
uploads/2022/11/11-2022-NSTC-National-Cislunar-ST- gov/mission/artemis-ii/.
Strategy.pdf.
44 “Artemis III,” NASA, updated January 9, 2024, 
29 Charles Galbreath, Securing Cislunar Space and nasa.gov/mission/artemis-iii/.
the First Island off the Coast of Earth (Arlington, VA:
Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies, 2024), https:// 45 Kathryn Hambleton and Catherine E. Williams, “NASA’s
mitchellaerospacepower.org/securing-cislunar-space- Artemis IV: Building First Lunar Space Station,” NASA, March
and-the-first-island-off-the-coast-of-earth/. 29, 2024, 
building-first-lunar-space-station/.
30 Scott Detrow, Linah Mohammad, and Adam Raney, “NASA’s
Chief Is Worried about China Getting Back to the Moon 46 Emily Spreen, Kathleen Howell, and Diane C. Davis, “Near
First. Here’s Why,” NPR, May 6, 2024, Rectilinear Halo Orbits and Their Application in Cis-
org/2024/05/06/1249249941/nasa-bill-nelson-moon- lunar Space,” paper presented at 3rd IAA Conference
artemis-china-starliner. on Dynamics and Controls of Space Systems, Moscow:
May 30–June 1, 2017, 
31 Marc Berkowitz and Chris Williams, Strategic Implications publication/319531960_NEAR_RECTILINEAR_HALO_ORBITS_
of China’s Cislunar Space Activities (Arlington, VA: National AND_THEIR_APPLICATION_IN_CIS-LUNAR_SPACE.
Security Space Association, 2023), 
47 Dylan Connell and Briana R. Zamora, “Gateway: Up Close
wp-content/uploads/2023/08/Strategic-Implications-of-
in Stunning Detail,” NASA, June 25, 2024, 
Chinas-Cislunar-Space-Activities-8.21-final.pdf.
gov/missions/artemis/gateway/gateway-up-close-in-
32 Communications Act of 1934, U.S. Code 47 (1934), § stunning-detail/.
151 et seq., 
48 “Gateway,” The European Space Agency, accessed
communications-act-1934.pdf.
August 17, 2024, 
33 National Aeronautics and Space Act, U.S. Code 51 (1958), § Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Exploration/Gateway;
201, NASA, “NASA, Canadian Space Agency Formalize
and-space-act-of-1958-unamended/. Gateway Partnership for Artemis Program,” press release,
December 16, 2020, 
34 Commercial Space Launch Act, Pub. L. No. 98-575, 98 nasa-canadian-space-agency-formalize-gateway-
Stat. 3055 (1984), partnership-for-artemis-program/; and NASA, “NASA,
STATUTE-98/STATUTE-98-Pg3055.pdf . Government of Japan Formalize Gateway Partnership for
Artemis Program,” press release, January 13, 2021, https://
35 U.S. Commercial Space Launch Competitiveness Act, Pub. 
L. No. 114-90, 129 Stat. 704 (2015), formalize-gateway-partnership-for-artemis-program/.
gov/114/plaws/publ90/PLAW-114publ90.pdf.
49 “Gateway Space Station,” NASA, updated June 12, 2023,
36 Morgan DePagter, “‘Who Dares, Wins:’ How Property Rights and
in Space Could Be Dictated by the Countries Willing to Make “FY 2025 Budget Request,” NASA, April 15, 2024, 
the First Move,” Chicago Journal of International Law Online nasa.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/nasa-fiscal-year-
1.2 (Summer 2022), 2025-budget-summary.pdf.
who-dares-wins-how-property-rights-space-could-be-
dictated-countries-willing-make. 50 Philip Baldwin et al., “NASA’s Deep Space Network (DSN)
Lunar Exploration Upgrades (DLEU),” presentation at
37 Marcia Smith, “White House Reveals Its Mission Authorization 17th International Conference on Space Operations,
Plan for Novel Space Activities,” SpacePolicyOnline.com, Dubai: March 6–10, 2023, 
November 15, 2023, citations/20230001339/downloads/NASA_DLEU%20
white-house-reveals-its-mission-authorization-plan-for- SpaceOps_R2%20(1).pdf.
novel-space-activities/.
51 Katherine Schauer and Danny Baird, “LunaNet: Empowering
38 Clayton Swope, “Mission Authorization: Decoding the Space Artemis with Communications and Navigation
Policy Dilemma,” CSIS, Critical Questions, December 20, Interoperability,” NASA, October 7, 2021, 
2023, gov/humans-in-space/lunanet-empowering-artemis-
decoding-space-policy-dilemma. with-communications-and-navigation-interoperability/;
Lunar Communications Relay and Navigation Systems,”
39 “Fiscal Year 2025 Budget Request,” NASA, updated August NASA, accessed October 9, 2024, 
29, 2024, projects/LCRNS.
40 “Artemis,” NASA, updated July 3, 2024, 52 “About CLPS,” NASA, updated February 22, 2024, https://
gov/feature/artemis/. 
41 NASA Office of Inspector General, NASA’s Management of 53 “Lunar Surface Instrument and Technology Payloads
the Artemis Missions (Washington, DC: NASA, 2021), https:// (LSITP),” NASA, updated July 30, 2024, 
oig.nasa.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/IG-22-003.pdf, gov/planetarymissions/lunar-surface-instrument-and-
4. technology-payloads-lsitp/.
– 49 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
54 “LunaH-Map,” NASA, accessed August 17, 2024, https:// 68 “International Lunar Research Station (ILRS),” Deep Space
science.nasa.gov/mission/lunah-map. Exploration Laboratory of CNSA, , 
unoosa.org/documents/pdf/copuos/2023/TPs/ILRS_
55 Tricia Talbert, “NASA Confirms New SIMPLEx Mission Small presentation20230529_.pdf.
Satellite to Blaze Trails Studying Lunar Surface,” NASA,
December 2, 2020, 69 Andrew Jones, “China Wants 50 Countries Involved in Its ILRS
nasa-confirms-new-simplex-mission-small-satellite-to- Moon Base,” SpaceNews, July 23, 2024, 
blaze-trails-studying-lunar-surface/. com/china-wants-50-countries-involved-in-its-ilrs-
moon-base/.
56 Matthew D. Sambora, “Demonstration Rocket for Agile
Cislunar Operations (DRACO),” Defense Advanced Research 70 Ling Xin, “A BeiDou-like Satnav System for the Moon?
Projects Agency, April 29, 2020, Chinese Scientists Plot a Possible Route,” South China
program/demonstration-rocket-for-agile-cislunar- Morning Post, July 14, 2024, 
operations. china/science/article/3270195/satnav-system-moon-
chinese-scientists-plot-possible-route.
57 “Collaborating Toward Integrated Commercial Lunar
Infrastructure,” Defense Advanced Research Projects 71 Andrew Jones, “China to Establish Organization to
Agency, December 5, 2023, Coordinate International Moon Base,” SpaceNews, April
events/2023-12-05. 28, 2023, 
organization-to-coordinate-international-moon-base/.
58 “Catalyzing an Integrated Lunar Economy: Initial Results of
the LunA-10 Capability Study,” Defense Advanced Research 72 “Queqiao,” NASA Space Science Data Coordinated
Projects Agency, May 10, 2024, Archive, August 17, 2024, 
spacecraft/display.action?id=QUEQIAO.
events/2024-05-10.
73 Andrew Jones, “China’s Queqiao-2 Relay Satellite Ready
59 Franchesca Conner, “AFRL’s Oracle Developing Nation’s
to Support Lunar Far Side Sample Mission,” SpaceNews,
1st Cislunar Space Situational Awareness Capability,” Air
April 12, 2024, 
Force Research Laboratory, December 11, 2023, https://
relay-satellite-ready-to-support-lunar-far-side-sample-
afresearchlab.com/news/afrls-oracle-family-of-systems-
mission/.
developing-nations-1st-cislunar-space-situational-
awareness-capabilities/.
74 Andrew Jones, “Chinese Scientists Outline Major Cislunar
Space Infrastructure Project,” SpaceNews, July 30, 2024,
60 Astrolab, “Astrolab’s FLEX Rover to be Launched on

Upcoming SpaceX Mission to the Moon,” press release,
cislunar-space-infrastructure-project/.
March 31, 2023, 
75 “European Service Module,” European Space Agency,
61 Garrett Shea, “NASA, Australia Sign Agreement to Add Rover
September 16, 2024, 
to Future Moon Mission,” NASA, October 12, 2021, https://
Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/Orion/

European_Service_Module.
agreement-to-add-rover-to-future-moon-mission/.
76 “Artemis II,” European Space Agency, September 16, 2024,
62 Australian Space Agency “Moon to Mars Initiative:

Launching Australian Industry to Space,” press release,
Robotic_Exploration/Orion/Artemis_II.
February 16, 2021, 
mars-initiative-launching-australian-industry-space.
77 “New Names for the Gateway,” European Space Agency,
updated April 3, 2024, 
63 Jeff Foust, “MDA to Build Robotic Arm for Lunar Gateway,”
Exploration/Human_and_Robotic_Exploration/New_
SpaceNews, June 27, 2020, 
names_for_the_Gateway.
to-build-robotic-arm-for-lunar-gateway/.
78 “Argonaut,” European Space Agency, accessed August 17,
64 Canadian Space Agency, “Jeremy Hansen: First Canadian
2024, 
Astronaut to Fly to the Moon,” press release, April 3, 2023,
and_Robotic_Exploration/Exploration/Argonaut.

jeremy-hansen-first-canadian-astronaut-to-fly-to-the- 79 “Lunar Pathfinder,” Surrey Satellite Technology Ltd, accessed
moon.html. August 17, 2024, 
missions-in-build/2024/lunar-pathfinder.
65 Adam Mann, “China’s Chang’e Program: Missions to the
Moon,” Space.com, February 1, 2019, 80 “Blue Ghost Mission 2 to the Moon,” Firefly Aerospace,
com/43199-chang-e-program.html. accessed August 9, 2024, 
missions/blue-ghost-mission-2/.
66 Simonetta Di Pippo, “With Its Latest Moon Mission Success,
China’s Space Program Has the US in Its Sights,” Space. 81 Geeta Pandey, “Chandrayaan-3: India Makes Historic
com, July 16, 2024, Landing near Moon’s South Pole,” BBC, August 23, 2023,
exploration-program-targets-us. 
67 Andrew Jones, “China Sets Out Preliminary Crewed Lunar 82 Andrew Jones, “Japan and India Plan 2025 Moon Mission
Landing Plan,” SpaceNews, July 17, 2023, to Hunt for Water near the Lunar South Pole,” Space.com,
com/china-sets-out-preliminary-crewed-lunar-landing- September 28, 2023, 
plan/. 2025-moon-mission-lunar-south-pole.
– 50 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
83 Andrew Jones, “India Plans Chandrayaan-4 Moon Sample around Moon in 2029,” TASS, January 28, 2020, 
Return, Will Involve Private Sector,” SpaceNews, May 14, 2024, com/science/1113619.

moon-sample-return-will-involve-private-sector/. 100 Elizabeth Howell, “Russia Wants to Build Its Own Space
Station, as Early as 2028,” Space.com, July 28, 2022, https://
84 “Beresheet,” NASA, accessed August 17, 2024, https:// 
science.nasa.gov/mission/beresheet/. timeline.
85 Elizabeth Howell, “Israel Will Aim for the Moon Again in 2024 101 Daisy Dobrijevic, “Danuri: Facts about the Korea Pathfinder
with Beresheet 2 Mission,” Space.com, December 17, 2020, Lunar Orbiter (KPLO),” Space.com, January 4, 2023, https://
 
moon-mission-2024. kplo-moon-mission.
86 Elena Gubbini et al., “Lunar Surface Access Service,” 102 “Korea’s National Space Agency Attends UN Conference
presentation at ESA Space for Inspiration Conference, on Lunar Activities,” Korea JoongAng Daily, June 19, 2024,
Noordwijk, Netherlands: July 12–13, 2022, 
esa.int/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/Lunar-Economy- business/industry/Koreas-national-space-agency-
Workshop_Lunar-Payload-Delivery-Services.pdf. attends-UN-conference-on-lunar-activities/2072347.
87 “Kaguya (SELENE),” Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency,
103 “Orbital Space Announces Privately Funded Lunar Mission
accessed August 17, 2024, 
from the Arab World,” Satnews, July 23, 2024, 
missions/spacecraft/past/kaguya.html.
satnews.com/2024/07/23/orbital-space-announces-
privately-funded-lunar-mission-from-the-arab-world/.
88 “Smart Lander for Investigating Moon (SLIM),” Japan
Aerospace Exploration Agency, accessed August 17, 2024,
104 Sally Boyani, “The Rashid Rover Didn’t Make It to the Moon,

but It’s a Success for Science,” Wired, May 3, 2024, https://
wired.me/gear/rashid-rover-worlds-most-compact-lunar-
89 Samantha Mathewson, “The Cold Lunar Night May Have
rover/.
Finally Swallowed Japan’s SLIM Moon Lander,” Space.com,
May 31, 2024, 
105 Jennifer Bell, “Dubai’s Ruler Announces New Moon Mission
unresponsive-jaxa-signal.
after UAE’s Rashid Rover Lunar ‘Crash,’” Al Arabiya, April 27,
2023, 
90 ispace, “ispace Announces Mission 2 with Unveiling of Micro
Dubai-s-ruler-announces-new-moon-mission-after-UAE-
Rover Design,” press release, November 16, 2023, https://
s-Rashid-Rover-lunar-crash-.
ispace-inc.com/news-en/?p=4954.
106 Abbey A. Donaldson, “NASA, United Arab Emirates Announce
91 Toyota, “Toyota Drives Lunar Exploration with Manned,
Pressurized Rover,” press release, March 15, 2019, Artemis Lunar Gateway Airlock,” NASA, January 7, 2024,
 
toyotatimes/27157958.html. emirates-announce-artemis-lunar-gateway-airlock/.
92 “Lunar Rover ‘YAOKI,’” Dymon, accessed August 17, 2024, 107 Uneeba Zameer Shah, “Pakistan’s First Moon Mission ‘iCube
 Qamar’ Launched,” The News (Pakistan), May 3, 2024,

93 Jeff Foust, “Japanese Astronauts to Land on Moon as Part moon-mission-icube-qamar-to-be-launched-today.
of New NASA Partnership,” SpaceNews, April 11, 2024, https://
spacenews.com/japanese-astronauts-to-land-on-moon- 108 Government of Mexico, “The Colmena Project, Mexico’s
as-part-of-new-nasa-partnership/. First Mission to the Moon, Gets Underway,” press release,
February 1, 2022, 
94 “Preliminary Data Shows Luna-25 Lunar Probe Collided with colmena-project-mexico-s-first-mission-to-the-moon-
Moon’s Surface – Roscosmos,” TASS, August 20, 2023, https:// gets-underway.
tass.com/science/1662683.
109 William Savinar, “Mexico’s Colmena Moon Landing Mission
95 Anatoly Zak, “Origin of the Luna-Glob Project,” Abandoned,” Courthouse News Service, January 9, 2024,
Russianspaceweb.com, updated April 5, 2023, https:// 
russianspaceweb.com/luna-glob-original.html. moon-landing-mission-abandoned/.
96 “Russia, China Agree on Joint Moon Exploration,” TASS, 110 Ayse Bocuoglu Bodur, “Türkiye’s 1st Spacecraft to Travel to
September 17, 2019, Moon in 2026,” Anadolu Agency, August 11, 2023, https://

97 Jeff Foust, “ESA Ends Cooperation with Russia on Lunar
travel-to-moon-in-2026/3047053.
Missions,” SpaceNews, April 13, 2022, 
com/esa-ends-cooperation-with-russia-on-lunar- 111 New Zealand Ministry of Business, Innovation, and
missions/. Employment, “NZ Space Sector Set to Star in Moon Mission,”
press release, June 27, 2022, 
98 “Russian Scientists Propose Roscosmos Create 2 Luna 27
about/news/nz-space-sector-set-to-star-in-moon-
Spacecraft – Roscosmos CEO,” Interfax, December 26, 2023,
mission.

99 “Russia’s Oryol New Spacecraft to Make Crewed Flight International Space Governance Frameworks
– 51 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
112 “Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in a New International Governance Instrument for Outer Space
the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon Resources?,” The Space Review, February 20, 2023, https://
and Other Celestial Bodies” [Outer Space Treaty], opened 
for signature December 19, 1966, 
oosa/en/ourwork/spacelaw/treaties/outerspacetreaty. 126 COPOUS, “Draft Mandate, Terms of Reference and
html. Methods of Work for an Action Team on Lunar
Activities Consultation),” A/AC.105/2024/CRP.12/
113 UNOOSA, “Status and Application of the Five United Nations Rev.2, June 25, 2024, 
Treaties on Outer Space, and Way and Means, Including oosadoc/data/documents/2024/aac_1052024crp/
Capacity-building, to Promote Their Implementation,” aac_1052024crp_12rev_2_0_html/AC105_C2_2024_
A/AC.105/C.2/2024/CRP.3, April 15, 2024, CRP12Rev02E.pdf.
unoosa.org/res/oosadoc/data/documents/2024/
aac_105c_22024crp/aac_105c_22024crp_3_0_html/ 127 Interview on July 30, 2024.
AC105_C2_2024_CRP03E.pdf.
128 “International Committee on Global Navigation Satellite
114 Outer Space Treaty. Systems (ICG),” UNOOSA, accessed August 19, 2024, https://

115 “Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,” UNOOSA,
accessed August 19, 2024, 129 “About International Telecommunication Union (ITU),” ITU,
en/ourwork/copuos/index.html. accessed August 19, 2024, 
Pages/default.aspx.
116 “About Us,” UNOOSA, accessed August 19, 2024, 
unoosa.org/oosa/en/aboutus/index.html. 130 Yvon Henri “Orbit Spectrum Allocation Procedures: ITU
Registration Mechanism,” presentation at 19th International
117 “Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return Wroclaw Symposium and Exhibition on Electromagnetic
of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Compatibility, Wroclaw, Poland: June 12, 2008, 
Outer Space” [Rescue Agreement], opened for signature itu.int/en/ITU-R/space/symposiumWroclaw2008/Wroclaw_
December 19, 1967, YH.pdf.
ourwork/spacelaw/treaties/introrescueagreement.html.
131 “Safeguarding Radio Astronomy on the Moon,” ITU News,
118 “Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused May 25, 2022, 
by Space Objects” [Liability Convention], opened for based-radio-astronomy-spectrum/.
signature November 29, 1971, 
en/ourwork/spacelaw/treaties/introliability-convention. 132 ITU, “World Radiocommunication Conference Revises
html. the ITU Radio Regulations to Support Spectrum Sharing
and Technological Innovation,” press release, December
119 “Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer 15, 2023, 
Space” [Registration Convention], opened for signature PR-2023-12-15-WRC23-closing-ceremony.aspx; and World
November 12, 1974, Radiocommunication Conference, “Resolution (WRC-23),”
ourwork/spacelaw/treaties/introregistration-convention. ITU, December 15, 2023, 
html. oth/0c/0a/R0C0A0000100015PDFE.pdf.
120 “Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon 133 “Artemis Accords,” NASA, updated June 13, 2024, https://
and Other Celestial Bodies” [Moon Agreement], opened for 
signature December 5, 1979, 
en/ourwork/spacelaw/treaties/intromoon-agreement. 134 Ibid.
html.
135 Abigail D. Pershing, “Interpreting the Outer Space Treaty’s
121 “Status of Agreement Governing the Activities of States on Non-Appropriation Principle: Customary International Law
the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,” United Nations Treaty from 1967 to Today,” Yale Journal of International Law 44,
Collection, accessed August 19, 2024, no. 1 (2019): 149–178, 
pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXIV- handle/20.500.13051/6733/Pershing.pdf?sequence=2.
2&chapter=24&clang=_en.
136 “The Artemis Accords: Principles for Cooperation in the
122 “Space Law Treaties and Principles,” UNOOSA, accessed Civil Exploration and Use of the Moon, Mars, Comets, and
August 19, 2024, Asteroids for Peaceful Purposes,” opened for signature
spacelaw/treaties.html. October 13, 2020, 
uploads/2022/11/Artemis-Accords-signed-13Oct2020.
123 “Long-term Sustainability of Outer Space Activities,” pdf?emrc=653a00.
UNOOSA, accessed August 19, 2024, 
org/oosa/en/ourwork/topics/long-term-sustainability-of- 137 Jack Wright Nelson, “The Artemis Accords and the Future of
outer-space-activities.html. International Space Law,” ASIL Insights 24, no. 31 (December
10, 2020), 
124 “Working Group on Legal Aspects of Space Resource Insights_2020_V24_I31.pdf.
Activities,” UNOOSA, accessed August 19, 2024, https://
 138 “United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea”
resources/index.html. (UNCLOS), Part V, opened for signature December 10, 1982,

125 Dennis O’Brien, “Will a Five-Year Mission by COPUOS Produce texts/unclos/unclos_e.pdf.
– 52 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
139 Jan Osburg and Mary Lee, “Governance in Space: Mining atcm.html.
the Moon and Beyond,” RAND Corporation, November 18,
2022, 153 “Key Documents of the Antarctic Treaty System,” Secretariat
governance-in-space-mining-the-moon-and-beyond. of the Antarctic Treaty, accessed August 19, 2024, https://
html. 
140 Wang Qiong et al., “IAF GNF Session: International 154 “The Antarctic Treaty Explained,” British Antarctic Survey,
Lunar Research Station International Science Project,” accessed August 19, 2024, 
presentation to International Astronautical Congress, antarctica/the-antarctic-treaty/the-antarctic-treaty-
Baku, October 2, 2023, explained/.
watch?v=7rwte0rJWeM.
155 Tony Press, “Antarctica: The Madrid Protocol 25 Years On,”
Australian Institute of International Affairs, October 5, 2016,
Non-space International Frameworks with

Analogues to Space Governance
antarctica-the-montreal-protocol-25-years-on/.
141 “UNCLOS.”
156 A. N. Cockcroft and J. N. F. Lameijer, “History of the
142 John Kraus, “Unmoored from the UN: The Struggle to Collision Regulations,” in A. N. Cockcroft and J. N. F.
Ratify UNCLOS in the United States,” The SAIS Review of Lameijer, A Guide to the Collision Avoidance Rules, 7th
International Affairs, June 26, 2023, edition (Oxford: Elsevier Science, 2012), available at
jhu.edu/unmoored-from-the-un-the-struggle-to-ratify- 
unclos-in-the-united-states/. uploads/2020/10/History_of_the_Collision_Regulations.pdf.
143 “UNCLOS,” Article 161. 157 Jeff Werner, “The History of the Rule of the Road – Sailing
Vessel History,” All at Sea, January 26, 2017, 
144 “Exploration Contracts,” International Seabed Authority, allatsea.net/the-history-of-the-rule-of-the-road/.
accessed August 19, 2024, 
exploration-contracts/. 158 “The Maritime Conference,” New York Times, March 27,
1889, 
145 Dánica Coto, “UN Body That Regulates the Deep Sea maritime-conference.html.
Tackles Proposed Mining Code amid Growing Concerns,”
Associated Press, July 15, 2024, 159 “Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing
isa-deep-sea-mining-jamaica-metals-a0af52ca0887b82 Collisions at Sea, 1972 (COLREGs),” International Maritime
c9aed5cc8c9c8e677. Organization, accessed August 19, 2024, 
org/en/About/Conventions/Pages/COLREG.aspx.
146 Deep Seabed Hard Mineral Resources Act, U.S. Code 30
(1980) §§ 1441 et seq., 160 “Convention on the International Maritime Organization,”
text/30/chapter-26. International Maritime Organization, accessed August 19,
2024, 
147 Jocelyn Trainer, “The Geopolitics of Deep-Sea Mining Convention-on-the-International-Maritime-Organization.
and Green Technologies,” United States Institute aspx.
of Peace, November 3, 2022, 
publications/2022/11/geopolitics-deep-sea-mining- 161 Arctic Council Secretariat, The Arctic Council: A Quick
and-green-technologies; and Bill Whitaker, “Why the U.S. Guide, 3rd edition (Tromsø: Arctic Council Secretariat, 2023),
Hasn’t Joined the Race for Deep Sea Mining in International 
Waters,” 60 Minutes, June 23, 2024, 427a-b874-78ce0e32bba4.
com/news/why-the-us-hasnt-joined-the-race-for-
deep-sea-mining-in-international-waters-60-minutes- 162 “Declaration on the Establishment of the Arctic Council,”
transcript/. Arctic Council, September 19, 1996, 
international.gc.ca/world-monde/international_relations-
148 Erin Blakemore, “Who Really Discovered Antarctica? relations_internationales/arctic-arctique/declaration_
Depends Who You Ask,” National Geographic, January 27, ac-declaration_ca.aspx?lang=eng.
2020, 
who-discovered-antarctica-depends-who-ask. 163 “Convention on International Civil Aviation,” International
Civil Aviation Organization, accessed August 19, 2024,
149 Ryan Alexander Musto, “Antarctic Arms Control at 60: A 
Precedent or a Pole Apart?” Wilson Center, December 2,
2019, 164 “The ICAO Council,” International Civil Aviation Organization,
arms-control-60-precedent-or-pole-apart. accessed August 19, 2024, 
icao/Council/Pages/council.aspx; and “Convention on
150 “Status Report on Antarctica,” Office of the Historian, U.S. International Civil Aviation,” U.S. Department of State,
Department of State, August 24, 1958, updated April 13, 2019, 
gov/historicaldocuments/frus1958-60v02/d276. uploads/2019/05/176-ICAO-Convention-5.3.2019.pdf.
151 “The Antarctic Treaty,” Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty,
Cislunar Governance and Policy Challenges

165 Maggie Koerth-Baker, “Who Makes the Rules for Outer
152 “ATCM and Other Meetings,” Secretariat of the Antarctic Space?” NOVA, November 30, 2015, 
Treaty, accessed August 19, 2024, wgbh/nova/article/space-law/.
– 53 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
166 Saharsh Panjwani, “Fifty Years of the Outer Space Treaty: no. 4 (1997): 370–84, 
Challenges and Need for a New Treaty,” Project Statecraft, org/Articles/research_library/WayneWhite98-2.pdf.
October 8, 2020, updated August 24, 2021, 
projectstatecraft.org/post/fifty-years-of-the-outer-space- 180 “Outer Space Treaty,” Article II.
treaty-challenges-and-need-for-a-new-treaty.
181 Paul Whitfield-Jones, “One Small Step for Property Rights
167 Sophie Goguichvili, Alan Linenberger, Amber Gillette, and in Outer Space?,” Mayer Brown, May 21, 2020, 
Alexandra Novak, “The Global Legal Landscape of Space: mayerbrown.com/en/insights/publications/2020/05/one-
Who Writes the Rules on the Final Frontier?” Wilson Center, small-step-for-property-rights-in-outer-space.
October 1, 2021, 
182 “International Space Law,” Space Foundation, accessed
global-legal-landscape-space-who-writes-rules-final-
August 19, 2024, frontier.
brief/international-space-law/.
168 UNOOSA, “United Nations Treaties and Principles on Outer
183 Moriba Jah, “Space Environmentalism: Toward a Circular
Space, Related General Assembly Resolutions and Other
Economy Approach for Orbital Space,” National Academy of
Documents,” ST/SPACE/61/Rev.1, December 11, 2013, https://
Engineering, April 25, 2024, 

org/news/2024/04/space-environmentalism-toward-a-
pdf.
circular-economy-approach-for-orbital-space.
169 Bailey DeSimone, “How the Antarctic Treaty of 1959
184 Martin Elvis, Tony Milligan, and Alanna Krolikowski, “The
Influenced the Outer Space Treaty of 1967,” Library of
Peaks of Eternal Light: A Near-Term Property Issue on the
Congress Blogs, January 28, 2022, 
Moon,” arXiv, August 2, 2016, 
law/2022/01/how-the-antarctic-treaty-of-1959-influenced-
the-outer-space-treaty-of-1967/.
185 William P. Clark, “Reagan and the Law of the Sea,” Heritage
Foundation, October 9, 2007, 
170 Laura Montgomery, “The Outer Space Treaty and Prohibited
global-politics/commentary/reagan-and-the-law-the-
Military Space Activities,” Nonproliferation Policy Education
sea.
Center, Occasional Paper 2304, May 2, 2023, 
org/the-outer-space-treaty-and-prohibited-military-
186 Timothy G. Nelson, “The Moon Agreement and Private
space-activities-occasional-paper-2304/.
Enterprise: Lessons from Investment Law,” ILSA Journal of
International & Comparative Law 17: no. 2 (2010), https://
171 Galbreath, Securing Cislunar Space.
nsuworks.nova.edu/ilsajournal/vol17/iss2/6.
172 Namrata Goswami and Bleddyn Bowen, “High Ground or
187 James Hardman, “For All Mankind? The United States’ Race
High Fantasy: Defense Utility of Cislunar Space,” Aerospace
to Redefine Space Law,” University of Cincinnati Law Review,
Corporation, May 13, 2024, 
March 23, 2023, 
default/files/2024-05/Wilson_HighGround_20240416.pdf.
states-race-to-redefine-space-law/.
173 Ibid.
188 Passant Rabie, “Satellite Collisions Are a Mounting Threat.
Updated ‘Rules of the Road’ Could Help,” Gizmodo, April
174 Karla de Souza Torres and A. F. B. A. Prado, “Changing
5, 2023, 
Inclination of Earth Satellites Using the Gravity of the Moon,”
prevention-collisions-space-ssc-1850303054.
Mathematical Problems in Engineering 2006, no. 1 (): 1–13, 
189 “Outer Space Treaty,” Article IX.
MPE/2006/13690.
190 Jessy Kate Schingler, “Imagining Safety Zones: Implications
175 Bo-yong He, Peng-bin Ma, and Heng-nian Li, “Properties
and Open Questions,” Space Review, June 8, 2020, https://
of the Lunar Gravity Assisted Transfers from LEO to the

Retrograde-GEO,” Scientific Reports 11, no. 18813 (September
22, 2021), 
Cislunar Operational and Infrastructure Challenges
98231-1.
191 “Space Situational Awareness,” Space Foundation,
176 Andrew Jones, “China Looked at Putting a Monitoring accessed August 19, 2024, 
Satellite in Retrograde Geostationary Orbit via the Moon,” org/space_brief/space-situational-awareness/.
SpaceNews, October 20, 2022, 
china-looked-at-putting-a-monitoring-satellite-in- 192 Brian Weeden, “Space Situational Awareness Fact Sheet,”
retrograde-geostationary-orbit-via-the-moon/. Secure World Foundation, , 
media/205874/swf_ssa_fact_sheet.pdf.
177 Frans G. von der Dunk, “The Origins of Authorisation: Article
VI of the Outer Space Treaty and International Space Law,” 193 “Data Sharing: Risk vs Reward for Space Sustainability,”
Space, Cyber, and Telecommunications Law Program Space Data Association, accessed August 19, 2024, https://
Faculty Publications 69 (2011), 
edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1068&context=spacelaw.
194 Thomas G. Roberts, “Popular Orbits 101,” Aerospace Security
178 “UNCLOS,” Part XI, Section 2, Project, CSIS, November 30, 2017, 
convention_agreements/texts/unclos/part11-2.htm. aerospace101/earth-orbit-101/.
179 Wayne N. White, Jr., “Real Property Rights in Outer Space,” 195 Matthew F. Marshall et al., Cross-Disciplinary Deep Space
Proceedings of the International Institute of Space Law 1997, Radar Needs Study (El Segundo, CA: Aerospace Corporation,
– 54 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
2023), White House, April 2, 2024, 
atr-2023-01267.pdf. gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/04/Celestial-Time-
Standardization-Policy.pdf.
196 Bell, “Bizarre Lunar Orbits.”
209 Chris Impey, “Analysis: Why Trash in Space Is a Major
197 David A. Vallado, Paul Crawford, Richard Hujsak, and T.S. Problem with No Clear Fix,” PBS, September 3, 2023, https://
Kelso, “Revisiting Spacetrack Report #3,” paper presented 
at AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Specialist Conference and space-is-a-major-problem-with-no-clear-fix/.
Exhibit, Keystone, CO: August 21–24, 2006, 
org/publications/AIAA/2006-6753/AIAA-2006-6753.pdf; 210 Vishnu Reddy, “Two Astronomers Are Working to Track
and “Demystifying the USSPACECOM Two-Line Element Set Space Junk Around the Moon,” Astronomy, February 6, 2023,
Format,” Keep Track, accessed August 19, 2024, 
keeptrack.space/deep-dive/two-line-element-set/. are-working-to-track-space-junk-around-the-moon/.
198 T.S. Kelso, “NORAD Two-Line Element Set Format,” CelesTrack, 211 Jeff Foust, “Lunar spacecraft receive dozens of collision
updated July 1, 2022, warnings,” SpaceNews, July 11, 2024, 
documentation/tle-fmt.php. com/lunar-spacecraft-receive-dozens-of-collision-
warnings/.
199 Holzinger, Chow, and Garretson, “A Primer on Cislunar
Space.” 212 Nathan R. Boone and Robert A. Bettinger, “Spacecraft
Survivability in the Natural Debris Environment near the
200 Zahi B. Tarzi, Brian T. Young, and David S. Berry, “Deriving Stable Earth-Moon Lagrange Points,” Advances in Space
Event Thresholds and Collision Probability for Automated Research 67, no. 8 (April 15, 2021): 2319–32. 
Conjunction Assessment at Mars and the Moon,” NASA, org/10.1016/j.asr.2021.01.047.
, 
uploads/2022/08/aas_22-042_paper.pdf?emrc=878ced. 213 Claudio Corti and K. Whitman, “Galactic Cosmic Rays
and Solar Energetic Particles in Cis-Lunar Space,” Bulletin
201 Ashley Hume, “Johns Hopkins APL Is Setting the Path to of the AAS, July 31, 2023, 
Prevent Traffic Jams in Space,” Johns Hopkins Applied publication/373618696_Galactic_Cosmic_Rays_and_
Physics Laboratory, December 5, 2022, Solar_Energetic_Particles_in_Cis-Lunar_Space.
edu/news/news-releases/221205-apl-cislunar-traffic-
management. 214 Claudio Corti et al., “Galactic Cosmic Rays and Solar
Energetic Particles in Cis-Lunar Space,” Bulletin of the AAS
202 Mahashreveta Choudhary, “What Are Various GNSS 55, no. 3 (2023), 
Systems?” Geospatial World, November 20, 2019, https:// release/1.

gnss-systems/. 215 “A $5 Billion NASA Mission Looked Doomed. Could Engineers
Save It?,” New York Times, September 24, 2024, 
203 “Positioning on the Moon: Developments in Cislunar nytimes.com/2024/09/17/science/nasa-europa-clipper-
Navigation,” CAST Navigation, October 31, 2023, https:// radiation.html.
castnav.com/positioning-on-the-moon-developments-
in-cislunar-navigation/. 216 Chris Major et al., “Overview of the Upcoming RadPC-
Lunar Mission,” paper presented at 2021 IEEE Aerospace
204 Greg Holt, Chris D’Souza, and Michael Wasinger, “An Conference, Big Sky, MT: March 6–13, 2021, 
Overview of the Artemis I Navigation Performance,” msuextension.org/blameres/vitae/publications/d_
NASA, January 14, 2023, conference_full/conf_full_051_lunar_mission_overview_
citations/20230000714/downloads/AAS-23-057_Artemis_1_ mar21.pdf.
Navigation_HoltDsouzaWasinger_FINALfinal.pdf.
217 Kristen John, “The Challenge of Lunar Dust,” NASA, June 8,
205 NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “A Standardized Lunar 2022, 
Coordinate System for the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter and downloads/The%20Challenge%20of%20Lunar%20Dust%20
Lunar Datasets,” LRO Project and LGCWG White Paper Version -%20v4.pdf.
5, October 1, 2008, 
uploads/2024/01/luncoordwhitepaper-10-08.pdf. 218 James Mantovani et al., “Regolith Simulant Preparation
and Geotechnical Characterization for Plume Surface
206 Theresa Hitchens, “NGA Emphasizing Space GEOINT Interaction Testing,” NASA, , 
Mission, Developing Lunar Model for Operators: Director,” nasa.gov/api/citations/20220013110/downloads/
Breaking Defense, May 23, 2023, Regolith-Simulant-Preparation-and-Geotechnical-
com/2023/05/nga-emphasizing-space-geoint-mission- Characterization-for-PSI-Testing%20Rev.pdf.
developing-lunar-model-for-operators-director/.
219 Joe Atkinson, “Tiny NASA Cameras to Picture Interaction
207 “What Is ESA’s Moonlight Initiative?” European Space Between Lander, Moon’s Surface,” NASA, February 2, 2024,
Agency, November 9, 2022, 
Multimedia/Videos/2022/11/What_is_ESA_s_Moonlight_ cameras-to-picture-interaction-between-lander-moons-
initiative. surface/.
208 Arati Prabhakar, “Memorandum for Departments and 220 NASA, “Plume Surface Interaction (PSI),” press release, July
Agencies Participating in the White House Cislunar 31, 2020, 
Technology Strategy Interagency Working Group,” surface-interaction-psi/.
– 55 –

SALMON
SWIMMING
UPSTREAM
//
CLAYTON
SWOPE
221 Phillip B. Abel et al., Lunar Dust Mitigation: A Guide and Announces Selections for Lunar Comms, Network Studies,”
Reference (Cleveland: NASA, ), https:// NASA, October 1, 2024, 
ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/20220018746/downloads/ nasa-announces-selections-for-lunar-comms-network-
TP-20220018746.pdf, 19. studies/.
222 Jamie Groh, “NASA Technology Helps Guard Against Lunar 235 Nokia, “An Inside Look at Nokia’s Moon Mission,” press
Dust,” NASA, April 10, 2024, release, July 25, 2023, 
and-facilities/kennedy/nasa-technology-helps-guard- newsroom/articles/inside-look-at-nokia-moon-mission/.
against-lunar-dust/.
236 ispace, “ispace-U.S. Announces Official Launch of
223 “Blue Ghost Mission 1 to the Moon,” Firefly Aerospace, Data Relay Service Enabled by Two Relay Satellites,”
accessed August 7, 2024, press release, April 25, 2024, 
blue-ghost-mission-1/. news-en/?p=5301; ispace, “ispace-U.S. to Use RTX’s Blue
Canyon Technologies Spacecraft Bus for Lunar Far Side
224 Caela Barry, “Weather on the Moon,” NASA, accessed August Communications Relay Satellites,” press release, April 10,
19, 2024, 2024, 
moon/.
Key Considerations for Next Steps
225 Richard L. Patterson, Ahmad Hammoud, and Malik Elbuluk,
“Electronic Components for Use in Extreme Temperature 237 Sue Nelson, “Moon Race 2.0: Why So Many Nations and
Aerospace Applications,” presentation at the 12th International Private Companies Are Aiming for Lunar Landings,”
Components for Military and Space Electronics Conference, BBC, February 16, 2024, 
San Diego: February 11–14, 2008, article/20240216-moon-race-20-why-so-many-nations-
citations/20090004677/downloads/20090004677.pdf. are-aiming-for-lunar-landings.
226 Emerson J. Speyerer and Mark S. Robinson, “Persistently 238 “International Lunar Year,” U.S. Department of State, August
Illuminated Regions at the Lunar Poles: Ideal Sites for 7, 2023, 
Future Exploration,” Icarus 222, no. 1 (): 122–136,
239 Moon-Jin Jeon, “Lessons Learned for Safe and Sustainable

Lunar Exploration: The Case of KPLO Operations,”
S0019103512004174?via%3Dihub.
presentation at the 67th session of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Vienna: June 20, 2024, https://
227 Martin Elvis, Tony Milligan, and Alanna Krolikowski, “The

Peaks of Eternal Light: A Near-Term Property Issue on
Presentations/21AM/2_Item_15_KPLO_Lessons_Learned_
the Moon,” Space Policy 38 (): 30–38,
Moon-Jin_Jeon_as_of_20_June.pdf.

S0265964616300194.
240 J. Krige, A. Russo and L. Sebesta, “A History of the European
Space Agency,” ESA, , 
228 NASA, “NASA Announces Artemis Concept Awards for
sp/sp1235/sp1235v2web.pdf.
Nuclear Power on Moon,” press release, June 21, 2022,

241 Clayton Swope and Stephanie Songer, “What Can We
artemis-concept-awards-for-nuclear-power-on-moon/.
Learn from Ariane for Future Space Partnerships?,” CSIS,
Commentary, July 9, 2024, 
229 Andrew Osborn, “Russia Says It Is Considering Putting a
what-can-we-learn-ariane-future-space-partnerships.
Nuclear Power Plant on the Moon with China,” Reuters,
March 5, 2024, 
242 Jeff Foust, “Lunar Spacecraft Receive Dozens of Collision
russia-china-are-considering-putting-nuclear-power-
Warnings,” SpaceNews, July 11, 2024, 
unit-moon-ria-2024-03-05/.
lunar-spacecraft-receive-dozens-of-collision-warnings/.
230 “Tracking and Data Relay Satellites,” NASA, updated
243 Adam Mann, “The Moon Could Soon Have a Space Junk
December 15, 2023, 
Problem,” Science, February 22, 2022, 
tracking-and-data-relay-satellites/.
org/content/article/moon-could-soon-have-space-junk-
problem.
231 Andrew Jones, “China Quietly Used NASA’s Jupiter Probe to
Test Its Deep Space Network,” SpaceNews, November 20, 244 Noah Robertson, “How DC Became Obsessed with a
2019, Potential 2027 Chinese Invasion of Taiwan,” Defense
jupiter-probe-to-test-its-deep-space-network/. News, May 7, 2024, 
pentagon/2024/05/07/how-dc-became-obsessed-with-
232 “ESTRACK,” European Space Agency, accessed August 19,
a-potential-2027-chinese-invasion-of-taiwan/.
2024, 
245 Kristin Burke, “Chinese Military Thinking on Orbits
233 “Lunar Data Network,” Intuitive Machines, accessed August
beyond GEO,” Space Review, May 16, 2022, 
7, 2024, thespacereview.com/article/4387/1.
services.
234 Jeff Foust, “NASA selects Intuitive Machines for lunar Recommendations
communications and navigation services,” Spacenews, 246 John F. Kennedy, “We Choose to Go to the Moon,” Rice
September 18, 2024, University, September 12, 1962, 
intuitive-machines-for-lunar-communications-and- speech.
navigation-services; and Goddard Digital Team, “ASA
– 56 –

COVER PHOTO SPACE SHUTTLE/MYSTERY/ADOBE STOCK AND MOON/MRVAYN/ADOBE STOCK
1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202 887 0200 |