Unnamed: 1: PREGUNTA, Unnamed: 2: FRAGMENTO, Unnamed: 3: DOCUMENTO

Unnamed: 0: 2.0, Unnamed: 1: ¿Cómo están empleando los sistemas no tripulados potenciados por IA para aumentar la efectividad de las operaciones militares?, Unnamed: 2: Data collection and analytics in intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) operations. AI will enable the effective processing of large volumes of data to anticipate and assess adversary actions, and to support planning and execution of military operations. The automation is expected to significantly reduce the workload of military personnel, as well as increase the effectiveness of target detection and identification. 3. Military logistics, including planning, resource management, transportation, maintenance, repair and operations (MRO), and supply chain management. The implementation of AI technologies is expected to significantly reduce risks related to human error and improve cost-effectiveness of logistics operations. 4. Cyber operations, by increasing the effectiveness of both defensive and offen- sive actions in cyberspace. 5. Personnel training, through more efficient, adaptive, personalized and data- driven approaches. 6. Military decision-making, particularly in enhancing data analytics and situation- al awareness to support tactical, operational and strategic-level judgments by providing accurate assessments and recommendations., Unnamed: 3: daio_study2529_guarding_the_alliances_eastern_frontiers_lipka_wernik_dziegiel.pdf

Unnamed: 2: No domain is an island unto itself; it is only by integrating disparate capabilities that future militaries see the true value of AI. This needs to start in concept development and procurement. To be most effective with their AI innovations, militaries must conceive how their systems can work jointly with their other forces. Ideally, these capabilities should be conceived in response to an existing requirement or operational problem. Shield AI’s drones are a good example. Small, infantry-launched quadcopters used to map rooms in advance of clearing emerged from examining the trials and tribulations of coalition forces in the Global War on Terror (18). Acquiring the right new systems is not enough; it must also be matched with the ability to actually get them to the necessary units and teach them to use them. This requires both bureaucratic/logistic changes (i.e., the correct units have access to the technology when necessary) and operational ones (i.e., commanders know how to effectively use it to achieve the desired result)., Unnamed: 3: 20240212113627.pdf

Unnamed: 2: If the unmanned platforms focus on supporting the manned aircraft, the mobility of the faster aircraft is limited to that of the slower ones. Stealth capabilities would be only as good as those of the least stealthy member of the swarm. Therefore, it might be more useful to grant the unmanned assets more independence. Drones could be sent in advance to the area of operation, loitering in search of potential targets or commanded to advance so as to trigger the enemy’s air defence, followed by other drones tasked with a jamming or target acquisition mission; the role of the manned aircraft would then be to launch a missile from stand-off distance. An analogy is a hunter and a pack of hounds. As long as the hounds are on a leash, the team is inefficient. With the hounds unleashed, they can locate the prey and chase it into the range of a rifle. The decision to use lethal force is made by the human. One area which could potentially be revolutionized by AI applications is dynamic management of the electromagnetic spectrum., Unnamed: 3: daio_study2316_cautious_data-driven_evolution_sami_jaervinen.pdf

Unnamed: 0: 3.0, Unnamed: 1: ¿Qué lecciones dejan los conflictos recientes sobre el empleo de inteligencia artificial en operaciones militares?, Unnamed: 2: Against this background, Ukraine is increasingly focusing on:81 investing in AI to enhance the autonomy and effectiveness of drones and robotic systems, in particular by enabling these systems to operate without GPS and engage adversarial drone systems; expanding the use of sophisticated sensors, including thermal and real-time satellite video feeds, thereby using for data analysis and data fusion to support decision-making for complex combat operations; developing fully autonomous systems to engage autonomous adversarial systems, thereby using AI to enhance autonomy; establishing new research and development centers to underline the government’s commitment to advancing AI and other de- fense technologies; integrating AI into all levels of military operations, and making AI solutions more affordable to accelerate a broader and quicker adoption of defense AI by the country’s Armed Forces. It is important to note that in the ongoing war, Ukraine’s defense AI solutions will be significantly improved thanks to continuous training based on battlefield experience and data., Unnamed: 3: daio_study2422_survival_of_the_smartest_vitaliy_goncharuk.pdf

Unnamed: 0: 4.0, Unnamed: 1: ¿Qué riesgos representa la escasez de talento especializado en inteligencia artificial para el desarrollo de capacidades de defensa?, Unnamed: 2: Asimismo, pese a los avances 13 de los 19 países del ILIA no generan habilidades tempranas en IA en el currículo y 11 de los 19 países no cuentan con programas de doctorado en IA en sus universidades. La infraestructura y el talento son aspectos centrales para el potencial del país para el despliegue y la adopción de inteligencia artificial. Mientras que la infraestructura define un techo en las posibilidades de desarrollo, especialmente la capacidad de cómputo, el talento es fundamental para que esas posibilidades se materialicen. Si los países de la región no avanzan en estas capacidades endógenas, se acrecienta el riesgo de desarrollar soluciones de IA con sesgos y poca pertinencia local. 06. IA GENERATIVA: UNA OPORTUNIDAD DE DEMOCRATIZACIÓN DEL ACCESO Las plataformas de IA generativa han democratizado el acceso y promovido la adopción, gracias a que tiene bajas barreras de entrada e introduce nuevas dinámicas de captura de valor y aprovechamiento, donde usuarios no expertos pueden interactuar y aprender con herramientas basadas en modelos avanzados con una interfaz amigable para todo tipo de personas., Unnamed: 3: ILIA-2025.-Hallazgos-principales-IA-aplicada-y-talento-humano-compressed.pdf