S P E C I A L S E C T I O N 97
The Caribbean
Defence and Security
National Leeggiissllaattiioonn
- Police (Amendment) Act, 1998.
Antigua and Barbuda
The non-Spanish speaking Caribbean is an area of vast - Defence (Amendment) Act, 2007.
heterogeneity that from the foundation of common con- Bahamas - Police Act, Chapter 205, 1965.
- Defence Act, Chapter 211, 1979.
cerns has established cooperative spaces. The countries
Barbados - Defence Act, Chapter 159, 1985.
have constructed their political systems and structures on - Police Act, Chapter 167, 1998.
the foundation of their processes of decolonization and Belize - Police Act, Chapter 138, 1951.
- Defence Act, Chappter 135, 1978.
maintain strong links with countries such as Great Britain,
Dominica - Police Act, Chapter 14:01, 1940.
United States, and Canada, both due to historical and lin-
- The Police Act, Chapter 244,
Grenada
guistic reasons. Strong links with China have also been de- Revised Laws of Grenada 1990.
veloped, as is covered in Professor Dion Phillips’ analysis. Guyana - Police Act, Chapter 16:01, 1957.
- Defence Act, Chapter 15:01, 1966.
In terms of their relations with other countries from the
- The Constabulary Force Act, 1935.
continent, such as the Latin Americans, shared concerns Jamaica - The Defence Act, 1962.
are highlighted in mechanisms such as the Organization Saint Kitts and Nevis - The Police Act, 2003.
- Defence Act, 10, 1997.
of American States, or the Conference of Defence Minis-
Saint Lucia - Police Act, Chapter 14:01, 2001.
ters of the Americas and Conference of Ministers of Public
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines - Police (Amendment) Act, 1989.
Security, as well as in the growing relations with Brazil,
Suriname - National Army Act, 1996,
Colombia or Venezuela.
Trinidad and Tobago - Defence Act, Chapter 14:01, 1962.
- Police Service Act, Chappter 15:01, 2006.
Belize Commonwealth of The Bahamas Antigua and Barbuda Commonwealth of Dominica
Belize Defence Force Royal Bahamas Defence Force Royal Antigua and Barbuda
Defence Force Dominica Police Force
Belize Police Department Royal Bahamas Police Force Royal Antigua and Barbuda
Police Force
Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis
Royal Saint Kitts and Nevis Defence Force Saint Lucia
Royal Saint Kitts and Nevis Police Force Royal Saint Lucia
Police Force
Jamaica
Jamaica Defence Force
Barbados
Jamaica Constabulary Force Barbados Defence Force
Royal Barbados Police Force
Grenada
Royal Grenada Police Force
The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago The Republic of Guyana The Republic of Suriname
Saint Vincent and
TTTrinidad and TTTobago Defence Force Guyana Defence Force National Army of Suriname the Grenadines
TTTrinidad and TTTobago Police Force Guyana Police Force Police Corp of Suriname Royal Saint Vincent and
The Grenadines Police Force
Missions of defence and/or security forces
Cooperation In case of war or emergencyyy, provided that
Defence Security Defence, in domestic Assistance in case of a proper state of emergency or war is
forces forces sovereignty security and emergency and/or declared, the Police Force shall serve asa
and territory natural disasters
public order military force in the defence of the State.
Source: Defence (Amendment) Act, 2007 (Antigua and Barbuda). Defence Act, Chapter 211 (Bahamas). Defence Act, Chapter 159 (Barbados). Defence Act, Chapter 135
(Belize). Police Act, Chapter 14:01 (Dominica). Defence Act, Chapter 15:01 (Guyana). Ministry of National Security and The Defence Act (Jamaica). Defence Act (Saint Kitts
and Nevis). Police (Amendment) Act (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines). Website of the Ministry of Defence (Suriname). Defence Act, Chapter 14:01 (Trinidad and Tobago).

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Creation of Defence and Security Forces
1750-1800 1801-1850 1851-1900 1901-1950 1951 onwards
1792 Trinidad and TTTobago 1832 Jamaica Constabulary 1853 Royal Grenada Police 1940 Dominica Police Force. 1960 Royal Saint Kitts and
Police Force Service. Force. Force. Nevis Police Force.
1834 Royal Saint Lucia Police 1896 Royal Saint Kitts and 1962 Jamaica Defence Force.
Force. Nevis Defence Force (1). 1962 Trinidad and TTTobago
1835 Royal Barbados Police Defence Force.
Force. 1965 Guyana Defence Force.
1839 Guyyana Police Force. 1967 Royal Antigua and
111888444000 RRRooyyaalll BBBaahhhaammaass PPPoollliiiccee Barbuda Police Force.
FFoorrccee.. 1973 Belize Police Department.
1975 National Army of
West Indies Regiment Suriname(2).
Createdin1795,the West InndiaRegimentwas aninfantryuunit ofthe British Army recruiteedd and 1978 Belize Defence Force.
generally stationed intheBrittish coloniesofthe Caribbean. Thhee Regimentdifferedfromsimilarfforces
1979 Royal Saint Vincent and
recruitedinotherpartsofthee British Empireinthat itformeddd anintegralpart ofthe regularBBritish
The Grenadines Police
Army. Ascountries became inndependent, they started creatingg theirowndefence forces, whichhhwere
Force.
no longer part of the West Indddies Regiment.
1979 Barbados Defence Force.
1980 Royal Bahamas Defence
(1) Initiallyyy, a defence force was created as a result of a strike that security forces wereunable to control. The regular force was Force.
ccrreeaatteedd iinn 11996677..
AArmy 1981 Royal Antigua and
(2)In1975,theRepublicof Suriname,becameindependentfrom theNetherlandsand established its ownnationalarmed Barbuda Defence Force.
forcesSurinaamseKrijgsmachi.In1980,theychangedtheirnameto NationaalLegeror NationalArmyyy,afterthemilitary
government took over.
Source:Compilation based on information provided by the above mentioned institutions.
GG: Governor General / PTE:President / PM: Prime Minister / DB: Defence Board / CF:Chief of the Force /
Legal functions related to defence:
SC:Security Council / CP:Commissioner of Police / CM:Military Command.
Country C f o o m rm m a a ll n y d b e y d Directed by C T o h n r t o ro u l g le h d C i o n c m o a u n m n o is t t r h s y i e o r n a C d t o i m m on i m n a i a s n t n d r d a , - Resp f o o n r s ible a T u ro th o b o p y r e iz x e i d t De M fe e n m ce b B e o rs ard
authorized by discipline Operations
Antigua GG PM PM DB CD JF GG PM, CF, others to be
and Barbuda designated.
PM, Minister of
Bahamas GG PM Minist S e e r c o u f r N ity ational SC SC JF GG National Security, others
to be designated.
Barbados GG PM -- -- CD JF GG --
Ministry of Defence
Belize GG PM M a in n i d s t I r m y m of i g D r e a f t e io n n ce Minister CD JF GG a o n th d e I r m m m in ig is r t a e t r io s n to , C b F e ,
desiggnated.
Minister for National
Dominica PTE PM Security, Labor and -- CP CP -- --
Immigration
Grenada GG PM -- -- CP CP -- --
PM with PTE, PM, Minister of
Guyana PTE PM -- PM CD JF Parliament Home Affairs, CF, three
others to be designated.
Minister of National
Jamaica GG PM Minist S e e r c o u f r N ity ational DB CD JF GG mini S st e e c r u t r o it y b , e C d F, e o si t g h n e a r ted.
S N a e i v n i t s Kitts and GG PM Minis S te e r c o u f r it N y a * tional -- CD JF -- --
Minister for Home
Saint Lucia GG PM Affairs and National -- CP CP -- --
Security
S th a e in G t r V e i n n a c d en in t e a s nd GG PM Minist S e e r c o u f r N ity ational -- CP CP -- --
PTE, President of the
National Assembly,
Vice-president, two
representatives of
Suriname PTE PTE Minister of Defence PTE CM JF PTE r t e h p e r e A s r e m n e ta d t i F v o e r o ce f s t , h a e
Ministry of Justice, a
member of the Council of
Ministers, a representative
of the Police.
Minister of National
T To ri b n a id g a o d and PTE PM Minist S e e r c o u f r N ity ational -- CD JF PTE Secu t r o it y b , e C d F, e t s w ig o n a m te in d i . sters
*In 2014 they are below the direct authority of the Prime Minister.
Source:Compilation based on the defence and police force laws of each country. In the case of Dominica, Police Act, Chapter 14:01, 1940, reference is made only
to the responsibility for the Police Force.

Chapter 9: Special Section The Caribbean

Regional Organizations
In the areas of defence and security, the countries of the Caribbean share a common agenda and take part in regional forums. Though they
originally tended towards integration (mainly economic), with time they have created new spaces of cooperation.
1990 2000
-oce
ro/dna
lacitiloP
ytiruces
dna
ecnefeD
noitarepooC
snoitazinagro
cimon
smsinahcem
seicnega
CARICOM. Caribbean Community
Economic integration and
cooperation among its members.

OECS. Organization of
Eastern Caribbean States
Sustainable development
through their strategic insertion
in the world economy.

ACCP. Association of
Caribbean Commissioners of
Police
Promote and facilitate
cooperation in the development
and implementation of
police strategies, systems and
procedures.

ACS. Association of Caribbean
States
Regional cooperation.

RSS. Regional Security System
Collective security system.

CDEMA. Caribbean Disaster
Emergency Management
Agency
Emergency management.

IMPACS. Implementation
Agency for Crime and
Security
Crime and security management
within the CARICOM framework.

SAM. Security Assistance
Mechanism
Territorial integrity, defence against
threats to security.

Participation in regional organizations
Anglophone Caribbean and Suriname Other dependencies and countries in the region Latin America
Antigua and Barbuda Anguilla Colombia
Bahamas French Antilles Costa Rica
Barbados Dutch Antilless Cuba
Belize Aruba (1) Dominican Republic
Dominica Bermuda El Salvador
Grenada Curacao Guatemala
Guyana Cayman Islands Haiti
Jamaica Turks and Caicos Islands (1) Honduras
Saint Kitts and Nevis Virgin Islands Mexico
Saint Lucia British Virgin Islands Nicaragua
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Montserrat Panama
Suriname Saint Martin Venezuela
Trinidad and Tobago (1) Aruba, Curacao, the Netherlands Antillesand theTTTurksandCaicos Islands, along withFrance on behalf
ofFrench Guyana, Guadeloupe andMartinique,areassociatemembersof theACS. As such, they have the
right to participate and vote on issues directly affecting them and within their constitutional competence.
CARICOM ACS OECS ACCP
Anguilla, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Mexico, Puerto Rico and VVVenezuela have observer status in
IMPACS RSS SAM CDEMA CARICOM.
1. Take the profi t out of crime, target criminal assets and protect the 7. Strengthen the effectiveness of criminal investigation through modern
Following fi nancial system. technologies and scientifi c techniques.
consultations 2. Crime Prevention - Addressing the causes of crime and insecurity and 8. Strengthen CARICOM’s resilience to cybercrime.
made by IMPACS, increase public awareness of the key risks. 9. Pursue functional cooperative security engagements to tackle and
in 2013 the manage shared risks and threats.
Heads of State of 3. Establishing appropriate legal instruments while ratifying existing
CARICOM members agreements. 10. Strengthen the justice sector.
adopted a new 4. Increase trans-border intelligence and information sharing. 11. Modernize and enhance correctional services and institutions management.
Regional Security
12. Strengthen mechanisms against human traffi cking.
Strategy, which 5. Enhance law enforcement and security capabilities and strengthen re-
plants the followingg gional security systems. 13. Improving resilience to natural and man-made disasters.
security pillars: 6. Enhance maritime and airspace awareness, strengthen CARICOM bor- 14. Promote resilient critical infrastructure management and safety at ma-
ders including contiguous land borders. jor events
Source: Compilation based on information provided by the aforementioned institutions and their websites.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

stcejorP
tnerruC
)2102(
Implementation Agency for Crime and Security (IMPACS)
Seat IMPACS:
It is the operational center of CARICOM’s crime and security management structure and main organization respon- Port of Spain,
sible for the implementation of the agenda against crime and security. Among its functions, it daily reports to the Trinidad and Tobago.
Council of Ministers responsible for these matters. It is focused on projects related to security affairs management
and investigation.
XXII Conference of the Heads Establishment of a Regional Task Force to examine the main causes of crime and make
of Government of CARICOM recommendations to cope with interrelated problems, including traffi cking of drugs and
(Nassau, Bahamas). fi re arms, and terrorism.
CARIPASS Program Regional Integrated Ballistic Regional Border Security Training
Implementation of a regional Information Network (RIBIN) (CARICAD)
electronic identifi cation system. Support to CARICOM members Training and education on border
In 2007, the initiative to create with no forensic technology, in order security for offi cers from the
a regional travel card was to track the movement of weapons Caribbean region.
conceived. Its installation began to organized crime activity.
in 2010.
IMPACS has two sub-agencies created for the purpose of supporting the Regional Security Strategy during the Cricket World Cup (2007). As a
result of their success, in , the Conference of Heads of Government endorsed a proposal for their permanent establishment.
Events Advanced Passenger Information System (APIS)
It is an automatic system implemented in 2007 for maritime and aviation operators that
permits the strengthening of border security in the region through the provision of infor-
CARICOM regional workshop on the
mation to law enforcement personnel from CARICOM Member States regarding passen-
Arms Trade Treaty (2014)
gers and carriers prior to their departure and/or arrival. The exchange of information such
Organized by IMPACS with the collaboration as the passport numbers of passengers and carrier information, including crew, is carried
of the UN Disarmament Offi ce, its objectives out through an electronic system between the airline operating system and that of the
were: country of destination. Such information must comply with a specifi c format. Efforts are
currently being made to expand the program to include information regarding the cargo
- Promoting the ratifi cation of the treaty. carried by planes and ships.
- Developing a common position among
CARICOM members in relation to the trade
in arms.
- Foment a CARICOM legislative model for
applying the treaty.
- Provide legal and technical assistance to
CARICOM member states in the implemen-
tation of the obligations under the treaty.
18th Joint Meeting of the
Permanent Committees of Police
Commissioners and Military Chiefs
Questions relating to civil-military coopera-
tion, information and intelligence sharing,
training, joint operations, and natural disas-
ter response were discussed. Joint meeting of the Committees of Police Commissioners and Military Heads of CARICOM.
Source: IMPACS
Source: Compilation based on the websites of the Implementation Agency for Crime and Security (IMPACS), CARIPASS program, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and International Trade of Canada.

Establishment of the Agency’s formal organization.
XXVI Conference of the Heads
By means of an inter-governmental agreement, the IMPACS was created in .
of Government of CARICOM
The IMPACS worked in a limited way until , when it started to operate as
(Gros Islet, Saint Lucia).
it is known today.

Joint Regional Regional Intelligence
Communications Centre
Fusion Centre
- Mechanisms for border
security.
- Shares information.
- Advanced information system
- Joint analysis.
for passengers and cargo.
- Regional listings.

Chapter 9: Special Section The Caribbean

Regional Security System (RSS)
The Regional Security System (RSS) was created in 1996. It is a collective security system whereby members agreed that any armed attack against
any of them, whether by a third State or other sources, represents an armed attack against all of them. Security forces are comprised of military
and police personnel.
Mission: To ensure the stability and well-being of its Member States Permanent headquarters: Bridgetown, Barbados.
through mutual cooperation, in order to maximize regional security in
Troops:contributed by each Member State (combination of po-
preserving the social and economic development of people.
lice and military personnel).
Functions: Promote cooperation in the prevention and interdiction of
traffi cking of illegal narcotic drugs, national emergencies, search and res- SAM Secretariat established by CARICOM.
cue, immigration control, fi sheries protection, customs and excise control,
Coordinates disaster response on behalf of CDEMA, through
maritime policing duties, natural and other disasters, pollution control,
CDRU (Caribbean Disaster Relief Unit).
combating threats to national security, prevention of smuggling, and pro-
tection of off-shore installations and exclusive economic zones.
Backgound:
1982: Memorandum of understanding among 4 members of 1983: Saint Kitts 1985: Grenada
the OECS (Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, St. Lucia and St. and Nevis endorsed the 1996: Regional
Vincent and the Grenadines) and Barbados to provide mutual endorsed the memorandum. Security System
assistance when required. memorandum.
Strategic Plan 2010-2020. Objectives: RSS TTTraining Institute
1. Expand the role of the RSS. Itisavirtual center that trainsqualifiedinstruc-
2. Strengthen the integrity of security institutions. tors, develops standardized training materials
andpromotes leadership skills among participat-
3. Increase the contribution of the RSS to regional and international security.
ing security forces.
4. Improve border security.
Between and , Canada
5. Reduce crime and identify and dismantle organized criminal networks.
contributed US$1,200,000 in support to this
6. Improveresponse and levels of activity in the face of natural and man-made project for the professionalization of personnel.
disasters.
7. Develop and implement a public relations strategy for the RBSaSh.amas
Member States shoulddd 2010 – Earthquake, Haiti: 1995 – Hurricanes Luis
take the necessary Operación Restore and Marilyn, Antigua,
Comfort. St Kitts and Nevis.
measures to facilitate
the passage across their
territories of service 1998 – Hurricane Georges:
personnel, equipment, St Kitts and Nevis.
and materiaaalllsss tttooo bbbe
used in aaassssssiiissstttaaannnce. Turks and Caicos 1989 – Hurricane Hugo,
Antigua, St Kitts
and Nevis.
SSSenior commanders of Cuba Dominican Rep.
contributing countries
maintain Cayman Islands Puerto Vírgin Islands
command of their Rico
AAAAAntigua
personnel during
operations. HHaiittii BBBBaarbuda
Jamaica
Saint Kitts and NNeevviiiiiiiissssssssssssssssssss Guadalupe
Montserrraaaaattttttt Dominica
666 of the 1114444 ooopppeerations 2004 – Hurricane Ivan,
MMartinique
have been iiinnn rrreeesssppppponse to Grenada. Saint Luciaaa
naturrraaalll dddisassstters.
Saint Vincennnttttt Barbados
2009 - Saint Lucia: Antilles
Firefighters from the RSS
were deployed. Grenaddaaaaaaaaaaaaa
TTTobago
Trinidad
Source:Compilation based on theTreaty Establishing the Regional Security System (1996/03/05),Corporate Plan 2010-2020, website of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and International Trade of Canada, information provided by the Permanent Secretary of the RSS (Central Enlace Offi ce, Barbados) and its website.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Security Assistance Mechanism
2006 (*)
Treaty to establish a security assistance mechanism, creating a link be-
tween different actors (the RSS and non-member States, the English-
speaking Caribbean and Suriname).
Objectives:
Anglophone
Caribbean - Disaster response.
(Antigua and Regional - Regional resource mobilization and deployment for national and re-
Barbuda, Bahamas, gional crisis management and fi ght against crime.
Barbados, Belize, Suriname Security
Dominica, Grenada, System (RSS) - Combat and elimination of threats to national and regional security.
Guyana, Jamaica,
Saint Lucia, Saint - Preservation of the territorial integrity of participating States.
Kitts and Nevis, A Joint Coordination and Strategic Planning Committee, comprised
Saint Vicent and
of the Regional Security System (RSS) Coordinator and the Security
the Grenadines and
Trinidad and Tobago). Chiefs of the Member States, has been established for its imple-
mentation. Where defence forces exist, both their commander and
the commander of the police force are members of the Committee.
* Signing by the various countries occurred gradually since then and continued through 2007.
Source: Compilation based on the Treaty Establishing the Regional Security System (1996/03/05), information provided by the Permanent Secretary of the RSS
(Central Liason Offi ce, Barbados) and its website.
Association of Caribbean Commissioners of Police (ACCP)
The creation of the Association reaches back to the Conference of Regional Police Commissioners in 1972, in the Port of Spain, Trinidad and
Tobago, where it was agreed to meet annually in order to discuss questions of interest to the police forces of the region. In 1987 in Castries, Saint
Lucia, the Association was offi cially established.
Itsmissionis to be the regional organization for the promotion and facilitation of: Values
• Cooperation in the development and implementation of police strategies, sys- ✓ Commitment to a quality service.
tems and procedures. ✓ Collaboration and cooperation.
• The development of technical and professional skilllllllsss aaammmooonnnggg ✓ Ethical and professional standards.
police offi cers. ✓ Linkkss with the community.
✓ RReespect for human rights.
• Proactive measures to prevent crime and improve reeela- ✓✓GGender perspective.
tions between the police and the community.
Secretariat
Executive Committee
Based in Barbados
Composed of 5 since 1999. Responsible
members from for planning and
different countries. coordinating ACCP
activities.
ACCP and Motorola
Scholarship Program
28th Annual General Meeting, Bermuda, 2013
17 countries participated, and its slogan was “Uniting the police and the com-
Since 2007, this program has provided assistance to the chil-
munity; prevention, intervention and strengthening strategies to put an end
dren of police offi cers so that they are able to fi nish their
to gangs and youth violence”.
university studies in engineering, human resources, criminol-
The topics of discussion were: joint community-police initiatives, collaborative
ogy and forensic science. Those selected are able to continue
work in criminal investigations, digital solutions to police work, witness pro- their education in Caribbean, British, American and Cana-
tection, the collection of intelligence and the exchange of information across dian institutions.
the Caribbean.
29th Annual General Meeting, Trinidad and Tobago, 2014
20 countries participated and its slogan was “Working together to combat
In annual reunions various agencies also participate, such as INTERPOL,
transnational organized crime”. They discussed the challenges facing the re-
FBI, CARICOM, International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP), among
gion, such as arms traffi cking, money laundering, cyber crimes and human
others, as well as security professionals and academics.
traffi cking.
Source: Website of the Association of Caribbean Commissioners of Police (ACCP), Bermuda Police Service, Royal Police Service of the Cayman Islands, and the Gov-
ernment of Trinidad and Tobago.

Chapter 9: Special Section The Caribbean

Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA)
Created in 1991 by decision of the Heads of Government of CARICOM Member State, CDEMA is an inter-governmental body. Initially created as
CDERA (Caribbean Disaster Emergency Response Agency), in it adopted the concept of emergency management, thus expand-
ing their scope of action.
National Organizations
Antigua and • National Offi ce of Disaster Services (NODS)
Barbuda • Ministry of Health and Social Transformation.
• National Emergency Management Agency. Bahamas
• Prime Minister’s Offi ce.
• Emergency Management Department
Barbados
• Ministry of Home Affairs.
• National Emergency Management Organization
Belize (NEMO).
• Ministry of Transport, Communications and National
Emergency Management.
• Disaster Management Offi ce.
Dominica
• Ministry of National Security, Labour and Immigration.
• National Disaster Management Association Agency (NADMA). Grenada
• Prime Minister’s Offi ce.
Guyana • Civil Defence Commission.
• President’s Offi ce
• Offi ce of Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Secretariat
Jamaica Management (ODPEM).
Headquarters: Barbados.
• Prime Minister’s Offi ce.
-Acts as a coordination body.
• National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA).
Saint Kitts and • Ministry of Foreign Affairs, National Security, Labour,
Nevis Immigration and Social Security.
Board of Directors
• National Emergency Management Organisation.
Saint Lucia -Brings together coordinators from each
• Prime Minister’s Offi ce.
national organization.
Saint Vincent and • National Emergency Management Organisation. -Provides recommendations.
• Ministry of National Security, Maritime and Aerial
the Grenadines
Development.
Suriname • National Coordination Center for Disaster Relief . Council
Highest political body. Trinidad and • Offi ce of Disaster Preparedness and Management.
Tobago • Ministry of National Security. Made up of the Heads of Government
of participating states.
Note:CDEMA Members include Anguilla (Department of Disaster Management), Turks and Reviews the Agency’s work.
Caicos Islands (Department of Disaster Management and Emergencies), British Virgin Islands
(Department of Disaster Management), Haiti (Directorate of Civil Protection) and Montserrat
(Disaster Management Coordination Agency).
National Disaster
Plans
Regional
Coordination Plan
Response
(agreements, acts, memorandums
of understanding and standard-
ized work plans)
Specialized
Plans
ECDG*
Operations
Regional
CDRU Operations Deposits
CARICOM’s disaster response unit runs disaster response and
humanitarian operations in the name of CDEMA. Formed by
the police and military forces that make up the RSS, it acts at
the request of CDEMA and is prepared to provide assistance
in maintaining law and order, in the management and distri-
bution of vital goods, and to deploy immediately.
Execution
Advise
Political
Functions:
- Mobilizing and coordinating humanitarian relief.
- Mitigating or eliminating, as much as possible, the
consequences of disasters impacting an affected par-
ticipating State.
- Providing immediate and coordinated response by
means of humanitarian assistance to an emergency in
any participating State.
- Securing, coordinating and channelling comprehen-
sive and reliable information on disasters affecting any
participating State to the pertinent governmental and
non-governmental organizations.
- Promoting the adoption of loss-reduction policies and
practices at national and regional levels.
- Coordinating the establishment, promotion and
maintenance of adequate response capabilities.
Structure
TheRegional Response Mechanism (RRM)
is an agreement for coordinating disaster re-
Emergencies in which the Agency has sponse between Member States and regional
participated in recent years: and international agencies. It ensures a rapid
response and effective management of re-
- Tropical Storm Ernesto (Belize, Barbados, sources.
Dominica, Jamaica, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, 2012).
- Tropical Storm Isaac (Antigua and Barbuda, RRM
Virgin Islands and Saint Kitts and Nevis, 2012).
-Hurricane Sandy (Bahamas, Haiti, Jamaica,
2012).
- Tropical Storm Chantal (Barbados, Domini-
ca, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grena-
dines, 2013).
- Low-level trough System (Dominica, Saint
Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
2013). * Eastern Caribbean Donor Group.
Source:Compilation based on the information provided by the Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA) and its website.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Strategic Relations and International Assistance
Members of
Organizations and Conference of Confereence Interrr-AAAmerican System of South Americann Bolivarian Alliance Interrr-American
Regional Systems: Defence Ministeers of Ameriican Naaaval CCooperation Defence Councill for the Peoples of Treaty of R
of The Americaas Statees Confeerences AAmong the UNASUR Our America eciprocal
(CDMA) American (ALBA) Assistance
Air Forces (TIAR))
(SICOFAA)
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados (1)
Belize (1) (1)
Dominica
Grenada
Guyana (1)
Jamaica (1) (1)
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname (1)
TTTrinidad and TTTobago
(1) Observer members.
Source: Compilation based on the fi nal declarations made at the conferences and the websites of the aforementioned institutions.
Analysis:
China in the Caribbean
China’s remarkable economic expan- lize the Caribbean to increase China’s
sion has raised eyebrows across the global market share as an exporter, and
globe, and the Caribbean is no exception. to strengthen its energy security.
Once largely absent from the region, the
People’s Republic of China (PRC) has Taiwan and the One China
emerged in recent years as both a com- Policy
petitive threat and an important econom- Be it diplomatic missions, aid or trade,
ic partner in the face of the weakening the issue of Taiwan remains at the core
relationship between the Caribbean and (although since 1949 China has not al-
Dr. Dion E. Phillips
both Britain and the United States. Al- lowed Taiwan, under the name Chinese
Professor of Sociology, University
though diplomatic relations were forged of the Virgin Islands, Taipei, to have a form of membership or
St. Thomas campus.
earlier on, China’s economic thrust was presence in international organizations
started in 2005 at the fi rst China-Caribbean Economic such as, for example, the World Trade Organization).
and Trade Forum. There it clarifi ed an interest in the Since the United Nations offi cially recognized
region that had been growing since 1998. China’s the PRC as the only representative of China to the
Caribbean engagement reached new heights with UN in 1971, and US President Richard Nixon made
the 3-day state visit to Trinidad and Tobago made by his landmark visit to the PRC one year later, the
President Xi Jinping in , the fi rst Chinese Caribbean and Latin American countries (albeit
president to do so. The new strategy seeks to ensure with some exceptions) have increasingly diplo-
region-wide support for the “One China policy”; uti- matically recognized the PRC and its representa-

Chapter 9: Special Section The Caribbean

Organization of American States (OAS)
Source:Resolution on the “Special security concerns of the small island states of the Caribbean” (AG/RES.2619 -XLI-O/11-, General Assembly, OAS, 2011/06/07), Kings-
town Declaration (2003/01/10) and the websites of the Organization of American States (OAS) and the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC).
tion. Prior to 1970, China’s ties with the Caribbean exchange for infrastructure projects (such as new
(Latin America as well) were heavily weighted on sports stadiums and other constructions, includ-
its ideological connection with Cuba, which recog- ing in the tourism industry), employing a majority
nized Beijing as early as 1960, also representing of Chinese workers at a time of high employment
the entry point of China in to the Caribbean. in the Caribbean countries provide limited knowl-
In addition to Cuba, the People’s Republic of Chi- edge transfer and increase debt levels. The Prime
na is now recognized by nine Caribbean countries: Minister of Barbados, Freundel Stuart, raised with
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Domi- President Xi Jinping the need for Chinese to in-
nica, Guyana, Jamaica, St. Lucia, Suriname and crease it imports so as to redress the considerable
Trinidad and Tobago. Diplomatic relations with the trade surplus that exists in China’s favor. China’s
English-speaking Caribbean region were fi rst be- preeminent interest is economic – access to miner-
gun by Guyana in , followed by Jamaica als, oil, gas and forestry in such countries as Trini-
in November of that year. dad and Tobago, Jamaica and Guyana. Cooperation
The region has witnessed changes in postures has also been established in agriculture, tourism,
over the last two decades, including some revert- health, culture, sports and education.
ing back and forth. As of 2014, only fi ve Carib-
bean countries continue to recognize Taiwan: Be- Diplomacy and Security
lize, Dominican Republic, Haiti, St. Kitts and Nevis, Since 2000, the People’s Republic of China has
and St. Vincent and the Grenadines. With four of engaged in a policy of donations that permits it
the 15-nation CARICOM community still maintain- to be present in the Caribbean security area, espe-
ing offi cial diplomatic ties with Taiwan, the Carib- cially the donation of equipment and the provision
bean region represents a strategic knot that Beijing of technical training. Senior offi cers of the defence
would like to eventually unravel. forces have attended the National Defence Univer-
sity in Beijing. Chinese offi cials have also made
Trade, Loans and Investment several visits to the Caribbean. This increased Chi-
Trade with China is largely one-way. Loan com- nese presence has weakened military ties between
mitments and assistance to countries mainly in the US and the Caribbean.
SNOITARALCED
Security concerns of Small Island Declaration of Bridgetown (Barbados, 2002)
States (SIS) were initially identifi ed in -Multidimensional approach to hemispheric security, expanded concept of and approach to threats.
the special session of the Committee
Declaration of Kingstown (St. Vincent and the Grenadines, 2003)
on Hemispheric Security held in 1996
on Small Island States Security.
and later in the High-Level Meeting on
-Adoption of the security management model on special threats, concerns and challenges of small
the Special Security Concerns of Small island states.
Island States, 1998. At these meetings, - Political, economic, social, health and environmental stability are essential for security.
it was concluded that SIS consider that
security is multi-dimensional in nature Declaration on Security in the Americas (2003)
and its threats do not fi t the traditional -Multidimensional scope of security and the new threats.
concept. -Special security concerns of Small Island States (paragraph 8).
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC)
CELAC has no permanent
structure. The presidency
Summit of Latin America and the Caribbean Rio Group corresponds to the host country
on Integration and Development (CALC) Objective: expand and systematize political of the subsequent meeting.
Objective: promote further regional integration. cooperation among Member States Presidency (2014):
Republic of Cuba
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) (1) (1) CELAC was created in the framework of
the Third Summit of Latin America and the
TheDeclaration of Caracas (2011/12/03) establishes that the dialogue, exchange and political negotiation
Caribbean on Integration and Development
processes promoted by CELAC must be carried out according to the following common values and principles: the
and the Rio Group Summit, based on the
need to respect international law, peaceful resolution of differences, prohibition of the use of force and the threat
Declaration of the Latin American and Carib-
to use force, respect for self-determination, sovereignty, territorial integrity, non-interference in domestic affairs
bean Unit Summit, held in Mexico in 2010.
and protection and promotion of human rights and democracy.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

In another example of Chinese presence, although and China (5 were sent to Albania; 2 to El Salvador;
Haiti is one of the few countries in the world that rec- 6 to Palau, 3 to Slovakia; 2 to Switzerland), the PRC
ognizes Taiwan, the PRC contributed police person- has made no mention of those sent to Bermuda.
nel to MINUSTAH, to which military personnel from
the engineering unit were then added. This marked Final Conclusions
the fi rst time that China participated in a peace op- China’s growing presence in the Caribbean has
eration in the Americas; in fact the Chinese personnel been widely noted over the past two decades.
who lost their lives in Haiti’s devastating However, in spite of its present focus on the Mid-
earthquake were the fi rst PRC military ranks to die of- dle East, the United States still regards the Carib-
fi cially in American territory in modern times. bean as it’s “third border” and will likely continue
In , four Chinese Uighur Muslims were to guard against the presence of any major power
released from the U.S. detention camp in Guanta- because of its geopolitical interests.
namo Bay, Cuba, and secretly fl own to Bermuda. For China, its presence in the Caribbean is in-
They had been captured in Afghanistan in 2001 tended to infl uence political decision-making on
as part of a total number of 22 Uighur refugees international issues (such as Taiwan and Tibet,
and taken to Guantanamo. China has always called or to garner support against a permanent seat on
Uighurs “terrorist suspects’ who are desirous of the UN Security Council for Japan). Its substantive
creating an independent homeland in the west- military activities are limited to Asia, which is the
ern province of Xinjiang. However, in 2008 the theatre of operations in which it has the greatest
U.S. government (which allowed Chinese offi cials interest. China’s loans and investment in projects
to interrogate the Uighur captives in 2002) fi nally give it political infl uence with the borrowing Ca-
declared that that they had no affi liation with Al ribbean countries as well as providing a retur n on
Qaeda or the Taliban, and should be released. It re- its investments. In the foreseeable future, on ac-
fused to repatriate them to China, arguing that they count of the mutual benefi ts for the Caribbean and
could face risks. While the issue of their resettle- China, it will expand its ties, resulting in a unique,
ment has been a source of tension between the US strong and unprecedented footprint.
naebbiraC
eht
ni
anihC
/
spillihP
.E
noiD
.rD
Association of Caribbean
2 Permanent Bodies:
States (ACS)
Secretariat
Council of
Created in 1994, it is a consultation and co- Ministers Assists the Council
operation body that includes all Caribbean of Ministers and
It is formed by Special Committees
countries. Its aim is to identify and promote Ministers and/or in the development
politics and programs oriented towards: representatives of and instrumentation
member states and of politics and
1. Strengthening the collective capacities of
is the principal body programs.
Headquarters: Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago
the Caribbean to achieve sustainable cultur- for defi ning the
al, economical, social, scientifi c and techno- politics and directionn
Special Committee on Disaster Risk Reduction: Created by the Council of Ministers
logical development. of the Association. in order to provide assistance in the implementation of its objectives, it meets once a
Supervises the
year and consists of cooperation between Member States and different bodies at the
2. Developing the potential of the Caribbean functioning of the
regional level, with the aim of establishing a coordination response to natural disasters.
Sea through interaction between Member Association and the Its principal objective is institutional strengthening of regional and national bodies in the
States and third parties. Secretariat. fi eld of prevention and mitigation of disasters.
3. Promoting an enlarged economic space
1999 – Dominican Republic – II Summit of Heads
for trade and investment that permits an in- of State and Government of the AEC: Elaborated
crease in the benefi ts brought by the region’s the Agreement between Member States for
regional cooperation in the field of natural
resources, including those of the Caribbean disasters, whose objective was to create legally
Sea, to the Caribbean countries. linked mechanisms that promote cooperation for
prevention, mitigation and response to natural
4. Establish, consolidate and amplify, accord- disaster through coordination between States
and the organizations that work in relation to
ing to the case, the institutional structures
natural disasters in the region.
and cooperation agreements that respond
to the diversity in cultural identities, of de-
2014 – Mexico - VI Summit of Heads of
velopmental requirements, and of legislative State and Government of the AEC: in its
systems across the region. final declaration, the Merida Declara-
tion, they recognised the entrance into
validity of the agreement following the
Source:Website of the Association of Caribbean ratification of Guyana, which was the
States and constitutory agreement. last of the necessary 25 ratifications.

Chapter 9: Special Section The Caribbean

Joint exercises
Cooperation among States is also manifested through the following joint exercises:
Caribe Wave / Lantex
Tradewinds
Humanitarian
Allied Forces Caribex
(FAHUM)
Panamax
Allied Forces
Command Forces
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Belize, Bahamas, Belize, Brazil, Anguilla, Antigua and Aruba, Antigua and Barbuda, Brazil, Guyana,
Bahamas, Barbados, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Chile, Colombia, Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, French Guiana,
Belize, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Costa Rica, Dominican Barbados, Belize, Colombia, Costa Rica, Suriname
Dominica, Dominican Dominican Republic, Republic, Ecuador, El Canada, Colombia, Cuba, Curacao, Dominica,
Republic, Grenada, Ecuador, El Salvador, Salvador, Guatemala, Chile, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, France Location: Brazil,
Guyana, Haiti, Holland, France, Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Dominica, Dominican (Martinique, Guadalupe, Guyana, French
Honduras, Jamaica, Honduras, Holland, Nicaragua, Panama, Republic, El Salvador, Guyana Saint Bartholomew, Guiana and
Nicaragua, Saints Kitts Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Grenada, Guatemala, Saint Martin), Great Britain Suriname
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago and Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, (Anguilla, Bermuda, Cayman
Saint Vincent and the Uruguay and United United States Turks and Caicos Islands, Islands, Turks and Caicos
Grenadines, Suriname, States, in collaboration British Virgin Islands, Islands, British Virgin Islands),
Trinidad and Tobago, with CFAC. 2012 location: Colombia Jamaica, Montserrat, Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti,
United Kingdom and Nicaragua, Panama, Holland (Bonaire, Saba and
United States Location: Panama Canal * No longer carried out Saint Kitts and Nevis, San Eustacio), Honduras,
due to Southcomm’s
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua,
2013 location: Saint budget reduction and the Grenadines, Panama, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Lucia . Suriname, Trinidad and Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
Tobago, United States and the Grenadines, Saint
2014 location: Antigua
Martin, Suriname, Trinidad and
and Barbuda and * Not carried out in Tobago, United States (Puerto
Dominican Republic 2013 Rico and the US Virgin Islands)
and Venezuela.
2014 location: El
Salvador Location: Caribbean and
adjacent regions (Eastern coast
of the United States, Canada,
the Gulf of Mexico and
Bermuda).
Humanitarian
Tradewinds Pana F m o a rc x e A s llied Command Forces All ( i F e A d H F U o M rces Cari L b a e n W te a x ve / CARIBEX
Training,
strengthening
Ensure the defence Competency in Response to natural Simulation of Tsunami links and
Maritime interdiction of the Panama Canal military capabilities disasters in the Alert improving
region response
capacity
Anglophone Caribbean Other countries and dependencies in the region Central America, Mexico, Haiti, Dominican Republic South America
United Kingdom // EEuropean countries with dependencies United States Canada
Source: Compilation based on information provided by US Southern Command and the website of the Regional Security System, the Brazilian Navy, the Army of El
Salvador, and UNESCO’s Inter-governmental Oceanographic Commission.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Presence through Embassies
Which Caribbean countries have Embassies in Latin American countries? Which Caribbean countries do Latin American countries send ambassadors to?
Argentina: Trinidad and Tobago Argentina: Guyana / Jamaica / Trinidad and Tobago
Brazil: Dominica / Guyana / Jamaica / Trinidad and Tobago Brazil: Antigua and Barbuda / Bahamas / Barbados / Belize / Dominica
/ Grenada / Guyana / Jamaica / Saint Kitts and Nevis / Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines / Saint Lucia / Trinidad and Tobago
Chile: Trinidad and Tobago
Chile: Jamaica / Trinidad and Tobago
Colombia: Jamaica / Trinidad and Tobago
Colombia:Jamaica / Trinidad and Tobago
Cuba: Antigua and Barbuda / Bahamas / Barbados / Belize / Dominica /
Grenada / Guyana / Jamaica / Saint Kitts and Nevis / Saint Lucía / Cuba: Antigua and Barbuda / Bahamas / Barbados / Belize / Dominica /
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines / Suriname / Trinidad and Tobago Grenada / Guyana / Jamaica / Saint Kitts and Nevis / Saint Lucia /
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines / Suriname / Trinidad and Tobago
Dominican Republic:Belize / Jamaica
Dominican Republic:Jamaica / Saint Lucia
El Salvador: Belize / Trinidad and Tobago
El Salvador: Belize / Trinidad and Tobago
Guatemala:Belize
Guatemala:Belize / Trinidad and Tobago
Honduras:Belize
Honduras:Belize
Mexico: Belize / Jamaica / Trinidad and Tobago
Mexico: Belize / Guyana / Jamaica / Saint Lucia
Venezuela:Grenada / Guyana / Jamaica / Trinidad and Tobago
Nicaragua:Belize / Jamaica
• All of the Caribbean countries considered in this Special Section have an Embassy in Cuba.
• Out of the Latin American countries considered in this publication, Cuba is the country with most Paraguay:Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
embassies in the Caribbean, followed by Brazil and Venezuela.
Source: Website of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs of Antigua and Barbuda, Argen- Venezuela: Antigua and Barbuda / Barbados / Belize / Dominica
tina, Chile, Barbados, Belize, Cuba, Guyana, Jamaica, Saint Vincent and the Grena- / Guyana / Jamaica / Saint Kitts and Nevis
dines, Trinidad and Tobago and Suriname; of the Government of Bahamas, Grenada / Saint Vincent and the Grenadines / Trinidad and Tobago
and Saint Lucia.
Hemispheric Relations
Caribbean - Canada
Operation Caribbean: The initiative is coordinated by
Military Training Assistance Programme (MTAP)
the Canadian Joint Operations Command and is aimed
Objective: Training of students and military advice. Includes training at developing surveillance and patrol activities in order to
foreigners in Canada.
prevent drug traffi cking. In 2013 they contributed 4 sur-
Countries: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia, Bra-
veillance aircraft, two warships, 2 frigates, 1 support ship
zil, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Hondu-
ras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago and Uruguay. and 1 submarine.
Joint operations have been carried out with the US Coast
Guard as part of Operation Martillo (Hammer).
Capacity-building projects in the Caribbean are carried
out in centres of excellence in cooperation with the Ja-
maican Defence Forces (JDF).
Caribbean Military Aviation School, created in 2006
as the Jamaican Military Aviation School.
Joint Operations and Information Centre, chaired by
the Canadian Armed Forces and operated by the JDF.
Caribbean Military Maritime Training Centre, created
in 2012 with its base in Jamaica
Counter Terrorism Training Centre, installed to carry out
the training of a capacity of 180 personnel of the JDF’s
Members of the Canadian Forces during a search and rescue operation with the Air Counter Terrorism Group.
Wing of the Jamaican Defence Force.
Photo: MCpl France Morin, Imagery Section St-Jean, DND-MDN Canada.
Caribbean Command and Personnel Course Command Centre of Excellence: Carried out annually in Jamaica since 1993.
More than 300 defence force and police offi cers have participated, including from Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Belize, Bermuda,
Canada, Dominican Republic, Guyana, Jamaica, Saint Kitts and Nevis, and Trinidad and Tobago. United States also participates.
Source:Compilation based on the Annual Report of the Directorate of Military Training and Cooperation (2012-2013), website of the Canadian Forces.

Chapter 9: Special Section The Caribbean

Caribbean – United States
Caribbean Basin Security Operation Martillo Caribbean Nations
Initiative (CBSI) (Hammer) Security Conference 2010
(CANSEC) - 2014
The CBSI is a US strategy Its objective is to combat
that brings all members of drug traffi cking and orga- Organized by Southern Emergence of the Initiative:
Command, it was carried out
CARICOM and the Dominican nized crime in the Caribbean Caribbean Basin
Republic together to jointly col- and Central America. Ships in in Santo Do- 2009 Security Initiative
and planes from the US Navy mingo, Dominican Republic.
laborate in regional security.
and Coast Guard participate Its objective was to improve 5th Summit CARIBBEAN-US
Key objectives to address the alongside military units from the coordination of efforts of the PLAN OF ACTION
threats faced by the Caribbean Belize, Britain, Canada, to combat emerging threats, Americas
countries: Colombia, Costa Rica, El principally in relation to drug
Salvador, France, Guatemala,
• Reduce illicit drug-traffi cking. Holland, Honduras, Nica- traffi cking and organized
crime.
• Advance in public security. ragua, Panama and Spain. US commitment to strengthen
In 2013 they detained295
• Promote social justice. suspects and confi scated Since the creation of the CBSI cooperation on regional security.
in 2010, the United States has
drugs with a total value of contributed more than
US$ 2,648 million. US$ 263 million to the program.
Source:Compilation based on information provided on the website of the State Department, United States, Treaties in Force 2013 of the United States, United States
Embassy in the Dominican Republic.
Caribbean – United Kingdom
The United Kingdom has signed two
British Military Operations in the Caribbean (2012-2014) agreements on drug traffi cking
Britain has a permanent presence in the Caribbean and North Atlantic through the with Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Atlantic Patrol Tasking North operation, which is focused on two areas: Barbados, Grenada, Guyana, as well
as with Trinidad and Tobago in crime
reduction assistance.
• Sent ships (HMS Argyll, HMS Lan- • Support provided by ships during
caster, HMS Portland), equipped the hurricane season (HMS Protec- British Army Training and Support
with a helicopter to contribute to tor; HMS Argyll, RFA Wave Knight). Unit in Belize (BATSUB)
anti-drug traffi cking operations. • Medical and technical assis-
Around 6 to 8 personnel from the British
• Support to local forces together tance alongside training carried
Army maintain a permanent presence in their
with the Coast Guard of the United out by the crew of RFA Wave
old base in Belize, which continues to be used
States and other countries. Knight.
for training and exercises by both countries.
Caribbean – France
French military presence is composed of two Sovereignty Forces* that operate together with the objective of guaranteeing protection of French
territories in the Caribbean region and training French military forces in special exercises.
Under the command of the local Chief of Staff, 2,150 per-
sonnel of the three forces carry out territorial protection ex-
ercises and patrols to counter mining (Harpie Mission), illegal
fi shing (Polpeche Mission) and drug traffi cking in the region.
They organize a military service that is dedicated to include
the French Guianan population and also have a training
center for jungle combat.
A deployment of 1,200 Naval and Army personnel oper-
ate to combat drug traffi cking in the region, carrying out
patrols in cooperation with US South Joint Task Force. Also
carrying out assistance tasks following natural disasters and
health emergencies.
Source: Compilation based on the information provided on the websites of the British Parliament and Foreign and Commonwealth Offi ce, the Royal Navy, the Ministry
of Defence of France and the Ministry of Defence of the United Kingdom.
gnikcfi
farT
gurD
nairatinamuH
ecnatsissA
Number of Caribbean countries with current bilateral agreements with the United States (2013)
12 countries 12 countries 2 countries 10 countries 4 countries 5 countries
Internatio a n n a d l m tr i a li i t n a i r n y g education Drugs M b i a li s t e a s ry Peacekeeping e M xe il r i c ta is r e y s s M ec u u t r u i a ty l
Note:The 13 countries contemplated in this section are included.
Armed Forces in French Guiana
Armed Forces in French Antilles
First joint operation between the Armed Forces of Suriname and French Guiana,
against illegal fi shing, .
* Military units are found outside of the country in overseas territories. Photo: État-major des armées, Marine nationale, Ministry of Defence of France.

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Antigua and Barbuda
Offi cial name: Antigua and Barbuda. Population: 90,000 inhabitants
Governor General: Rodney Williams Territorial Extension: 440 km2
Prime Minister: Gaston Browne GDP (US$): 1,244,000,000
Minister of National Security: Steadroy Benjamin GDP per capita PPP (US$): 19,146
Parliamentary Monarchy since 1981.
Member of the Commonwealth. National Legislation
• Police (Amendment) Act, 1998.
• Defence (Amendment) Act, 2007.
Minister of National Security
Royal Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force
Antigua and Barbuda
is a member of the Regional
Security System (RSS).
Personnel: 250 Responsible for the
country’s defence and
other tasks established by The Force actively collaborates with the Offi ce of National
Regular Forces the Defence Committee. Drug Control and Money Laundering Policy, especially
through its Intelligence Unit and the Coast Guard. One of the
biggest joint operations carried out in 2014 was the capture
1st Batallion Coast of a sailboat carrying marijuana (with an approximate value of
Guard 10 million Euros).
Service TheAntigua & Barbuda National Cadet Corps is an organization of young
and Support people who volunteered to be cadets during their high school studies. It
Unit receives private support as well as from the Government and is under the
command of a senior offi cer of the Defence Forces. Its main objective is to
train young people in the military fi eld, but also to promote certain attitudes
Reserve Forces
such as discipline, loyalty, leadership and citizenship.
Total cadets number approximately 180 young men and women.
Ministry of National Security
(areas of responsibility)
Antigua and Barbuda – Brazil
Immigration National Security Labour Department In , a defence
cooperation agreement
was signed. The main
Fire Service Defence Force National Labour Council areas of cooperation
include research and
development and the
acquisition of products,
National Drug Control Police Penal System
as well as training and
educational exchanges.
Defence Committee
Composition of the Defence Board:
• Prime Minister (President).
• Minister responsible for defence and national
security.
• Other Ministers
• Chief of Defence Staff.
• Others considered appropriate by the Prime Minister.
35th Meeting of CARICOM Heads of State, July 24th 2014,
St John’s, Antigua and Barbuda. It was chaired by the Prime
Minister of Antigua and Barbuda, Gaston Browne.
Photo:Antigua and Barbuda Government
Source: Wesbite of the Government of Antigua and Barbuda, National Cadet Corps, Offi ce of National Drug Control and Money Laundering Policy, Defence (Amendment)
Act, 2007, presentations of the delegation of Antigua and Barbuda in the Conference of Defence Ministers of the Americas. CEPAL website (territory 2011), IMF, World
Economic Outlook Database (GDP and GDP PPP: 2014 projection),Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe, 2013, CEPAL (population).

Chapter 9: Special Section The Caribbean

Bahamas
Offi cial Name:Commonwealth of The Bahamas Population: 377,000 inhabitants.
Governor General: Marguerite Pindling Territorial Extension: 13,880 km2
Prime Minister:Perry Gladstone Christie GDP (US$): 8,819,000,000
Minister of National Security:Bernard J. Nottage GDP PPP per capita (US$): 32,905
Parliamentary monarchy since 1973.
Member of the Commonwealth.
National Legislation
• Police Force Act, Chapter 205, 1965.
Itsmission is to defend
Ministry of National Security the sovereignty of the • Defence Act, Chapter 211, 1979.
Commonwealth of
Royal Bahamas Defence Force The Bahamas, provide
assistance to law and order
enforcement and carry
out humanitarian tasks
Graduates
together with their local and
Personnel: 1,154 international partners. In , 74 men and 9 women
graduated from an intensive Royal Baha-
Regular Forces Naval offi cers mas Defence Force training course that
taking theJunior lasted 12 weeks and included instruction
Naval Offi cers
Squadron Air Wing course in the in disciplines such as navigation, small
Department Britanian Royal arms and communications.
Navy College of
Great Britain for
Reserve Forces 9 months.
Challenges to national security
• Illegal migration (transit country).
Seminar for the development of a national cyber security strategy
• Natural disasters (hurricanes).
Conducted in , with technical assistance from the OAS. The initiative included
• Predation of fi sh resources.
strengthening cyber security legislation and the establishment of a National Cyber Security
• Smuggling of small arms and drugs.
Incident Response Team (CSIRT).
• Activities linked to terrorism.
As a result of the seminar thenational cyber security working group was created, which
will be responsible for:
Some strateggies
1. Develop an action plan for cyber security strategy.
• Decentralization of Defence Force op-
2. Lead and ensure the implementation of the National Cyber Security Incident Response Team erations through the establishment
(CSIRT). of bases in the north, south and cen-
3. Generate awareness and provide public education in the area of cyber security. tral Bahamas equipped with patrol
boats and aircraft to maximize the
use of resources in patrolling territo-
Joint Exercise with the United States rial boundaries.
In , 55 marines from the Defence Force participated alongside United States Navy •Working with local law enforcement
personnel. Courses were given in four areas: Intelligence, Shooting, Martial Arts & Tactics for agencies and regional partners to ad-
threat neutralization. dress current challenges.
Bahamas - Haiti
In , a bilateral meeting was
held between the foreign ministers of
the Bahamas and Haiti to address the
problem of illegal immigration. There
they signed a joint statement in which
it was agreed to deepen cooperation
between the defence forces of the two
countries to effectively fi ght against the
organizers of clandestine travel.
Graduation ceremony of members of the
Royal Bahamas Defence Force.
Photo:
Source: Website of the Government of The Bahamas, Bahamas Defence Force, Royal Bahamas Police Force, Offi ce of the Prime Minister of Haiti, Defence Act, Chapter
211 (1979), the National Anti-Drug Strategy (2012-2016). CEPAL website (2011 territory), IMF, World Economic Outlook Database (GDP and GDP PPP: 2014 projec-
tion),Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe, 2013, CEPAL (population).

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Barbados
Offi cial Name: Barbados Population: 285,000 inhabitants.
Governor General: Elliot Belgrave Territorial Extension: 430 km2
Prime Minister: Freundel Stuart GDP (US$): 4,316,000,000
Parliamentary monarchy 1966. GDP PPP per capita (US$): 25,193
Member of the Commonwealth.
National Legislation
• Defence Act, Chapter 159, 1985.
Itsmission is defend the
• Police Act, Chapter 167, 1998.
country from external
Prime Minister’s Offi ce
invasions or attacks, patrol
Barbados Defence Force the coastal zone to prevent
contraband and other
illegal activities and assist
Barbados is a member
other agencies in the case
of natural or manmade of the Regional
Personnel: 626 disasters. Security System (RSS).
Regular Forces
1st Batallion Coast Air Wing Regional Police Training Centre
Guard
It is located in Barbados and provides training to police
The Barbados Defence Force administers the National Sports
offi cers from many other corps of the Caribbean police
Development Program. With an approximate cost of US$ 900,000,
forces (apart from Barbados).
the program recruits talented sportsmen and provides them with a
monthly subsidy so that they focus on one of the sports within the
program: football, athletics, cricket, boxing and table tennis.
The headquarters of the Regional Security System (RSS) The programs offered are fully fi nanced by the
and the Caribbean Emergency Management Agency Government of Barbados.
(CDEMA) are located in Barbados.
The last meeting of the RSS Council of Ministers
was in .
As part off thheir bbasic training, recruits are trainedd in thhe use off
Joint Regional Communications Center (JRCC) communication equipment and fi rearms.
Established in 2006 as part of the CARICOM regional initiatives created
for the 2007 Cricket World Cup, its mission is to provide an effective
method of screening passengers to strengthen and ensure the security
of the region’s borders. It assists in the detection of people traveling TThhe courses giiven are ddestiinedd to polliice offfifi cers andd
with stolen, lost or forged documents, through the identifi cation and private security personnel.
monitoring of the movements of people considered a threat to regional
security.
Since its creation (1956) it has had:
• 8 training directors.
• 12 commanders
• 164 instructors
• 6,800 students
CARICOM liaison offi cers from
the United Kingdom, the United States
and Canada are stationed
in Barbados.
Ceremony
Photo:
Source: Defence Act, Chapter 159 (1985), website of the Royal Barbados Police Force, Regional Police Training Centre of Barbados, Implementation Agency for Crime
and Security (IMPACS), Barbados Estimates 2013-2014. CEPAL website (2011 territory), IMF, World Economic Outlook Database (GDP and GDP PPP per capita: 2014
projection),Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe, 2013, CEPAL (population).

Chapter 9: Special Section The Caribbean

Belize
Offi cial name:Belize Population: 332,000 inhabitants.
Governor General: Collville Young Territorial Extension: 22,970 km2
Prime Minister:Dean O. Barrow GDP (US$): 1,653,000,000
Minister of National Security:John B. Saldivar GDP PPP per capita (US$): 8,915
Parliamentary Monarchy since 1981.
Member of the Commonwealth.
National Legislation
It is responsible for the • Police Act, Chapter 138, 1951.
Minister of National Security
defence of Belize, for • Defence Act, Chapter 135, 1978.
bringing support to the
Belize Defence Force
civilian authorities in
maintaining order, and other
functions defi ned by the
Governor General.
Personnel
Personnel: 1,110 during jungle
training.
Regular Forces
1st and 2nd Air Wing National
Batallion Coast Guard (1)
Special Boat
Unit
Service and
Support
Batallion
Volunteer
Batallion
Reserve Forces
(1) Independent from the Defence Forces.
Belize – Mexico
Joint foot, land vehicle and maritime patrols are carried out along the Rio Hondo
Photo: Belize Government
(boundary between these countries) and quarterly meetings are held between the
authorities of the Belize Defence Force and the Army of Mexico in order to coordi- Belize – Guatemala
nate these border control activities.
The border dispute between Guatemala and Belize began in the mid-nine-
teenth century and involves Guatemala’s claim of 11,030 km2. In 1999,
Guatemala acknowledged Belize’s independence but the border issue
Cooperation of the Belize Defence Force in public security
remained unsettled. In recent years, historical agreements were reached
Joint patrols between personnel from the Belize Defence Force and the Belize with the active involvement of the OAS, the most outstanding being:
Police Force have been carried out for 20 years, focusing on the gang question.
Police have trained personnel from the Belize Defence Force in Public Security
and they have been given “special powers” to carry out arrests. However, in
2014, the Minister of National Security ended these joint patrols and clarifi ed
that the Belize Defence Force will provide assistance only when required by : It was agreed to hold simultaneous elections on
the Ministry. October 6, 2013, but a lack of agreement between the countries
led to them not being held.
The National Security Strategy sets out 11 goals. Each one is
assigned a government ministry or agency, which coordinates the
implementation and progress of the programs. : Agreement to hold popular
consultations in each country asking the population
Goals Responsible whether they agreed or not with the border dispute
being defi nitively settled by a ruling of the International
Maintaining the sovereignty Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Court of Justice.
and territorial integrity Ministry of National Security
Reducing crime and : Agreement to provide a Framework
dismantle transnational and Ministry of National Security
for Negotiations and Confi dence-Building Measures.
local criminal networks
Protect the country from Ministry of National Security
terrorism
: Resumption of talks.
Source: Website of the Government of Belize, Belize Defence Force, British Army, Defence Act, Chapter 135 (1978) and information provided by the Belize Defence
Force. CEPAL website (territory 2011), IMF, World Economic Outlook Database (GDP and GDP PPP: projection 2014), Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe,
2013, CEPAL (population).

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Guyana
Offi cial name: The Republic of Guyana Population:800,000 inhabitants.
President: Donald Rabindranauth Ramotar Territorial Extension:214,970 km2
Prime Minister: Sam Hinds GDP (US$):3,142,000,000
Semi-presidential republic since 1966. GDP PPP per capita (US$): 8,735
Member of the Commonwealth.
National Legislation
• Police Act, Chapter 16:01, 1957.
• Defence Act, Chapter 15:01, 1966.
Offi ce of the President Itsmission is to defend
the territorial integrity of • Status of Visiting Police Force Act, 2008.
Guyana Defence Force Guyana, assist the civilian
power in law and order
enforcement when required
Guyana is a member of the
and to support the country’s
economic development. Regional Security System
Personnel: 3,428 (RSS).
1st and 2nd
Regular Forces
Infantry
Education
Batallion
(Reserve) G C u o a a r s d t Air Corps Guyana Defence Force’s Schools have
Service and trained many offi cers and soldiers from
Support other Caribbean Commonwealth coun-
Batallion tries.
Engineers Since 1981, Guyana has provided train-
Battalion ing to future offi cers at Colonel Ulric Pil-
Guyana is a
grim Offi cer Cadet School, who are also
member of
Artillery trained at the Royal Military Academy
Company UNASUR’s
(Sandhurst, United Kingdom), the Royal
South American
Naval Academy (Dartmouth, United
Defence Council
Special Forces Kingdom) and in Brazil.
Squadron
Reserve Forces
In the 2009 Organizational Analysis of the Guyana Defence Force, the following na-
tional threatswere identifi ed:
1. Territoriality and sovereignty of Guyana, due to the land and maritime territorial
claims by Venezuela.
2. Social and political unrest due to ethnic differences.
3. Transnational crime due to porous borders and the fact that Guyana is a transit
country for drug traffi cking.
4. Environmental degradation due to illegal mining and deforestation.
5. Natural disasters due to climate change.
6. Unemployment and poverty.
7. Food Security.
8. Inability of public health structures to address endemic diseases.
9. Over-exploitation of marine resources.
10. Low level of law enforcement.
Guyana and Venezuela have a border dispute over more than
155,000 km2. In 1966, the Geneva Agreement was
signed in the heat of Guyana’s independence, establishing a
framework for negotiations. Successive agreements centered
on good offi ces and peaceful dispute settlement.
Despite the dispute, both countries are advancing in ame-
nable areas of cooperation, as shown by the existence of a
High Level Binational Commission.
Members of the
CARICOM HQ
Defence Force
during a training is located in
session on jungle Guyana
survival skills.
Photo:Guyana Defence Force.
Source: Defence Act Chapter 15:01, (1966), Organizational Analysis of the Guyana Defence Force, 2009. Website of the Offi ce of the President, Guyana Defence
Force, Guyana Police Force, Ministry of the People’s Power for Communication and Information of Venezuela, United States Embassy in Guyana. CEPAL website (terri-
tory 2011), IMF, World Economic Outlook Database (GDP and GDP PPP: projection 2014),Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe, 2013, CEPAL (población).

Chapter 9: Special Section The Caribbean

Jamaica
Offi cial Name:Jamaica Population: 2,784,000 inhabitants.
Governor General: Patrick Allen Territorial Extension: 10,990 km2
Prime Minister:Portia Simpson Miller GDP (US$): 14,262,000,000
Minister of National Security:Peter Bunting GDP PPP per capita (US$): 9,256
Parliamentary Monarchy since 1962.
Member of the Commonwealth. National Legislation
• The Constabulary Force Act, 1935.
Ministry of National Security Itsmission is to provide the
military capacity to dissuade • The Defence Act, 1962.
Jamaica Defence Force and/or eliminate threats
against the State and/or the
country’s interests.
Coast Guard vessels providing
their services.
Personnel: 3,466
Regular Forces
1st and 2nd Batallion
3rd Batallion
(Reserve)
Service and
Support Batallion Coast Guard Airwing
Engineer
Regiment
Photo:Jamaica Defence Force
Combat support
Jamaica – United Kingdom
Batallion
IInn 22001144, tthhee UUKK ooffffeerreedd 44 sscchhoollaarrsshhiippss, wwiitthh aa vvaalluuee ooff aapppprrooxxiimmaatteellyy
£175,000, to members of the JDF in order to train at the Royal Naval School
Reserve Forces Dartmouth, Royal Military Academy Sandhurst and the Royal Air Force Col-
lege Cranwell.
The 1st and 2nd Battalions are tasked The Combat Support Batallion Jamaica - Canada
with conducting infantry operations. provides training in order to
They assist the police in maintaining assure and facilitate the the Canada takes a particular interest in Jamaica because more than 300,000
law and order and in conducting joint operational preparation of the Jamaicans live in their country. For this reason, cooperation with the Ja-
internal security operations. They assist JDF. It is responsible for the maican Defence Forces is of strategic importance in the framework of the
the Department of Correctional Services development of the force’s Canadian project “Capacity Development in the Caribbean”. The insti-
and perform are tasked with doctrine, its training standards, tutionalization of training programs at the Centers of Excellence built in
conducting infantry operations. They operational support and cooperation with Jamaica aims to consolidate the country as a regional
assist the police in maintaining law and training. leader and strengthen the Caribbean regional security system.
order and in conducting joint internal
security operations. They assist the
Department of Correctional Services
The mission of the Service and Support
and perform drug eradication and
Battalion is to provide timely combat
interdiction operations. FFalmouth
service support to the JDF. It is
MMMMoooonnnntttteeeeggggoooo BBBBaaaayyyy DDiissccoovvery Bay responsible for the administration and
logistics of the JDF (health, transport,
Ochhoo RRiiooss finance, communication, vehicle
maintenance, etc.).
Negril
Port Antonio
Spanish
MMaannddeevviillllee
BBllaacckk RRiivveerr TTToowwnn
KKKKKiinnggssttoonn
MMaayy PPeenn
The Coast Guard's mission PPPoooorrrrtttt EEEEssssqqqquuuuiiiivvvveeeelllll MMoorraanntt Bay
is to provide maritime AAlllliiggaattoorr PPoonndd Rocy Point
services to help the JDF to
achieve its operational
m ob o m a j r r e d s a i i r n t u c i e e i n s t m b r s i p t v c s e i e e e n u t n a c s e s a n . t n a , i n a o I c f t r e c e t e n i i e t s o s s s y p ) n p o i n o ( a a i f s l n n l l e c l s a s d w a h , e w r a a a t c t r n h t h o g a e d e n e r a s d n o . d f r s e T p u i s d h m r c p o e e u p m m v e 3 o e e o r r l a d o t d t n i e p o a d B m f t n a e r t a e e t h s t n c t e i e a o o t r . l r n n v i e I o i s t d c g b t n e i c r u u s u o ' a l i t s a c l n o s d t r t m d i i e t o n f u h r o i n g s s c e r s . t c i i t s n o c e h o o n s r c o u p a a i u n s e n s g t e r t d r a o h y o t a i p f h a o s r n s u n n o i d m s a s v t t i i s t a u d n o n i r e n a l R o e e p t n g e o g r TT i t m i a p o hh n o t r ee e i e a o f o e c n v EE n t r h i h t nn d i a n i ' e e e l gg s g v o ii J m m e n D s b u e i i j t F s l e . h p i e s t c e p i a r t o r i o v n y r e t i s s c I T o t p h i n a a n e t l t M f s s i r a n o u r o o i n u p n l c s l t o e p i o r s a u y o t n o n r s r m d y f t d d u t o i t r l h p c o i f e u t t e r a v s g o H t a r h A v l e y e c o e i i a d u r n o r a l p e a t g p W d h o s t e i i d l o c a r i i i c n a i a n s n s e s t t t g s c i i i a . o o s a o n t i n n n s n a c s d n d t o e , o , c u p p m h e c e s r e t u o r a t i a a o n p v r d t i i g p t d i t o i h o m e n e r e t s .
Source: Website of the Jamaica Defence Force, Ministry of National Security, British Army, Annual Report of the Directorate of Training and Military Cooperation
(2012-2013), Department of National Defence and Armed Forces of Canada, Private Security and Regulations Authority. CEPAL website (territory 2011), IMF, World
Economic Outlook Database (GDP and GDP PPP: proyection 2014),Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe, 2013, CEPAL (population).

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Saint Kitts and Nevis
Offi cial Name: Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis Population:54,000 inhabitants.
Governor General:Edmund Lawrence Territorial Extension:260 km2
PPriime MMiiniister:DDenziill LL. DDougllas GDP (US$):795,000,000
MMiinniisstteerr ooff FFoorreeiiggnn AAffffaaiirrss, HHoommeellaanndd SSeeccuurriittyy,
GDP PPP per capita (US$):15,959
Immigration and Labour: Patrice Nisbett
PPaarrlliiaammeennttaarryy mmoonnaarrcchhyy ssiinnccee 11998833.
National Legislation
MMeemmbbeerr ooff tthhee CCoommmmoonnwweeaalltthh.
• The Police Act, 2003
• Defence Act,10, 1997
Prime Minister´s Offi ce
Royal Saint Kitts and Nevis Defence Force Saint Kitts and Nevis is a member of
the Regional Security System (RSS).
Personnel: 300
Crime Reduction Plan
In the framework of this strategic plan launched by the Prime Minis-
Regular Forces
ter in 2012-2013, under the slogan “law and order”, several initia-
tives were initiated, including the creation of:
Company • Anti-robbery Team: Composed of members of the Police and
Coast Defence Force and Department of Customs and Excise, it performs
Guard tasks and provides intelligence and surveillance support to the
Service and Crime Investigations Department (CID) and the Violent Crimes Unit
Support (VCU).
Platform
•Anti-crime Unit:Within the Prime Minister’s Offi ce, it focuses on
crimes committed in certain communities, focusing on the recovery
Reserve Forces of fi rearms in public.
In , 28 graduates
(men and women) of the Basic
Military Course joined the Royal
Saint Kitts and Nevis Defence Force.
New members of the Defence Force
graduate from the Basic Military Course
(2013/09/06).
Photo:Saint Kitts and Nevis Government.
International Cooperation
Saint Kitts and Nevis – United States Saint Kitts and Nevis – European Union
The security and law enforcement cooperation initiative with the United States With the assistance of the EU, and in the frame-
also covers: work of the Security Enhancement Program
• Strengthening and reform of judicial institutions and prisons. (SSIP) in 2012, an offi cial participated in the
2nd Annual Conference on the Drug Policy Co-
• Consideration of social factors, possible causes of crime.
operation Program between the EU and Latin
Furthermore, joint operations have been conducted to reduce the smuggling of America.
drugs and weapons and the United States has provided the Coast Guard with 2
The EU also cooperated in the 3rd Meeting of
interceptor vessels, Hermitage Bay and Quaile Bay, to strengthen their capabili-
the CBSI Commission in .
ties in detecting illegal activities in its maritime territory.
Source: Website of the Government of Saint Kitts and Nevis, 2013 Budget Address. CEPAL website (territory 2011), IMF, World Economic Outlook Database (GDP and
GDP PPP: projection 2014),Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe, 2013, CEPAL (population).

Chapter 9: Special Section The Caribbean

Suriname
Offi cial Name: Republiek van Suriname Population: 539,000 inhabitants.
President:Desiré Bouterse. Territorial Extension: 163,820 km2
Defence Minister: Lamuré Latour. GDP (US$): 5,322,000,000
Republic with a presidential system since 1975. GDP PPP per capita (US$): 13,710
National Legislation
• Ley del Ejército Nacional, 1996.
President
National Army of Suriname Themission or the National Army is to:
• Defend the territorial integrity of Suriname.
• Assist the civil power in maintaining law and order.
• Contribute to the country’s economic development.
Personnel: 2,000
Regular Forces
The Republic of Suriname became independent in 1975. At that
1 I s n t a fa n n d t r 2 y nd S N e a rv v i a c l e Air Corps time, the defence of the new republic was transferred from the Royal
Battalion Netherlands Army to the newly-formed armed forces: the Surinaamse
Krijgsmacht. The military government that seized power in 1980 after
the coup changed their name toNationaal Legerr, or National Army,
Special Forces
as they are known today.
Company
Internal security is mainly a responsibility of the police forces. How-
ever, the armed forces can be involved in domestic issues when re-
quired. Moreover, they contribute to the development of tasks in
Reserve Forces other countries.
Suriname has training agreements with the United
States and receives military aid from the Netherlands,
China, and Brazil. It maintains close relations with
Venezuela and has agreed to purchase military
hardware from India.
In cooperation with Colombia, Suriname was the pro tempore president of the
South American Defence Council for 2013-2014. In , the UNASUR
delegates meeting was held in the capital, Paramaribo, in .
Suriname has disputes over Western borders with Guyana
Visit of school and Eastern borders with French Guiana.
children to the Since 1969, no real confrontations have been reported.
Boekoe Memre Currently, some maritime border issues also remained un-
barracks
settled.
(2012/08/26).
Suriname is
a member
of UNASUR’s
South American
Defence Council
Photo:Government of Suriname.
Source:Website of the Government of Suriname, National Army Law (1996), CEPAL website (territory 2011), IMF, World Economic Outlook Database (GDP and GDP
PPP: projection 2014),Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe, 2013, CEPAL (population).

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Trinidad and Tobago
Offi cial Name: The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
President: Anthony Thomas Aquinas Carmona
Prime Minister: Kamla Persad-Bissessar
Minister of National Security: Gary Griffi th
Parliamentary Republic since 1962.
Member of the Commonwealth
National Legislation
• Defence Act, Chapter 14:01, 1962.
Ministry of National Security
• Police Service Act, Chapter 15:01, 2006.
Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force
Personnel: 5,376
Regular Forces
3rd Engineer- ing Battalion
Reserve Forces (221)
180,3
Population:1,341,000 inhabitants.
Territorial Extension:5,130 km2
GDP (US$):28,992,000,000
GDP PPP per capita (US$): 21,096
Itsmission is to defend Trinidad
and Tobago from external and
internal threats, assure national
interests and provide support to
a state and non-state agencieess
that seek national developmeennnnt.
Functions
• Cooperate with and assist the civil authorities in maintaining law
1st and 2nd and order.
Battalion
• Assist civil authorities in times of crisis or disaster.
Coast Guard Air Guard • Perform ceremonial functions on behalf of the State.
(1,608) (466) • Provide search and rescue services in accordance with national
requirements and other international agreements.
• Assist in the prevention of traffi cking in narcotics and other illicit goods.
Service and
Support • Monitor the safety of maritime traffi c in national waters.
Battalion • Assist in the development of the national community.
Trinidad and Tobago is the seat of the
Implementation Agency for Crime and
Emergence of the Aerial Guard
Security (IMPACS).
Until 2005 the Aerial Guard didn’t exist as an independent unit within
Entrance to the general barracks of the
the Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force. There was only the Air Wing of Photo:President’s Offi ce. Coast Guard during a presidential visit.
the Coast Guard. In 2003, the Prime Minister announced the construc-
tion of a regional gas pipeline between Trinidad and Tobago and Ja-
maica. This meant that the Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force now had
to protect the economic interests of the country at both a national and
regional level. In order to have the capacity to defend the sovereignty
of the republic in this wider region, in 2005 the Aerial Guard of Trinidad
and Tobago was established as a unit separate from the Coast Guard.
The Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force has
professional training exchange programs with the
USA, Canada and China.
Offi ce of disaster management and preparedness Composition of the Defence Force
Created in 2005, is a division within the Ministry of
National Security whose mission is to build capacity for
Air Guard: 9% Reserves: 4% Regiment: 57%
disaster risk management and adaptation to climate
change in conjunction with other agencies, and to Executive Director
coordinate responses and reconstruction operations Coast Guard: 30%
in order to protect persons, the environment and the
economy, and ensure a nation resilient from disasters. Vice Executive Director
Mitigation, Preparation Public Administration Project
Planning and and Information and Finance Management
Investigations Response and Unit Unit
Unit Unit Community
Education
Extension
Unit
Source: Website of the Ministry of National Security, Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force, Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, Defence Act, Chapter
15:01 (2006), Trinidad and Tobago Citizen Security Programme and information provided by the Ministry of National Security. CEPAL website (territory 2011), IMF,
World Economic Outlook Database (GDP and GDP PPP: projection 2014), Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe, 2013, CEPAL (population).

Chapter 9: Special Section The Caribbean

Dominica
Offi cial Name: Commonwealth of Dominica Population: 72,000 inhabitants.
President: Charles Savarin Territorial Extension: 750 km2
Prime Minister: Roosvelt Skerrit GDP (US$): 515,000, 000
Minister off Nationall Security, Labbour andd GDP PPP per capita ((US$$)): 14,743
Immigration: Alvin Bernard
Parliamentary Republic since 1978. National Legislation
MMeemmbbeerr ooff tthhee CCoommmmoonnwweeaalltthh.
• Police Act, Chapter 14:01, 1940.
Ministry of National Security, Labour and Immigration
Dominica Police Force
Dominica is a member of the Regional
Security System (RSS).
Personnel: 444
Regular Forces
Marine
Departments
Unit
Troops
In , representatives of the OAS Inter-American Committee together
against Terrorism (CICTE) together with experts from the Council of to engage
in a jungle
Europe and the University of Oxford visited Dominica to provide ad-
exercise.
vice on the development of a cyber security strategy in the framework
of the OAS Commonwealth Cybercrime Initiative (CCI).
Photo:Dominica News.
Source: Website of the Government of Dominica, of the Ministry of National Security, Labour and Immigration:Dominica Police Force, Organization of American States
(OAS), CEPAL website (territory 2011), IMF, World Economic Outlook Database (GDP and GDP PPP: projection 2014),Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe,
2013, CEPAL (population).
Grenada
Offi cial Name: Grenada. Population:106,000
Governor General:Cecile La Grenade Territorial Extension:340 km2
Prime Minister:Keith Mitchell GDP (US$):839,000, 000
Parliamentary Monarchy since 1974. GDP PPP per capita (US$): 14,046
Member of the Commonwealth.
National Legislation
• The Police Act, Chapter 244, Revised
Offi ce of the Prime Minister (1) Police Force
Laws of Grenada 1990. parade.
Royal Grenada Police Force
Grenada is a member of the
Regional Security System (RSS).
Personnel: 836 Photo:Prime Minister’s Offi ce.
Regular Forces In 2014, the Police Force received responsibilities in case of disaster. In addition to designing,
updating and evaluating the continuity of operations and response plans and procedures, their
specifi c responsibilities are:
Coast
Departments
Guard
Police Force Coast Guard
• Protection of public property and the prevention of vandal- • Search and rescue.
ism and looting. • Law enforcement and maritime security.
• Traffi c control towards and away from hospitals and emer- • Control of pollution, such as substances
(1) Ministry of National Security, Public gency areas. spilled into the sea from ships or from the
Administration, Disaster Management, Internal • Crowd control. land.
Affairs, Information and Implementation. • Evacuation procedures. • National security along the coast.
• Security of basic services and vulnerable points.
• Assist in evacuations when requested
• Coordination of the telecommunications system.
Source:Website of the Offi ce of the Prime Minister, Royal Grenada Police Force, The Police Act, Chapter 244 (Revised Laws of Grenada 1990), CEPAL website (territory
2011), IMF, World Economic Outlook Database (GDP and GDP PPP: projection 2014),Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe, 2013, CEPAL (population).

A Comparative Atlas of Defence in Latin America and Caribbean / 2014 Edition

Saint Lucia
Offi cal Name: Saint Lucia Population:182,000
Governor General:Pearlette Louisy Territorial Extension:620 km2
Prime Minister:Kenny Anthhony
GDP (US$):1,337,000,000
MMiinniisstteerr ffoorr LLeeggaall AAffffaaiirrss, HHoommee AAffffaaiirrss aanndd
GDP PPP per capita (US$):12,887
National Security: Victor Phillip La Cobiniere.
PPaarrlliiaammeennttaarryy mmoonnaarrcchhyy ssiinnccee 11997799. MMeemmbbeerr ooff tthhee
Commonwealth. National Legislation
• Police Act, Chapter 14:01, 2001.
Ministry of Justice, Internal Affairs and Security The Police is deployeedd
in two division across
Royal Saint Lucia Police Force the territory ooff SSaaiinntt Strategic objectives of the
Lucia: Northh aanndd South Royal Saint Lucia Police Force
Castries • Establish a community-
Personnel: 1,271 based policing program
in cooperation with all
Regular Forces communities.
Anse La Raye
• Implement a crime
Departments Marine Dennery prevention strategy to
Police improve arrest rates and
reduce crime.
Soufriere • Increase professional
Saint Lucia is a standards of investigations
member of the Micoud into complaints and internal
reviews.
Regional Security
System (RSS). • Strengthen internal support
Choiseul services.
Visit of the Police Commissioner • Establish an effective
to a primary school (2014). Vieux Fort strategy against traffi cking.
Photo: Royal Saint Lucia Police Force.
Source:Website of the Royal Saint Lucia Police Force, Police Act, Chapter 14:01 (2001). CEPAL website (territoryy 2200111), IMF, World Economic Outlook Database (GDP and GDP
PPP: projection 2014),Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el Caribe, 2013, CEPAL (population).
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Offi cial Name: Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Population: 109,000
Governor General: Frederick Nathaniel Ballantyne Territorial Extension: 390 km2
Prime Minister: Ralph Gonsalves GDP (US$): 750,000,000
Parliamentary monarchy since 1979. Member of the GDP PPP per capita (US$): 12,672
Commonweallthh.
The Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines’ Plan for Economic and
Social Development 2013-2025, proposed actions in order to ensure societal
Ministry of National Security and Aerial and peace, security and stability. The strategic interventions proposed are:
National Legislation
Maritime Development • Improve and sustain initiatives to reduce crime.
• Police (Amendment)
Royal Saint Vincent and the Grenadines • Collaborate, fi rst with members of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean
Act, 1989.
Police Force States, and with CARICOM members in a broader perspective in order to ensure
the protection of the nation’s marine resources.
• Solidify initiatives to improve border security, including organizational develop-
The Coast Guard
ment and training, ensuring a safe environment for conducting business.
Personnel: 852 conducts training
with Barbados, • Improve mechanisms for exchange of information and intelligence between
Regular Forces forces at the national, regional and global levels.
Antigua and
Barbuda, United • Amend legislation pertaining to national security, including essential services.
Re R s a p p o i n d se Coast States and the • Collaborate with the international community on issues of transnational and
Unit Guard United Kingdom international security.
Special
Se U rv n i i c t es Se F r i v re ice O th f e fi c S e e r c s u o ri f t y
Forces receiving
training.
Source:Website of the Ministry of National Security and Aeria and Maritime Development,
Police Act, 280, National Economic and Social Development Plan (2013-2025) of Saint Vin-
cent and the Grenadines. CEPAL website (territory 2011), IMF, World Economic Outlook
Database (GDP and GDP PPP: projection 2014), Anuario Estadístico de América Latina y el
Caribe, 2013, CEPAL (population).
Photo:OAS